To fill in the vacancy arising from the setting aside of the election of the returned candidate from the 59 Taoru Assembly Constituency in Haryana, by the Supreme Court, the appellant Commission sent a message and programme on April 6, 1984 to the Chief Electoral officer for the State of Haryana.
According to that programme, the notification under section 150 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 was to be issued on April 18, 1984, the last date for filing nominations was April 25, 1984 while the date of poll was May 20, 1984 The Election Commission fixed an identical programme for filling 23 other vacancies in the legislative assemblies of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and West Bengal.
On April 7, 1984, the Election Commission was requested by the Haryana Government to hold the proposed by election alongwith the general elections to the Lok Sabha, due later in the year.
On April 11, 1984, the Chief Secretary wrote a letter to the Election Commissioner renewing the request to defer the by election.
On April 12, 1984 the Election Commissioner informed the Chief Election officers by a telex message that it had decided to adhere to the programme of by elections to all the 24 constituencies and copies of notifications to be published on April 18, 1984 were sent to the Chief Electoral officer, Haryana.
A Press not was issued to that effect after informing all the political parties.
The Chief Secretary, Haryana met the Chief Election Commissioner on April 14, 1984 and explained to him personally why it was neither advisable nor possible to hold the by election to the Taoru seat as proposed by the latter.
On April 16, 1984, the Chief Secretary wrote a letter reiterating the view of the Government to the Chief Election Commissioner.
On April 17, 1984, the Chief Commissioner replied to the letter of April 16, 1984 by saying that the Commission had taken the decision to hold the by election after taking the Punjab situation and taking into consideration all factors including the fact of non fact that the political parties were not opposed to the proposed byelection.
On the same day the Government of Haryana filed a writ petition in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and obtained an ex parte order staying the issuance and publication of the 555 notification by the Election Commission under sections 30, 56 and 150 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Hence the appeal by special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court.
^ HELD : (Per Majority) Per Chandrachud C.J. 1 : 1.
The widely prevalent practice of partices obtaining ex parte orders when they can give prior intimation of the proposed proceedings to the opposite side, without much inconvenience or prejudice has often been disapproved by this Court.
When the public authorities do so it is all the more open to disapprobation.
[561D E] 1 : 2.
The Government of Haryana obtained an ex parte order from the High Court when it could easily have given prior intimation of the intended proceedings to the Election Commission of India.
The letter is constitutionally identifiable, conveniently accessible and easily available for being contacted on the most modern systems of communication.
The Election Commission of India, too rushed to this Court on the 18th without informing the Government of Haryana that it proposes to challenge the order of the High Court and to ask for stay of that order.
The Government of Haryana is also identifiable and accessible with the same amount of case.
Were it not for the fact that this matter brooked no delay the Supreme Court would have hesitated to pass any interim order without the appellant giving prior intimation of its proposed action to the respondent.
[561E G] 1 : 3.
Despite the guideline indicated by the Supreme Court in the West Bengal poll case, A.K.M. Hassan Uzzaman vs Union of India, , regarding the passing of orders by the High Courts in exercise of their writ jurisdiction, the High Court of Punjab & Haryana far from showing any reluctance to interfere with the programme of the proposed election, the High Court has only too readily passed the interim order which would have had the effect of postponing the election indefinitely.
Considering that the election process was just round the corner, the High Court ought not to have interfered with it.
The nonspeaking order passed by it affords no assistance on the question whether there were exceptional circumstances to justify that order.
[562A C] 2.
The Government of Haryana is undoubtedly in the best position to assess the situation of law and order in areas within its jurisdiction and under its control.
But the ultimate decision as to whether it is possible and expedient to hold the elections at any given point of time must rest with the Election Commission Arbitrariness and mala fides destroy the validity and efficacy of all orders passed by public authorities.
It is therefore necessary that on an issue like the present, which concerns a situation of law and order, the Election Commission must consider the views of the State Government and all other concerned bodies of authorities before coming to the conclusion that there is no objection to the holding of the 556 elections at this point of time.
Hence the Election Commission came to its decision after bearing in mind the pros and cons of the whole situation.
It had the data before it.
It cannot be assumed that it turned a blind eye to it.
In these circumstances, it was not in the power of the High Court to decide whether the law and order situation in the State of Punjab and Haryana is such as not to warrant or permit the holding of the by election.
It is precisely in a situation like this that the ratio of the Bengal Poll case would apply in its full rigor.
[562E H, 563A B] 3 : 1.
However, it would be open to the Chief Election Commissioner to review his decision as to the expediency of holding the poll on the notified date.
In fact, not only would it be open to him to reconsider his decision to hold the poll as notified, it is plainly his duty and obligation to keep the situation under constant scrutiny so as to adjust the decision to the realities of the situation.
All the facts and circumstances, past and present, which bear upon the question of the advisability of holding the poll on the notified date have to be taken into account and kept under vigil.
That is to continuing process which can only cease after the poll is shield.
Until then, the Election Commission has the locus, for good reasons to alter its decision The law and order situation in the State, or in any art of it, or in a neighboring State, is a consideration of vital importance for deciding the question of expediency or possibility of holding an election at any particular point of time.
If he considers it necessary, he should held further discussions with the Chief Electoral officer of Haryana and consult, once again, leaders of the various political parties on the question whether it is feasible to hold the poll on the due date.
On an important issue such as the holding of an election, which is of great and immediate concern to the entire political community, there can be no question of any public official standing on prestige, an apprehension which was faintly projected in the State 's arguments.
A sense of realism, objectively and noa alignment must inform the decision of the election Commission on that issue.
[563D H] Mohd.
Yunus Saleem vs Shiv Kumar Shastri.
; @ 743 44; followed.
3 : 2.
Indeed, every citizen of this country who has some degree of political awareness, would have a fair idea of the situation in Punjab and its impact on the even flow of life in the neighbouring State of Haryana.
But the circumstance that the High Court has the knowledge of a fact will not justify the substitution by it of its own opinion for that of an authority duly appointed for a specific purpose by the law and the Constitution.
Different people hold different views on public issues, which are often widely divergent.
Even the Judges.
A Judge is entitled to his views on public issues but he cannot project his personal views on the decision of a question like the situation of law and order in a particular area at a particular period of time and hold that the Election Commission is in error in its appraisal of that situation.
[564D F] Per Thakkar, J. (Contra) : The exact parameters of the decision in Hassan 's case and the true 557 ratio cannot be known till the judgment containing reasons is born.
As on today no one can predict what exactly will be decided by the Court in Hassan 's case when the Judgment eventually comes to be pronounced (who can make a guess about the colour or shade of the eyes of a child which is yet to be born ?).
But it can be reasonably said that Hassan 's case does not enjoin that an interim order of such a nature can never be passed in any situation.
If that were not so, the court would not have said (1) that imminence of electoral process is a factor which must guide and govern the passing of orders (meaning thereby that while such order scan be passed this factor must be accorded due consideration) and (2) that "more imminent such process, the greater ought to be the reluctance of the High Court to do anything or direct anything to be done which will postpone that process indefinitely" (which means it must be done only with reluctance when elections are imminent).
In other words the power must be exercised sparingly (with reluctance) particularly when the order would be to postpone the installation of a democratically elected popular Government.
These observations were made by the Court in Hassan 's case in the context of the expiry of the term of legislature as envisioned by Article 172 of the Constitution of India and consequential general elections for such legislature as is evident from the elusion to "imminence of elections" and "indefinite postponement of elections to legislative bodies which are the essence of democratic functions of the Constitution.
" This must be so because the legislature would stand dissolved on the expiry of the term, and a new legislature has to be elected.
It is in this context (presumably) that a reference is made to "imminence of elections".
[567D E H; 568A F] For a By election like the present one, to fill a single vacancy .
there can be no question of "imminence" or "indefinite postponement of elections" which would stall the installation of a democratically elected government.
It is nobody 's case that the party position was such that the result of the election to this vacant seat would have tilted the majority one way or other.
No oblique motive has even been hinted at.
The High Court was therefore not unjustified in proceeding on the assumption that it had such a power.
[568F G] The High Court cannot be faulted for passing the impugned order faced as it was by an unprecedented situation like the present.
If the High Court had not granted the order and the Election Commission had not chosen to appear on or before April 18, 1984 the High Court would have perhaps become powerless to pass any other order, whatever be the justification for it, as the "electoral process" would have actually commenced.
The High Court was prima facie satisfied that the Election Commission had failed to take into account vital matters, appeared to have acted on non consequential considerations, and had acted arbitrarily in turning down the request of the State Government as also the Chief Election Officer of Haryana.
The High Court was therefore entitled to grant a stay.
[569A B] The Supreme Court in exercise of the jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of India should not interfere with the ad interim order passed by the High Court in such a fact situation.
On the one hand the Election Commission appeared to have been altogether oblivious to the dimension as regards the bonafide apprehension pertaining to the life and 558 security of the National leaders who might address public meetings, the Candidates the officers engaged in election work, and the voters.
The danger was further aggrevated in the face of open threats held but to the lives of the National leaders of different political parties.
What is more, the Election Commission has shown total unawareness of the circumstance that public meetings were prohibited under section 144 of the Cr. P. C. in the constituency going to the polls.
On the other hand the only consequence of granting a stay would have been to postpone the election programme by a few days in the event of the Election Commission commission not choosing to appear in the Court (to show cause why the ad interim order should no be made absolute) on or before April 18, 1984 which was the scheduled date for issuance of the notification announcing the election programme The Election Commission could have appeared before the High Court and got the stay vacated in time instead of approaching this Court by way of the present appeal by Special Leave.
The Election Commission could not have failed to refraise that no serious consequence would have flowed from the impugned order even if stay was vacated, not immediately, but a few days later, for, it was only a by election to one single seat of no significance which would not have resulted in postponement of the installation of an elected government.
Worse come to worse, the by election could not have been held along with by elections in other states on the 'same day '.
[569B G] More so when the Election Commission has not been able to show what possible detriment would have been suffered if the by election could not have been so held on that particular day.
How and by what process of ratiocination did the Election Commission convinced itself that free elections could be held in a situation where the Candidates would consider it hazardous to contest or to indulge in election propaganda, and even voters would be afraid to vote, even to this court.
[569G H, 570A] It is no doubt true that theoretically the Election Commission can still postpone the polling, if it is so minded.
But the Court should not remain a passive spectator in this extraordinary situation and leave the Nation to the mercy of an individual, however high be his office, when it is evident that he has secluded himself in his ivory tower and has shut his eyes to the realities of the situation and closed his mind to the prognosis of this matter.
The Court can certainly satisfy itself whether the Election Commissioner had kept his eyes, ears and mind open, and whether he was able to show that all relevant factors including the consideration as to what advantage was to be secured as against the risk to be faces, entered into his reckoning.
If this is not shown to have been done, as in the present case, his decision is vitiated and the Court need not feel helpless.
The High Court was therefore fully justified in passing the impugned order, and the Supreme Court should not upture it.
[571B D]
