Muthammal, the absolute owner of the suit properties, executed a Deed of Settlement dated May 17, 1925 (exhibit A 3) whereby she endowed the suit properties to a temple of her family deity.
She constituted herself as the first trustee for her life and after that, her husband and mother were to be the trustees and after their demise, the respondents ' heirs were to be the trustees.
Five years later i.e. On January 28, 1930, she purported to cancel and revoke the trust (settlement), by getting the Deed of Cancellation registered.
Thereafter, certain mortgages were executed by her in respect of the properties and later on the properties were sold by her to the father of appellants Nos.
I and 2.
She died on October 1, 1960.
The respondents plaintiffs, claiming to be the trustees of the endowment, filed a suit on August 29, 1962 for possession of the properties challenging the alienations that were made in favour of the appellants ' father.
The appellants contested the suit and raised the plea of adverse possession and the suit being barred under Article 144 of the Act.
The trial court held that the Deed of Settlement itself was not a genuine deed, but even if it were, the suit was barred under Article 144.
In the appeal by respondents plaintiff, the Appellate Court held that Deed of Settlement was valid and genuine and in fact it effected a legal endowment in favour of the diet, the original settlor having disvested herself of the ownership completely and consequently the Deed of Cancellation was ineffective in law.
The suit was regarded as one falling under article 134B of the Act and the suit having been filed within 12 years from the death of the settlor was held to be within time and the respondents Plaintiffs ' ' suit was decreed.
In the second appeal filed by the appellants, the High Court confirmed the first Appellate Court 's decree.
810 on appeal to this Court, the appellants, relying on the decision in Srinivas vs Ramaswami,[1966]3 S.C R 120, contended that there was a resignation on the part of the settlor as a Trustee and such resignation, if not overt and express, must be deemed to have taken place by reason of the fact that she herself had executed and registered the Deed of Cancellation (Ex.
B 1) on January 21, 1930 and thereafter she had alienated the proper ties in favour of the appellants ' father and she even left the village for quite a few years and since the suit was filed in the year 1962, long after the expiry of 12 years from such deemed resignation, it was barred.
The respondents plaintiffs, however, contended that there was no plea of limitation specifically raised on the basis that there was any deemed resignation on the part of the settlor and as the parties did not lead any evidence focussing their attention on this aspect of the matter and if there be some evidence vaguely or generally led by the parties on this aspect the same should be ignored.
alternatively, it was contended that even other wise by the mere execution of a Deed of Cancellation and indulgence in alienations of properties by the settlor in favour of the appellants ' father no deemed resignation should be implied for a wrongful Cancellation Deed, and a wrongful alienation cannot affect her character as a trustee of the properties under the Deed of Settlement which was complete and under which she had divested herself of the ownership of the properties irretrievably.
The starting point of limitation for the suit must be held to be the date on which the settler died.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Limitation in the instant case, will have to be regarded as having commenced on the date of the death of the settlor and the respondents plaintiffs ' suit would be within time.
[814E] 2.
Where a trustee wrongfully alienates some trust property and even if the entire trust property is alienated, he does not cease to be a trustee.
By wrongfully executing a Deed of Cancellation the settlor cannot effectively revoke the settlement and if such settlor happens to be the trustee he shall continue to be the trustee of the settlement.
[813 a F] In the instant case, there is a clear finding recorded by the first Appellate Court, and the High Court that the Deed of Settlement dated May 17, 1925 was valid and complete in all respects where under the settlor had divested herself of the properties which she had endowed to the temple, and both the Cancellation Deed as well as the alienations were ineffective and wrongful and, therefore, it could not be said that by indulging in these acts she had resigned her position as a trustee of the endowment.
[813 F G] (3) The fact that the settlor had left the village for a few years is neither here nor there.
The facts regarding performing of Puja of the deity in the temple by some other persons and contribution towards the expenses of the temple by some devotees are really equivocal and would not be conclusive of the matter on the point of the settlor having resigned inasmuch as the temple which was a village temple was already in existence, 811 to which only properties had been endowed and the temple was a public A religious institution to which the endowment had been made and as such the fact that certain expenses of the temple were contributed by devotees or members of the public would hardly be indicative of the fact that the settlor had resigned from the position as a trustee qua the endowed property.
Similar, would be the position with regard to the fact that some persons were performing the Puja which would not be unnatural in the case of a public religious institution.
[813H; 814A C] There could conceivably be a deemed resignation or a deemed removal but for inferring the same some additional facts would be required to be proved.
The facts on which reliance had been placed by the appellants by themselves are insufficient to warrant the inference that there was a deemed resignation [814C D] Srinivas vs Ramaswami, [19661 3 S.C.R. 120, referred to.
