Section 46 of the Electricity (Supply) act 1948 provides that a tariff to be known as the Grid Tariff shall, in accordance with any regulations made, be fixed from time to time by the Electricity Board.
Section 58 enables a local authority to implement the directions issued by the Electricity Board or the Government with regard to amortisation and tariffs policies.
The U.P. Electricity Board under a notification dated 24 April 1962, fixed the tariff payable by licensees who used to get bulk supply of electric energy.
The tariff so fixed was enhanced by another notification dated September 30, 1967 by 20% which came into force on December, 1,1967.
The City Board, a licensee, moved the State Government on September 13,1966 for permission to enhance the rates for supply, but no such sanction was given till March 23, 1968.
The City Board questioned the validity of the tariff fixed and its subsequent enhancement under article 226 on the grounds: (1) that the notification dated April 24, 1962 was not in conformity with section 46, and (2) that it had not been Permitted to enhance correspondingly the rates chargeable by it.
The petition was, however, dismissed.
On appeal the Division Bench partly allowed the appeal, holding: (i) that ample guidance is available in the Act, and that the rates fixed are subject to the control of the State Government: (ii) that the levy of an additional 7.112 % as an additional charge and subsequent enhancement under the two notifications was illegal; (iii) that it was open to the Electricity Board to make an additional charge to the extent of the actual expenditure incurred by supplying energy at 6600 volts, and (iv) that the Electricity Board should consider afresh rates at which electric energy could be supplied.
Both the City Board and the Electricity Board filed appeals to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the City Board that in the absence of any regulations laying down the principles for fixing the tariff under s, 79, the 816 two Notifications issued under section 46 of the Act were void as they had been issued without any guidance and were, therefore, arbitrary.
On the question whether the grid tariff fixed suffered from vice of arbitrariness, ^ HELD: (1) While section 79(h) of the Act authorises the Electricity Board to make regulations laying down the principles governing the fixing of Grid Tariffs, section 46(1) of the Act does not say that no Grid Tariff can be fixed until such regulations are made.
It only provides that the Grid Tariffs shall be fixed in accordance with any regulations made in this behalf.
The framing of regulation under section 79(h) of the Act cannot, therefore, be a condition precedent for fixing the Grid Tariff.
In the instant case, the Grid Tariff fixed did not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
[821E G; 822E] Mysore State Road Transport Corporation vs Gopinath Gundachar Char ; , followed.
(2) The had been enacted to provide for the rationalisation of the production of supply of electricity and generally for taking measures conducive to electrical development.
It is, therefore, permissible for the Electricity Board to fix a common Grid Tariff for an area so that there may be a reasonably uniform development of the area by the supply of electric energy to all licensees or consumers in the area at a uniform rate with such reasonable variations as may be permissible in law subject to the condition that no undue preference is shown to any of them.
The Act also furnishes ample guidance regarding the determination of tariffs by an Electricity Board.
[823A C] Maharashtra State Electricity Board vs Kalyan Borough Municipality and Anr. ; , followed.
(3) The validity of the levy of additional charges could not be questioned by the City Board under Article 226 of the Constitution in respect of the period prior to the filing of the writ petition.
The additional charge of 7.1/2% was levied in 1962 and the City Board did not question it before the Court till March 23, 1968 when it filed the Writ Petition.
Moreover, the City Board had not stated that it had not collected charges from the consumers of electric energy supplied by it at the rates which would cover the additional 7.1/2% and had not recouped itself by collecting the charges from the consumers.
The presumption in this situation would be that the City Board had not suffered any loss by the levy of 7.1/2% by way of additional charges.
[823 G H 824 A B] In the instant case, the City Board has been given directions from time to time by the Government regarding the charges it may collect from the consumers in the light of the charges it has to pay to the Electricity Board and its own investment expenditure on the undertaking.
The City Board cannot question the Grid Tariff only without at the same time questioning the directions pursuant to which it has been collecting charges from its consumers.
No satisfactory material has been placed before the Court showing that the charges which were being collected by the City Board from the consumers were uneconomical and did not satisfy the reasonable standards which should 817 govern the directions issued by the Electricity Board or the Government from A time to time regarding the tariffs policies of the City Board.
Therefore, it would not be proper to reopen the claims of the City Board in regard to the period prior to the filing of the writ petition arising on the basis of the alleged invalidity of the notification dated April 24,1962.
The decision of the High Court on the above point is allowed to remain only for the period between March 23, 1968 and July 1, 1968.
No opinion on its correctness is expressed because the period is small one and the Electricity Board has not insisted upon a decision on this question.
The relief granted by the High Court with regard to the levy of additional charge of 20% with effect from December 1, 1967 till July 1, 1968 is also not disturbed for the same reasons [824D H; 825A] The matter may be reconsidered by the Electricity Board as directed by the High Court on the other points in regard to the above specified periods
