Section 134(1) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act 1950 provides that if a Sirdar (tenure holder) deposits with the State Government an amount equal to ten times the land revenue payable on the date of application for the land of which he is a Sirdar, he shall be entitled with effect from the date on which the amount has been deposited, to a declaration that he has acquired the rights mentioned in sec.
137 in respect of such land.
Sec. 137 as it stood before amendment in 1962 provided that the Sirdar shall become a bhumidhar from the date of grant of a certificate by the Assistant Collector under sub sec.
The vendor Who had Sirdari rights over the disputed land deposited the required amount on 28th Oct. 1961 section 134 of the Act in order to acquire Bhumidari rights over the land.
He sold the land to the appellant on the same day while he was granted certificate of Bhumidari rights section 137 of the Act on 30th Oct. 1961.
Thereafter, the respondents, sons of the vendor, filed a suit before the Additional Munsiff for cancellation of Sale Deed executed by the vendor on 28th October, 1961.
The suit was dismissed and the order was confirmed in first appeal.
Rut, the High Court in second appeal filed by the respondents decreed the suit, holding that the vendor had no right to execute the sale deed on 28th October 1961, since he acquired Bhumidbari rights w.e.f.
30th October 1961 i.e. from the date of grant of Bhumidari Certificate and Dot from the date of deposit of the amount.
919 Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (l) Section 43 of the 'transfer of Property Act embodies a rule of estoppel and enacts that a person who makes a representation shall not be heard to allege the contrary as against a person who acts on that representation.
lt mattes not whether the transferor acted fraudulently or innocently in making the representation.
What is material is hat he did make a representation and the transferee has acted on it.
Where the transferee knew as a fact that the transferor did not possess the title which he represents he has, then he cannot b said to have acted on it when taking a transfer.
Section 43 would then have no application and the transfer will fail under s 6(a).
But where the transferee does act on the representation, there is no reason why he should not have the benefit of the equitable doctrine embodied in section 43, however, fraudulent the act of the transfer or might have been.
[923 G H; 924 C D] C (2) In the instant case, the amount of deposit under sec.
134 of the Act was made on October 28, 1961 and it was on the same day that the sale deed was executed.
It is clear that the vendor erroneously represented to the vendee that he was authorized to transfer the property and professed to transfer such property for consideration.
the very execution of the sale deed on the same day as the deposit of the requisite amount under sec.
134 is significant enough establish that the sale deed was the result of an erroneous representation by the Vendor.
It is also clear that the respondents who are the sons of the vendor, cannot possibly claim to be transferees in good faith which indeed they do not claim to be.
Section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act clearly applies to the situation However, the conflict of opinion which rose in the Allahabad High Court on the question whether a tenant obtained Bhumidari rights from the date of deposits, the date of declaration or the date of certificate was resolved by the legislature which amended sec.
137(2)in 1962 and substituted the words "from the data on which the amount referred to in section 134 has been deposited" for the words, '"from the date thereof." Unfortunately the amending Act, which in the case of certain amendments provided that the substituted words shall be deemed always to have been so substituted, did not so provide in the case of the amendment of sec.
137(2) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition Act.
The result was that in cases where the amount had been deposited and a certificate obtained on different dates before the coming into force of the 1962 amending Act, the position still was that the tenure holder acquired bhumidari rights with effect only from the date of issuance of the bhumidari certificate.
[922 E H; 921 F H; 922A] Ram Sawarup vs Deputy Collector, Consolidation & Ors.
I.L.R. 1971 (1) All. 698, approxed.
Jumma Masjid vs Kodimaniandra Deviah, ; Supp. 2 S.C.R. 554, Official Assignee, Madras vs Sanpath Naidu and Dhani Ram vs Jokhu Second Appeal No. 4276 of 1964 [decided by Allahabad High Court referred to. 920
