The respondent in C.A. No. 201 of 1977, was appointed as a Forester by the Conservator of Forests.
He was placed under suspension pending enquiry into charges of negligence of duties on 26.2.1969 by the District Forest Officer under whom he was working.
He challenged before the High Court under article 226 the validity of the order of suspension on the ground (i) that the order was made in contravention of article 311 of the Constitution; and (ii) that it was also violative of Rule 12 of the Orissa Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1962.
The High Court while rejecting the second contention held that the order was violative of clause (1) of Art, 311 inasmuch as the respondent could not have been validly suspended from service by the District Forest Officer, who is an authority subordinate to the authority which originally appointed him namely the Conservator of Forests.
The question of law raised in C.A. No. 200 (N)/71 also identical.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: (1) An order of suspension passed against a Government servant pending disciplinary enquiry is neither one of dismissal nor of removal from service within article 311 of the Constitution Clause (1) of article 311 will get attracted only when a person who is a member of Civil Service of the Union or an All India Service or a Civil Service of a State or one who holds a civil post under the Union or a State is 'dismissed ' or 'removed from service.
The provisions of the said clause have no application whatever to a situation where a Government servant has been merely placed under 963 suspension pending departmental enquiry since such action does not constitute either dismissal or removal from service.
[964E G] (2) The High Court was right in rejecting the second contention of the respondent.
Rule 12 of the Rules lays down that any authority empowered by the Governor or the appointing authority in that behalf may place a government servant under suspension, where a disciplinary proceeding against him is either contemplated or is pending.
In the instant case, it is not in dispute that under a Notification issued by the State Government in exercise of the powers conferred by Rule 11 of the Rules, the District Forest Officer was constituted "the appointing authority" in respect of Foresters with effect from 7.5.1962.
It is therefore clear that on the date on which the impugned order of suspension was passed 26.2.1969, the District Forest Officer under whom the respondent was working in the Ghumsur North Division was fully competent to pass the impugned order of suspension.
[964H; 965A C] Mohammad Ghouse vs State of Andhra Pradesh ; followed.
