First Paragraph of Regulation 34 of West Bengal State Electricity Board Regulations provides that in case of a permanents employee his services may be terminated by serving 3 months notice or on payment of salary for the corresponding Period in lieu thereof.
The Secretary of the appellant Board terminated the services of first respondent, a permanent employee with immediate effect on payment of three months ' salary in lieu of three months notice without giving any reasons under Regulation 34 of the Board 's Regulations.
There was nothing in the order which could possibly be said to attach any stigma to the respondent The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court for quashing the impugned order.
The High Court came to the conclusion that Regulation 34 was arbitrary in nature and suffered from the vice of enabling discrimination and therefore it struck down the first paragraph of Regulation 34 and as a consequence quashed the order terminating the services of the first respondent.
In an appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that section 18A and 19 of the Electricity Supply Act laid down sufficient guidelines for the exercise of the power under Regulation 34 and in any case the power to terminate the services of a permanent employee was vested in higher ranking officials and might be expected to be exercised in a reasonable way and therefore Regulation 34 did not offend Article 14 of the Constitution.
1015 Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Article 14 has been interpreted in several decisions of the Court and conferment and exercise of arbitrary power on and by the State or its instrumentalities have been frowned upon and struck down by this Court as offending Article 14.
[1017G] In the instant case, on the face of it the Regulation is totally arbitrary and confers on the Board a power which is capable of vicious discrimination.
It is a naked 'hire and fire ' rule, the time for banishing which altogether from employer employee relationship is fast approaching Its only parallel is to be found in the Henry VIII class so familiar to administrative lawyers.
[10 1017E F] Workman, Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs Hindustan Steel Ltd., ; followed section section Muley vs J. R. D. Tata and Ors., [1979] 2 section L. R. 438, approved.
Moti Ram Deka vs North East frontier Railway; , , referred to.
Manohar p. Kharkhar vs Raghuraj, [1981] II L L J. 459, overruled.
