An Ordinance, U.P. Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964 (Amendment and Validation Ordnance No. 1969) passed on November 5, 1969 amended the definition of "agricultural produce" embodied in section 2(a) of the U P. Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam Act 1964 and 'gur, rab, shakkar, khandsari and jaggery ' were included in the amended definition.
This Ordinance was subsequently converted into U.P. Krishi Utpadan Mandi (Amendment and Validation) Act 1970.
Thus 'Khandsari ' stood covered a by the definition of section 2 (a) of the Act so amended.
The petitioners, who are owners of Khandsari factories, have alleged that what they produce is "Khandsari Sugar" and not 'Khandsari ', which is covered by the definition of "agricultural produce".
It was contended; (1) that they are not liable to obtain a licence under Rule 67 of the Rules framed under s, 40 of the Act or to pay the licence fees (Rs. 100 per 967 annum) payable for such licence; (2) that the Market Committee (Mandi A Samiti) constituted under section 12 of the Act cannot levy and collect market fee of 1% of the value, under section 17(iii) of the Act, on the transactions in respect of what they produce, from the traders who purchase the product from them; and (l) that section 2 (a) of the Act is discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: (Per Majority) 1.
The definition embodied in section 2(a) of the Act is an inclusive one.
It in terms provides that 'Khandsari ' is included within the coverage of "agricultural produce".
The Act, however. does not define the term 'Khandsari '.
It is not sufficient to contend that what the petitioners produce is "Khandsari Sugar" and not 'Khandsari '.
It has also to be shown by them that what they produce is popularly or commercially known as "Khandsari Sugar" and not as "Khandsari".
And thus they have failed to establish.
It is not shown that "Khandsari Sugar" is the nomenclature employed in the world of trade and commerce in respect of their product.
Neither the traders, nor the consumers are shown to have done so in their day to day dealings.
[989F H; 990A] 1 2.
The term 'Khandsari Sugar" owes its origin to U.P. KHANDSARI SUGAR MANUFACTURING ORDER of 1977 issued under section 3 of the ESSENTlAL COMMODITIES ACT, 1955.
"Khandsari Sugar" was defined by cl. 2(f) of the said Order as meaning "sugar containing more than 90% sucrose and manufactured by open pan process including bels.
" It is a statutory definition enacted for the 'purpose ' of the aforesaid Control Order which uses the expression "Khandsari Sugar".
It has nothing to do with the moaning and content of the term Khandsari ' as used by the trade in U.P. [990B C] 2.
(i) It is unnecessary for the present purpose to cite all the decisions.
Or to undertake a journey through the factual hinterland of each decision.
Or to turn the headlights on the observations made in each of p the decisions.
For, the principle, though Barbed in different apparel, is simply this.
In legislations pertaining to the world of business and commerce, the dictionary to refer to is the dictionary of the inhabitants of that world.
What they understand by the term 'Khandsari ' is precisely what that term means in the statute designed to regulate their dealings and transactions.
The best test therefore is to ask the question what they themselves have understood by the term Khandsari, bow they themselves have interpreted it, and on what basis they themselves have moulded their own conduct, for all these years.
The factory owners similarly situated as petitioners as also the traders in general have understood the term 'Khandsari ' as being applicable to the Khandsari produced by the factories by open pan process as also to Khandsari produced indigenously.
[990E G] Commissioner of Income tax, Andhra Pradesh v Taj Mahal Hotel, at p. 47 and Porrits & Spencer (Asia) Ltd. vs State of Haryana, [1979] I S.C.R. 545, relied on.
968 2.
(ii) Inclusion of Khandsari in the definition of "agricultural produced by virtue of amendment of section 2(a) was challenged by a few commission agents carrying on business of sale and Purchase of Khandsari in 1969 by instituting writ petitions in the High Court of Allahabad.
ever, none of the grounds of challenge pertained to the aspect relating to the meaning and content of the term Khandsari '.
The petitions were dismissed by a Single Judge and that decision was confirmed by the Division Bench.
[989C D] 2.
(iii) Factory owners producing Khandsari have been obtaining licence under the Act and paying, without demur, market fee at 1% of the value since 1969 70 till 1981, when fresh challenge was made through the instant petitions.
For more than ten years even the petitioners have not felt that 'Khandsari ' means something other than what they produce.
It is not shown that in the popular or commercial sense, the product is not known as Khandsari ' but is known as Khandsari Sugar".
The term "Khandsari Sugar" saw the light of day seven years after the Act was enacted in 1970 when U.P. Khandsari Sugar Order of 1977 was born and the artificial nomenclature was coined for the restricted purpose of the order.
There is no material even to show that this nomenclature was known to the petitioners or to the traders themselves there to before.
[990H; 991C; E F] 3.
The Legislature has in terms encompassed 'Khandsari ' within the definition of section 2(a) of the Act.
And the term 'Khandsari ' is sufficiently wide to cover all varieties of Khandsari including the article produced by the factories like those of the petitioners.
Besides, the basic premise assumed by the petitioners that the object of the Act is merely to protect the producers from exploitation is fallacious.
This is one of the objects and not the sole or only object of the Act.
The Act has many more objects and a much wider horizon, and oven transactions where both the sides are traders and neither side is agriculturist, are brought within the coverage of the Act.
[992A D] Ramesh Chandra vs State of U.P., ; and Ramesh Chandra Kachardas Porwal & Ors.
v State of Maharashtra & Ors.
; , , relied on.
There is nothing in the definition of 'Producer ' contained in section 2(p) of the Act which would justify overriding the clear language of the statutes read in the light of the perspective of the Act and the history of the levy.
While the term 'Khandsari ' has not been defined, it is obviously wide enough to cover Khandsari produced by any process regardless of its quality or variety [994D E] 5.
This Court has had several occasions to deal with a similar problem in the context of taxing statutes.
And this Court has consistently taken the view that in the matter of classification the Legislature has a wide discretion in selecting the persons or objects it will tax, and that a statute is not open to attack on the ground that it taxes some persons or objects and not others. 'Everything or nothing ' argument is basically fallacious.
For, the Legislature may tax or regulate the trade in some 969 Objects and not in others.
Or may bring within its net some objects A initially and may cast the net wider later on.
Or may tax or regulate the trade in only such objects which it considers expedient or worthwhile.
The decision essentially a policy decision, may depend on several factors.
Factors, such as, the felt necessity for such an impost or regulation of a trade in a particular article, likely impact of the decision on the trade, industry, or consumer, viability of the same from the stand point of its own management resources.
Or from the angle of the net advantage to be secured in the balance sheet of pros and cons taking into account the anticipated administrative and management inputs required to be invested in the exercise.
In substance, it is a policy decision turning on numerous and complex factors.
[99B E] 5 (i) It is not for this court to question why Khandsari produced by the petitioners is included when sugar produced by the Mills is not so included.
It is not a question to which we can legitimately address ourselves, for, essentially it is a question of legislative wisdom and legislative policy dictated by countless and complex considerations.
The Court cannot, and will not substitute its own wisdom in place of the legislative wisdom in such matters.
The Court will not impose on itself this responsibility, if not for any other reason, than for the reason that it is beyond its province.
Hence section 2(a) of the Act is not discriminatory and violative of Article 14.
[996G H; 997Al East India Tobacco Co. vs State of Andhra Pradesh, [1963] I S.C R. 404, relied on.
Willie on Constitutional Law p. 857, referred to.
Per A. Varadarajan, J (Dissenting) 1.
What the petitioners, produce in their modern Khandsari mills by the open pan process is Khandsari sugar, an industrial product like plantation white sugar and not Khandsari which is produced by agricultural producers in the indigenous method and the levy of market fee on sales of khandsari sugar under the Adhiniyam is unwarranted as the Adhiniyam is intended for the protection of agricultural producers in the disposal of their products and only Khandsari produced by agricultural producers is included in the definition of agricultural produce" in section 2(a) thereof and not Khandsari sugar.
[986P G] 2.
A manufacturer producing Khandsari Sugar by the modern method in the open pan process is not a producer within the meaning of section 2(p) of the Adhiniyam.
[980E] 3.
The object of the Adhiniyam as seen from the prefatory note and preamble is to protect the agricultural producer from exploitation.
Protection of any industrial producer is not the object of the Adhiniyam.
[979G] 4.
The Khandsari sugar produced by the petitioners in their mills with the aid of power in the open pan process by employing large number of employees to whom the Industrial Disputes Act, Minimum Wages Act, Factories Act.
Employees Provident Fund Act and similar enactments apply 970 is an industrial product which is very different from Khandsari produced by agricultural or sugarcane growers in the old indigenous method.
[982E F] 5.
The Adhiniyam originally intended to protect the interests of agricultural producers has not become a marketing legislation under entry 28 of List II in the Seventh Schedule by the mere fact of inclusion of one or more industrial products in the definition of agricultural produce in section 2(a) of the Adhiniyam.
[983H; 984A] 6.
The prefatory note and the preamble can be looked into in the present case as there is dispute between the parties on the question whether "Khandsari sugar" produced by the petitioners, which is not included in the schedule or definition of agricultural produce in the Adhiniyam, while "Khandsari" is mentioned in the definition of agricultural produce in section 2(a) thereof can be the subject matter of levy of market fee under the Adhiniyam.
[984F G] 7.
The principle underlying the levy of tax cannot be made applicable to the levy of market fee under the Adhiniyam.
Both Plantation While Sugar and Khandsari Sugar are industrial products and there is discrimination against Khandsari Sugar in seeking to subject it to the levy under the Adhiniyam leaving out plantation White Sugar [988B] Laxmi Khandsari Etc.
vs State of U.P. & others; , Paunakram vs State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 187 and Andhra Sugars ltd.& Anr. etc.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors., [1968] I SCR, 705 referred to.
