The appellant is a trade union registered under the Trade Unions Act.
It represents employees in the Chambal Project of Government of Madhya Pradesh in Gwalior Division.
The union raised three demands, namely, (1) Chambal allowance; (2) Dearness allowance equal to that of the Central Government employees; and (3) Wages for the period of strike lasting 20 days in the year 1966 and served notices of these demands on the Deputy Chief Engineer, Major Project Chambal Since the attempts for settlement by the canciliation officer failed, a full report of the dispute under section 12 (4) of the Act was sent to the State Government which, by its order dated 15.
3. 1969, refused to refer the matter to the concerned Tribunal.
The appellant took the matter before the High Court by filing Miscellaneous Petition No 29169 for a mandamus to the State Government to refer the matter for adjudication.
The High Court allowed the writ petition, and directed the State Government to consider the question whether a reference was necessary or not.
The Government again refused to refer the dispute to the Tribunal, taking the stand that the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act were not applicable to the workmen in the Chambal Scheme as it was not Industry '.
The appellant approached the High Court for the second time by filing Miscellaneous Petition No. 45 of 1970 and challenged the said orders.
The High Court allowed the petition and directed the Government to take suitable action under section 12 (5) of the Act.
The Government challenged the said decision before the Supreme Court by filing SLP No. 933 of 1972 without success.
Later, by its order dated 13.
1. 72, the State Government referred to the Tribunal only the third question of payment of wages for the strike period and declined to refer the other two questions for the reasons that (a) the Government was not in a position to bear the additional burden and (b) the grant of the special allowance claimed would invite similar demands by other employees which would affect the entire administration.
The appellant was perforced 1020 to approach the High Court, for the third time, by way of a miscellaneous Petition No. 127 of 1972 for a direction to the State to refer the other two demands also.
In the meanwhile, the Supreme Court by its decision dated July 20, 1978 confirmed the High Court 's order that Chambal Project was a 'industry ' within the meaning of the Act.
whereupon the Government reviewed the matter and passed an order on 3. 79 giving additional reasons for declining to refer the dispute for adjudication namely, (a) the State Government was not in a position and therefore cannot pay Central DA to any of its employees in any department and (b) the work charged employees who get a consolidated salary are not entitled to Chambal allowance under the rules.
The High Court, by its decision dated 8th August 1980 dismissed the petition holding that the reasons given by the Court are germane and relevant.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 The reasons given by the State Government to decline reference are beyond the powers of the Government under the relevant sections of the Industrial Disputes Act.
[1026C] 1.2 While conceding a very limited jurisdiction to the State Government to examine patent frivolousness of the demands, it is to be understood as a rule, that adjudication of demands made by workmen should be left to the Tribunal to decide.
Section 10 permits appropriate Government to determine whether dispute 'exists or is apprehended" and then refer it for adjudication on merits.
The demarcated functions are (1) reference, (2) adjudication.
[1025H; 1026A] 1.3 When a reference is rejected on the specious plea that the Government cannot bear the additional burden, it constitutes adjudication and thereby usurpation of the power of a quasi judicial Tribunal by an administrative authority namely the Appropriate Government.
What the State Government had done in this case is not a prima facie examination of the merits of the question involved.
To say that granting of dearness allowance equal to that of the employees of the Central Government would cost additional financial burden on the government is to make a unilateral decision without necessary evidence and without giving an opportunity to the workmen to rebut this conclusion.
This virtually amounts to a final adjudication of the demand itself.
The demand can never be characterized as other perverse or frivolous.
The conclusion so arrived at robs the & employees of an opportunity to place evidence before the Tribunal and to substantiate the reasonableness of the demand.
[1026B E] 1.4 What exactly are the conditions of service of the employees and in what manner their conditions of service could be improved are matters which are the special preserve of the appropriate Tribunals to be decided in adjudicatory processes and are not once to be decided by the Government on a prima facie examination of the demand.
The question whether the emp 1021 loyees were/were not entitled to the Chambal allowance as they are in A receipt of a consolidated pay relates to the conditions of service of the employees Further this demand also cannot be said to be either perverse or frivolous.
[1026F G] 1.5 However, there may be exceptional cases in which the State Government, may, on a proper examination of the demand, come to a conclusion that the demands are either perverse or frivolous and do not merit a reference.
Government should be very slow to attempt an examination of the demand with a view to decline reference and Courts will always be vigilant whenever the Government attempts to usurp the powers of the Tribunal for adjudication of valid disputes.
To allow the Government to do so would be to render section 10 and section 12 (5) of the Industrial Disputes Act nugatory.
[1026G H; 1027A] C Bombay Union of Journalists vs State of Bombay ; , explained and followed.
