The Employee ' State Insurance Act 1948, a social welfare legislation in tune with the Directive Principles of State Policy contained in Articles 41, 42 and 43 OF the Constitution, was enacted to provide for certain benefits to employees in the case of sickness, maternity and employment injury and to make provisions for certain other matters in relation thereto.
the Act directly falls under Entries 23 and 24 of List III of the Vllth Schedule of the Constitution, which are, social security and social insurance, employment and unemployment", and "welfare of labour including coDditioDs of work, provident funds, employers liability, workmen 's compensation, invalidity and old age pensions and maternity benefits".
The Act applies to all factories including factories belonging to the Government other tban seasonal factorics Chapter Il provides for the establishment of the Employees ' State Insurance Corporation, to bo a body corporate, for administering the scbeme of Employees ' State Insurance.
Section 26 provides for the establishment of a Fund called the Employees ' State Insurance Flmd.
Section 28 lists the purposes for which the Fund may be expended.
Chapter IV provides for the manner of insurance of ull the employGes in factories or ostablishments to which tho Act applios 1086 and the payment of contribution for that purpose.
The contribution payable in rcspect of an employce shall comprise contributioll payable by the employer called employer 's contribution aad contribution payble by the employee called employee 's contribution.
The contribution has to be paid at tbe rates specified in the first schcdule.
SeCtiOD 46 specifies the benefits to which the iosured persons,their dependats and others shall be entitled.
The scheme under tbe Act could only be implemonled by stagos, and, thelefore, ' trnnsitory provisioDs" were made by introduction of Chapter V A by section 20 of Act No. 53 of 1951, which provided for tbe payment by the principal employer of a special contribution which shall be in lieu of the employer 's contribution payable under Chapser IV in the case of factories or establishments situate in areas iD which the provisions of both Cbapters IV and V are in force.
The provisioas or Chapter V A, however, ceased to have effect on and from July 1, 1973.
The appellant compaoy wa9 foemed in 1964 and started production Ihe same year.
The appellant company was exemptcd from Ihe provisiona of Chapter V A until the provisions of Chapter V of the Act were enforced in the area where the appellaDt 's factory was situaled.
This exemption was withdrawn with effect from May 31, 1969.
The appellant company ques tioned its liability to pay special contribution under Cbapter V A of the Act under Article 2 '6 of the Constitution.
The High Court disrDissed the Detition .
In the appeal to this Court it was contended that Ihe contribution payable under Chapter V A is a fee and its levy is illegal as the Act does not contemplate the rendering of any service or the conferment of any benefit to the appellant company or its employees as quJd pro quo for the pay mcnt.
and the DrOVisionS of Chapter V A are, therefore, ultra vires Dismissing the appeal. ^ HELD: 1.
The payment of contribution by an employer towards the premium of an employee 's compulsory insurance under the Employee ' State Insurance Act falls directly within Entrics 23 and 24 of List III of the VIIth Schedulo and it is wholly unnecessary to seek justification fot it by recourso to Entry 91 of List 1 or Entry 47 of List III in aDg circumlocutous fashioD. [1094A B] 2.
These contributions or for example coDtribulions to Provident Funds or payment of other benefits to worlcers cannot be labelled as taxes or fees.
They are neither taxes nor fees.
They donot require to be labelled as taxes or fees to recoive ligitimation.
[1093E '] 3.
( Even if tho charge is to be con trucd as a fee it is justifiable on that basis also as there was sufflcient quid pro quo.
[1096A] 3.
(ii) Services and bonefits are indeed meant to be and are bound to be conferrcd oo the employees and throngh them on the employer, in due course.
when tbe scheme becomes fully operative in all areas.
For a start the scheme is confined to a few aroas and though special contribution is 1087 levied from all employers wherever they be, in the case of employers who A straightaway receive the beoefits of the insurance scheme, their rate of contribution is bigher while in the case of employ rs, who do not yet receive the benets of the scheme, their rate of contribution is lower.
For the latter the scheme is analogous to a deferred insurance policy.
Morely because the benefits to be receive are postponed, it cannot be said that there is no quid pro quo Ordinarily a return in presenti is generally present when fee is levied, but simultaeity or contemporaneity of payment is not the most vital or crucial test to determine whether a levy is a fee or not.
In fact, it may often happen that the rendering of a service or the conferment of a benefit may only follow after the consolidation of a fund from the fee levied.
It is only after a sufficient nucleus is available that one may reasonably except a compensating re(urn.
The question of how soon a return may be expected or ought to be given must necessarily depend on the nature of the services required to be performed and benefits required to be conferred [1094D H] Basant Kumar vs Eagle Rolling Mills; , 6 SCR 913, referred lo.
K. C. Sarma vs Regional Director, E. section I Corporation, AIR 1962 ASSAM 120, followed.
The observations in the case of Kewal Krishan that the benefit should not be indirect and remote was not made in connection with any delayed benefit from the point of view of time, but with reference to the very benefit itself and its connection with the levy.
The judgments of Courts are not to be construed as Acts of Parliament.
Nor can a Judgment on a particular aspect of a question be read as a Holy Book covering all aspects of every question whether such questions arose for consideration of not in that case.
[1096B C] Kewal Krishan vs State of Punjab; , destinguished.
Amar Nath Om Parkash VS.
State of Punjab; , , relied on.
