The Food Corporation of India has been entrusted with the duty of procuring foodgrains and its movement and distribution throughout the country.
The Corporation employs for the discharge of this work three types of labourers; (1) departmentalised labour who are its regular employees; (2) direct paid labour; and (3) Contract labour who are employed by the Corporation through the intermediary of contractors.
The petitioners who come under the third category have been trying to pursuade the corporation for progressive departmentalisation of its labour Or in the alternative extending to them the benefits of the .
By this writ petition they prayed for a writ of mandamus either to the Union Government or to the concerned State Governments, to extend to them the benefits of the Act, for a direction to the corporation to pay them the same wages as are paid to the departmentalised labour and other reliefs.
The Corporation pleaded that the appropriate Government for the purpose of the claims of the petitioners working in its establishment in a State a is the concerned State Government and not the Central Government, which stand was adopted by ihe 15th Respondent State of Madhya Pradesh and the 21st Respondent State of Punjab through their respective affidavits and therefore disowned its responsibility.
The other States did not file their counter at all.
Allowing the petition, the Court, 151 ^ HELD: 1 Section 10 of the enables the appropriate Government by a suitable notification after making a study of the conditions laid down therein to prohibit employment of contract labour in any 'process, operation, or other work ' in any establishment.
The petitioners, complaint that despite several disputes and representations made to all the State Governments as well as the Union of India, nothing has so fare been done to give the benefit of Section 10 to the contract labour in the Corporation by playing hide and seek, one pointing to the other as the appropriate Government for redressal of their grievances is justified.
[155D E] 2.1 On the interpretation of the relevant sections namely, I (4), 1 (5), 2 (1) (a) and 2 (a) (e) of the Contract Labour Act, 1970 read with section 2 (a) (1) of the "appropriate Government" for the purpose of this case pertaining to the regional offices and warehouses of the Food Corporation of India in the respective States is the State Government and not the Central Government.
[161D] 2.2 Section 1(4) deals with the application of the Act to establishments and contractors answering to the description given therein and certainly the establishment of the Food Corporation and the contractors it employs come within the ambit of the provisions of this Act.
[156F] 2.3 Various warehouses, godowns and places alike sot up by the Corporation would be establishments where the trade of the corporation is being carried on and within the meaning of the term "establishment" in section 2 (1) (e) (ii) of the Act.
[158EI 2.4 It is a well established canon of statutory construction that legislature is known to avoid tautology and redundancy.
If Food Corporation of India was an industry carried on by or under the authority of the Central Government, it would have been comprehended in the first part of sub section (1) of Section 2 of the , but that being not the position, it was specifically referred to by name.
However, the expression 'appropriate Government ' in the Contract Labour Act, 1970 does not include by name the Food Corporation of India as the one in respect of which the appropriate Government would be the Central Government, while it is mentioned so in the definition in the even though both the statutes use the general expression 'any industry carried on by or under the authority of the Central Government. ' [169C E] 2.5 Looking to the placement of the expression in the definition clause of the Contract Labour Act and the purpose for which it is enacted, the expression 'any industry carried on by or under the authority of the Central Government ' mean 'pursuant to the authority, such as where an agent or a servant acts under or pursuant to the authority of his principal or master ' Since the various establishments of the Corporation do not pertain to any 152 controlled industry, sub clause (1) of sub section (1) of section 2 (a) of the Act is not attracted and therefore, the case would be governed by the residuary provision in sub section (2) and the State Government would be the appropriate Government.
Further in the counter affidavit filed by `the Corporation it is stated that this question was examined by the Labour Ministry which had clarified that the respective State Governments are the 'appropriate Governments ' for the corporation 's establishments situated in the State.
The Union of India has correctly taken a similar stand and the States of Punjab and Madhya Pradesh have also affirmed it.
[160B; F;G; 161A B] Heavy Engineering Mazdoor Union vs The State of Bihar and Ors., 11969] 3 SCR 995; Rashtriya Mills Mazdoor Sangh, Nagpur vs The Model Mills, Nagpur and Anr., , applied.
3 In the instant case, it will not be possible or proper for the Court to grant the reliefs prayed by the petitioner in full on the materials on record, the materials being scanty and insufficient for a comprehensive adjudication of the claims of the petitioners.
The Act contains provisions enabling the appropriate Government to get reports as to how to implement the provisions of the Act.
The machinery provided for by the Act has not been brought into action in any State except the State of Madhya Pradesh.
Therefore the course open lo the Court is to issue appropriate direction to the State Governments except Madhya Pradesh State to constitute committees within three months, under section 5 of the Act to make necessary enquiries, and to submit a report within four months of its constitution as to whether it would be possible to abolish contract labour in the Corporation altogether.
[161 F G]
