The respondent was carrying on business of manufacturing fertilizers at Ludhiana under the name and style of Messrs Varinder Agro Chemicals (India) and marketed his product through his agent Messrs Sachdeva Enterprises Kapurthala.
On finding the sample collected by a Fertilizer Inspector from the said agent on December 12, 1978 to be of sub standard, quality the Chief Agricultural officer, Kapurthala filed a criminal complaint being CC No. 156 C of 1980 on December 24, 1980 in the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kapurthala against the two partners of Messrs Sachdeva Enterprises and the Respondent under section 13A of the read with section 13(1) (a) of the Fertilizers Control order 1957.
On July 20, 1981 respondent moved an application before the trial court praying that he be discharged and the proceedings be dropped against him on the ground that the Kapurthala Court had no territorial jurisdiction to try him because he carried on business of manufacture of fertilizers at Ludhiana.
Relying no the decision of the Gujarat High Court in State of Gujarat vs Agro Chemicals etc.
(1980 Cr. L. J. p. 516) the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate discharged the respondent and dropped the proceedings against him.
The Criminal Revn.
Application No. 48 of 1981 filed by the State of Punjab was allowed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Kapurthala holding that in view of the provisions of Section 180 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Kapurthala Court had jurisdiction to try the Respondent along with the other co accused.
Thereupon the respondent preferred a revision petition being Crl.
No. in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
A learned Single Judge of the High Court relying on the decision of that Court in Satinder Singh and Ors.
vs State af Punjab, Crl.
Appln.
No. 1158 M/1981 dated 24 2 1982 which accepted the view taken by the Gujarat High Court, allowed the revision petition and set aside the decision of the Additional Sessions Judge.
Hence the State Appeal by Special Leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court 840 ^ HELD: 1.
The Court in whose jurisdiction sub standard fertilizer was found to be marketed will have the jurisdiction to try manufacturer of sub standard fertilizer even if the manufacturing activity is at an entirely different place.
The manufacturer as well as the dealer can be tried at a place where the consequences of the manufacturing and selling of sub standard fertilizer had ensued as envisaged in sections 179 and 180 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[in] 1: 2.
Now if manufacturing sub standard fertilizer is by itself an offence and marketing the sub standard fertilizer is itself a distinct offence but they are so inter connected as cause and effect, both can be tried at one or the other place.
If one manufacturers the sub standard fertilizer, wherever it is marketed the inter relation or casual connection is of cause and effect.
The situation will be adequately covered by sections 179 and 180 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[843G H] Incharge Production, Haryana State Coopt.
Supply And Marketing Federation Ltd. (HAFED) Fertilizer vs State of Punjab; Crl.
No. 6763 M of 1982 decided by the High Court on 9 3 1983 approved.
Where a sample of fertilizer is taken from a bag which was in the same condition as delivered by the manufacturer and it was in possession of a marketing agent manufacture and sale of sub standard fertilizer would constitute indisputably one transaction.
But this is predicated upon the facts which may be disclosed in the trial and proved.
[844D E] Bhagwan Das Jagdish Chander vs Delhi Administration [1975] Supp.
S.C.R 30, distinguished.
