In response to an advertisement dated 25th June, 1974 issued by the State Transport Authority, Orissa inviting applications in the prescribed forms, from the operators for all India Tourist Permit, a number of intending operators including the appellants submitted their applications and at the meeting held on February 2, 1975, the State Transport Authority granted to the appellants all India Tourist Permits for omnibus with passenger capacity not exceeding 29.
Some of the applicants who failed to obtain a permit filed three appeals being M. V.
Appeals Nos. 15, 16 and 17 all of 1975 to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal under sec.
64 (2) of the .
The Appellate Tribunal dismissed all the appeals and confirmed the order made by the State Transport Authority granting all India tourist permits to the appellants.
Three unsuccessful applicants for permit filed three writ petitions styled as C.J.C. No. 381, 182 and 881, all of 1976 questioning the correctness of the order granting the permit and dismissal of their appeals in the High Court of Orissa.
A Division Bench of the High Court, by a common judgment, allowed all the three writ petitions quashing and setting aside the order of the State Transport Authority.
Consequently, these appellants surrendered their permits.
Hence these three appeals by special leave.
During the pendency of these appeals The appellants were granted temporary all India tourist permits in compliance with the interim orders made by the Court.
Allowing the appeals, the Court 2 ^ HELD: 1.1 It was not necessary that the applicants for an all India tourist permit must have a pre existing contract carriage permit which could be endorsed so as to convert it into all India tourist permit [11 B C] 1.2 By introducing sub section 7 in section 63 of the the concept of all India permit to be granted by a State Transport Authority of a State within the limits of the quota prescribed by the Central Government which would enable the holder of the permit to operate in the whole of India, was introduced, for the first time with effect from 1st October, 1970.
The underlying object for creating this new class of permit was to promote tourism and to remove the barrier caused by the earlier system under which if a tourist vehicle is hired by a tourist party for moving from State to State, the vehicle cannot be taken to another State from the place of commencement of journey unless a valid contract carriage permit of that State is obtained or the existing permit is counter signed.
[6G H, 7A B] 1.3 An Application for an all India tourist permit has to be processed in accordance with the provisions of sections 49, 50, 51, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61 and 63 (7).
An all India tourist permit is primarily a contract carriage permit but while the ordinary contract carriage permit can be granted by the Regional Transport Authority, for operation within local jurisdiction, or when counter signed by Regional Transport Authority of adjacent area in more than one such jurisdiction but not at any rate outside the State and not in any case on an all India basis.
To this extent, an ordinary contract carriage permit differs from an all India tourist permit but an all India tourist permit is none the less a contract carriage permit.
Sub section (7) Of section 63 on the other hand confers power on the State Transport Authority to grant an all India tourist permit which in effect is a contract carriage permit but which permits plying of tourist vehicle throughout India.
Even for obtaining such a permit, section 51 will apply with this modification that the application for all India tourist permit has to be made to State Transport Authority of the State in which their permit is sought.
This scheme of law nowhere expressly or by necessary implication suggests that an applicant for an all India tourist permit must of necessity or as a prerequisite have a contract carriage permit which alone can be endorsed for the purpose of all India operation.
Sub section (7) of section 63 if read thus would render nugatory the affirmative provision that on a proper application being made and legally processed, the State Transport Authority can grant an all India tourist permit.
[6D, 7E H, 8C D] 1.4 The fact that an application for an all India tourist Permit has to be made under section 49 which prescribes procedure for obtaining a contract carriage permit, because in substance an all India tourist permit is none the less a contract carriage permit but with a much wider area of operation, however, does not permit an inference that before obtaining an all India tourist permit, the intending operator must obtain a contract carriage permit from the Regional Transport Authority and then get it endorsed from the State Transport Authority to make it valid for the whole or any part of India.
Sub section (7) of section 63 does not speak of any 3 endorsement on permit, though endorsement may be another mode of enlarging the area of operation It speaks of granting a permit valid for the whole or any part of India when granted by a State Transport Authority in exercise of The power conferred by sub section (7) of section 63 without any further endorsement of any other authority [8E H] 2.
Sub Rules (2), (3) and (4) of Rule 3 of the Orissa Tourist Vehicles Rules, 1967 had absolutely no application to the proceedings of the State Transport Authority held for consideration of applications for all India Tourist Permit and granting them to the appellants.
These Rules were enacted in the year 1967 in exercise of the power conferred by section 68 of the and were brought into operation on 19/20 June, 1967.
These rules were made at a time when the only way to enlarge the area of operation in respect of a permit was by endorsement by various authorities on the original permit granted by a Transport Authority.
All India tourist permit was not conceptualized by the time 1967 Rules were framed.
Therefore, the rules at the relevant time catered to a situation When the area of operation specified in a contract carriage permit could be enlarged by endorsement by authority other than the grantor only.
[9F H; 10A] 3.
The applications of the appellants with all relevant information were complete and the blanks in their application forms were irrelevant.
In the advertisement issued by the State Transport Authority on June 24, 1974 inviting applications for permits in respect of omnibus authorising it to ply as an all India tourist vehicle in the prescribed forms, two prescribed forms were annexed.
The first form was meant for those who had no existing contract carriage permit and were applying straightaway for the first time for an all India tourist permit.
The form itself shows that the application had to be made to the State Transport Authority for a contract carriage permit with an all India operation.
There was another form which catered to the needs of the holder of the existing contract carriage permits who wanted the area of operation to be enlarged by converting an ordinary contract carriage permit into all India tourist permit.
For a fresh applicant like the appellants who had no existing contract carriage permit, therefore, the blanks could not have been filled in.
[10F H; 11A]
