The Rajasthan Universities Teachers and Officers (Special Conditions of Service) Act, 1974 provided for an elaborate procedure for recruitment of teachers and officers in the universities but no selection had been made on the basis of that Act and all appointments were made on a temporary basis.
Section 3 of the Act provided that no stop gap or part time arrangement can be made for more than six months.
The temporary appointments of lecturers by the Vice Chancellor could not be made for more than one academic year.
It further provided that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, no teacher or officer in any University in Rajasthan should be appointed except on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted under section 4.
For a long time since the inception of the University, there had been no regular selections and appointments of lecturers in the University and the teachers ' organisations were pressing for absorption on substantive posts, of temporary lecturers who were working for long years.
The Government of Rajasthan therefore promulgated the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Ordinance, 1978.
Clause 3 of the said Ordinance had an English version as well as a Hindi version.
Hindi version in Roman script read as follows: "Samast asthai pradhyapko ke sambandh me jo is roop me 25 June, 1975 ko ya usse purve niyukat kiye gaye the aur jo Rajasthan Vishvavidhyalay Adhyapak (Asthai Pradhyapki Ka Amelan) 244 Adhyadesh, 1978 (1978 ka Adhyadesh section 5) ke prarambh ke samaya is roop me karya kar rahe hein, unki apni, apni. .
The English version of the Ordinance reads as follows: "All temporary lecturers as were appointed as such on or before the 25th day of June, 1975 and are continuing as such at the commencement of the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers Ordinance, 1978 Ordinance No. 5 of 1978).
" On 18th April, 1978 the Ordinance was replaced by an Act namely the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979 in which identical language was used.
The appellants in the appeals who were temporary lecturers and teachers, were appointed temporarily by the Vice Chancellor by virtue of section 20A of the Universities of Rajasthan Act, 1946.
It was the contention of the appellants in their writ petitions that lecturers had been temporarily appointed and continued from time to time but there were no rules for their absorption into permanent cadre.
The services of the lecturers were terminated from time to time before vacation and they were reappointed so as to deprive them of the continuity of service which would have entitled them to Permanent absorption or regularisation of their service.
The Single Judge allowed the writ petitions holding that (1) the judgment in Yogendra Kumar Tiwari vs University of Rajasthan and Others had become final as no appeals bad been preferred therefrom, and (2) clause 3 of the 1978 Ordinance means that in order to be eligible for screening for absorption a lecturer must be in the appointment of the University any time or for any period before 25 6 1975 and must be a temporary teacher on 12 6 1978 even though in between he or she might not have been at all in service.
The Single Judge followed the interpretation of Section 3 as made in Tiwari 's case and, was of the opinion that a clear differentiation had been made between pre emergency and post emergency appointees of teachers and there was no basis or nexus for such differentiation with the object of the Act and such differentiation amounted to discrimination and violated Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The Single Judge struck down the consequential part of Sections 6 and 7 of the Act.
The Universities of Rajasthan preferred appeals against the aforesaid judgment.
The State Government did not.
The Division Bench was of the opinion that what was required was continuous employment from prior to 25th June, 1975 to 12th June, 1978 to be eligible for screening for absorption and that 25th June, 1975 was chosen such as any other date and there was no differentiation between pre emergency and post emergency appointees for absorption as lecturers.
The Division Bench set aside the decision of the Single Judge.
245 In the Appeals to this Court on the question: (i) what is the true meaning of Section 3 of the Act of 1979, and (ii) whether by choice of the date of 25th June, 1975, an invidious distinction has been made between pre emergency and post emergency appointees, which has no nexus with the purpose of the Act, and as such that Act is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the Appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The object of the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Ordinance, 1978 which was replaced by the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act 1979 was to provide for absorption of temporary lecturers of long standing.
So therefore experience and continuous employment were necessary ingredients.
The Hindi version of the Ordinance used the expression " Ke prarambh ke samaya is roop me karya kar rahe hein" is capable of meaning "and are continuing" to work as such at the time of the commencement of the Ordinance Keeping the background of the purpose of the Act in view that would be the proper construction and if that is the proper construction which is in consonance with the English version of the Ordinance and the Act as well as with the object of the Act, then the Act and the Ordinance should be construed to mean that only those would be eligible for screening who were appointed prior to 25.6.1975 and were continuing at the time of the commencement of the Ordinance i.e. 12.6.1978 i.e. approximately about three years.
[259B D] 2.
The English version of clause (3) presents no difficulty.
Those who are appointed before 25.6.1975 and "are continuing" on the date when the Ordinance came into effect i.e. 12.6.1978.
So therefore "were continuing as such. " in the Act must mean that to be eligible for absorption these temporary lecturers should have been in continuous employment from a date prior to 25.6.1975 to the date of the commencement of the Ordinance of 1978 i.e. 12.6.1978.
[258H; 259A] 3.
The interpretation of clause (3) of the Ordinance of 1978 in Tiwari 's case could not in the facts and circumstances be treated to be such an authoritative pronouncement which will bind the courts in subsequent decisions in the interpretation of an Act which was passed soon thereafter, if on a proper construction of the subsequent enactment, it appears that the expression had not been correctly interpreted.
[258G H] The criterion fixed for screening for absorption was not an irrational criteria a criterion not having any nexus with the purpose of the Act.
Therefore, the criticism that a teacher who was working even for two or three months only before 25.6.1975 and then with long interruptions was in employment of the University at the time of the commencement of the Ordinance would be eligible but a teacher who had worked continuously from 26.6.1975 i.e. after the date fixed i.e. 25th June, 1975 for three years would be in eligible and as such that will be discrimination against long experience, cannot be accepted.
Such a construction would be an unreasonable construction unwarranted by the language used in the provisions concerned.
[260A C] 246 5(i) If a particular period of experience is fixed for screening or for absorption, it is within the wisdom of the legislature, and what period should be sufficient for a particular job or a particular employment is not subject to judicial review.
[260C] (ii) Improper application of law in certain cases does not make the law had per se.
Useless law similarly is not always arbitrary law.
[261A] (iii) Wisdom or lack of wisdom in the action of the Government or legislature is not justifiable by court.
To find fault with a law is not to demonstrate its invalidity.
Mere errors of Government are not subject to judicial review.
What is best is not always discernible.
Metropolis Theater Company vs City of Chicago and Ernest J. Magerstadt, 57 Lawyers ' Edition 730., Prag Ice & Oil Mills & Anr.
V. Union of India, ; at 333.
, D.S. Nakara and Others vs Union of India [1983] 2 SCR 305=[1983] 2 SCR 165 referred to.
If 25th June, 1975 was taken in order to differentiate between pre emergency and post emergency appointees for consideration for absorption then there cannot be any doubt that such a differentiation would amount to are arbitrary discrimination.
Because the fact whether one was pre emergency appointee and another a post emergency was wholly irrelevant to the object of the Act and the Ordinance i.e absorption of temporary lecturers of long standing working in the university.
Therefore to the question of absorption of temporary lecturers of long standing imposition of emergency in the country and appointment prior or subsequent thereto is wholly irrelevant and has no nexus.
Differentiation on a ground which is irrelevant amounts to discrimination.
[261B D] In Re The Special Courts Bill 1978, Gopalan vs State of Madras ; , State of Travencore Cochin vs Bombay Company Limited, [1052] 1112.
, State of West Bengal vs Union of India, [1964] l SCR 371, referred to.
According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Ordinance and bearing in mind the preamble of the Act, the main object was to make a specific provision for the selection of teachers and officers in the universities which had not been done for a long time.
Temporary appointments against vacant posts had been made by the universities and such posts had been continuing in some cases for ten years.
The preamble to the Act of 1979 is a key to unfold the intention of the legislature to make this law.
It lays down that the Act was to provide for the absorption of temporary lecturers of long standing working in the universities of Rajasthan.
[264C D] 8.A certain tenure of service for the purpose of absorption was the object to be achieved and this has a rational nexus with the object.
The prescription of the date from which the period should begin and the date on which it should end were merely incidental to the purpose.
Any date perhaps could 247 have served the purpose which took into consideration long tenure.
What was intended by the use of the expression 'appointed on or before 25.6.1975 ' and must have continued until 12.6.1978 being the date of coming into force of the Ordinance indicated that there should have been near about three years experience for being eligible for absorption.
The date was a handy date.
Handy in the sense it came quickly in the minds of some people.
At least there is no evidence that there was any attempt to separate or penalise pre emergency appointee and no decision was taken by any appropriate authority and no such evidence is there to make a distinction between pre emergency and post emergency appointees.
Being in the employment at the time of coming into operation of the Ordinance was the pre condition i.e. 12th June, 1978.
Naturally some day anterior to that date had to be indicated to ensure long tenure of experience and 25th June, 1975 was chosen because it was as good a date as any other.
[266B D] 9.
It may be that 25th June, 1975 has some odour to some people.
It may be that it revised many attitudes but this is wholly irrelevant.
Any other date might have been chosen.
A particular period was taken to make a person eligible for being screened for absorption and regularisation and if the beginning date happens to coincide with a particular date about which some people have some memories, the law would not become bad.
That would be taking too sensitive a view of human expressions.
[267B C] 10.
For the regularisation of teachers, experience was the object to be found out.
Certain period of experience was necessary for the basis for making the regularisation.
The period of experience would be how much and the date of experience should begin from what time are within the legislative wisdom and there is nothing in this case to indicate that the starting point i.e. to be in service on or before 25.6.1975 was an arbitrary choice, [269D E] State of Mysore & Anr.
vs S.V. Narayanappa, [1967] 1 SCR 128, referred to.
