The present Writ Petitions relate to the mining of lime stone quarries in Dehradun mining area.
During the pendency of the Writ Petitions, the Court appointed a Committee known as Bhargav Committee for the purpose of inspecting the lime stone quarries mentioned in the writ petitions, The Government of India had also appointed a Working Group headed by the same Sh.
D.N. Bhargav who was a member of the Bhargav Committee appointed by the Court on mining of lime stone quarries in Dehradun Mussoorie area, some time in 1983.
After the hearing was over, the Court passed the following order on the Writ Petitions observing that the reasons for the order will be set out in the judgment to follow later.
The Court is clearly of the view that so far as the lime stone quarries classified in category (c) in the Bhargav Committee Report are concerned, which have already been closed down under the directions of the Bhargav Committee, should not be allowed to be operated.
If the lessees of these lime stone quarries have obtained any stay order from any court permitting them to continue the mining operations, such stay order will stand dissolved an if there are any subsisting leases in respect of any of these lime stone quarries, they shall stand terminated without any liability against the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The lime stone quarries in Sahasradhara Block even though they are placed in category (b) by the Bhargav Committee should also not be allowed to be operated and should be closed down forthwith.
The Court would also direct, agreeing with the Report made by the Working Group that the lime stone quarries placed in category (2) by the Working Group other than those which are placed in categories (B) and (C) by the Bhargav Committee should also not be allowed to be operated and should be closed down save and except for the lime stone quarries covered by mining leases Nos. 31, 36 and 37 for which the Court would give the same direction as will H be given in regard to the lime stone quarries classified as category B in the 170 Bhargav Committee Report.
If there are subsisting leases in respect of any of these lime stone quarries they will forthwith come to an end and if any suits or writ petitions for continuance of expired or unexpired leases in respect of any of these lime stone quarries are pending, they too will stand dismissed.
[175G H; 176A] (2) So for as the lime stone quarries classified as category in the Bhargav Committee Report and/or category I in the Working Group Report are concerned, they are divided into two classes, one class consisting of those which are within the city limits of Mussorie and the other consisting of those which are outside the city limits.
The lime stone quarries falling within category of the Bhargav Committee Report and/or Category 1 of the Working Group Report and falling outside the city limits of Mussorie, should be allowed to be operated subject of course to the observance of the requirements of the Mill`i Act 1952, the Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961 and other relevant statutes, rules and regulations.
Of course, it must be made clear that the Court is not holding that if the leases in respect of these lime stone quarries have expired and suits or writ petitions for renewal of the leases are pending in the courts, such leases should be automatically renewed.
It will be for the appropriate courts to decide whether such leases should be renewed or not having regard to the law and facts of each case.
So far as the lime stone quarries classified in category in the Bhargav Committee Report and/or cat gory 1 in the Working Group Report and falling within the city limits of Mussorie are concerned, the Court would give the same direction which is it giving in regard the lime stone quarries classified as category B in the Bhargav Committee Report.
[176F H 177A C] The Court does not propose to clear the lime stone quarries classified as category (B) in the Bhargav Committee Report and category 2 in the Working Group Report for continuance of mining operations nor to close them down permanently without further inquiry, and accordingly appoint a high powered Committee to be headed by Mr. Bandyopadhyay, Secretary, Ministry for Rural Development as Chairman.
The lessees of the lime stone quarries classified as category in Bhargav Committee Report and/or Category I in the Working Group Report and filling within the city limits of Mussoorie as also the lessees of the lime stone quarries classified as category in the Bhargav Committee Report will be at liberty to submit a fully and detailed scheme for mining their lime stone quarries to this Committee (hereinafter called the Bandyopadhyay Committee) and if any such scheme or schemes are submitted, the Bandyopadhyay Committee will proceed to examine the same without any unnecessary delay and submit a report to this Court whether in its opinion the particular lime stone quarry can be allowed to be operated in accordance with the 'scheme and if so, subject to what conditions and if it can not be allowed to be operated, the reasons for taking that view.
The report submitted by the Bandyopadhyay Committee in each case will be considered by the Court and a decision will then be taken whether the lime stone quarry or quarries in respect of which the Report has been made should be allowed to be operated or not.
But until then those lime stone quarries will not be allowed to be operated or worked and the District Authorities of Dehradun will take prompt and active steps for the purpose of ensuring that these lime 171 stone quarries are not operated or worked and no mining activity is carried on even clandestinely.
[177D H; 178D H: 179A] 4.
So far as the lime stone quarries at Sl.
17 to 20 in the category in the Bhargav Committee Report are concerned, they have already been closed down and no further direction therefore is necessary to be given in regard to them save and except in regard to removal of the lime stone, dolomite and marble chips which may have already been mined and which may be lying at the site.
[179E F] 5(i) So far as lime stone quarries classified as category in the Bhargav Committee Report and/or category I in the Working Group Report and falling side the city limits of Mussoorie are concerned, the Court has permitted the lessees of these lime stone quarries to carry on mining operations and hence they must be allowed to remove whatever minerals are lying at the site of these lime stone quarries without any restirication whatsoever, save and except those prescribed by any statutes, rules or regulations and subject to payment of royalty.
[181B C] 5.
(ii) So far as the other lime stone quarries are concerned, whether comprised in category of Bhargav Committee Report of category 1 of the Working Group Report and falling within the City limits of Mussoorie or falling within category 2 of the Working Group Report, the lessees of these lime stone buarries are permitted to remove whatever minerals are found lying at the site of its vicinity, provided of course such minerals are covered by their respective leases and/or quarry permits.
Such removal will be carried out and completed by the lessees within four weeks from the date of this Order and it Shall be done in the presence of an officer not below the rank of Deputy Collector to be nominated by the District Magistrate, Dehradun a gazetted officer from the Mines Department nominated by the Director of Mines and a public spirit individual in Dehradun, to be nominated by Shri D. Bandopadhyay.
No part of the minerals lying at the site shall be removed by the lessees except in the presence of the above mentioned three persons.
The lessees will, on the expiry of the period of four weeks, submit a report to this Court setting out the precise quantities of minerals removed by them from the site pursuant to this Order made by the Court.
The lessees shall not be entitled to remove any minerals after the expiration of the period of four weeks.
[112E H; 113A] 6(i) In order to mitigate the hardship that may be caused to the lessees of lime stone quarries which have been directed to be closed down permanently or which may be directed to be closed down permanently after consideration of the Report of the Bandhopadjay Committee, the Court would direct the Government of India and the State of Uttar Pradesh that whenever any other area in the State of Uttar Pradesh is thrown open for grant of lime stone or dolomite quarrying, the lessees who are displaced as a result of this Order shall be afforded priority in grant of lease of such area and intimation that such area is available for grant of lease shall be given to the lessees who are 172 displaced so that they can apply of grant of lease of such area and on the basis of such application, priority may be given to them subject, of course, to their otherwise being found fit and eligible.
[179G H :180A C] 6(ii) The lime stone quarries which have been or which may be directed to be closed down permanently will have to be reclaimed and afforestation and soil conservation programme will have to be taken up in respect of such lime stone quarries.
and the Court would therefore direct that immediate steps shall be taken for reclamation of the areas forming part of such lime stone quarries with the help of the already available Eco Task Force of the Department of Environment, Government of India and the workmen who are thrown out of employment in consequence of this Court shall, as far as practicable and in the shortest possible time, be provided employment in the afforestation and soil conservation programme to be taken up in this area.
[180E G] ^
