The appellant was employed as a Cash Clerk in a Department under the administrative control of the Government of India.
He was prosecuted for breach of trust in respect of a sum of Rs. 500.
He repaid the amount and pleaded guilty to the charge.
The Magistrate accepting the plea convicted the appellant under i section 409 of the Indian Penal Code, but having regard to the peculiar circumstances relating to the crime and the adverse circumstances in which the appellant was placed, when he committed the offence, viz. his son died during the period, his wife fell down from an upper storey and was seriously injured, his daughter fell ill and that illness lasted for about eight months; released him under section 4 of the As a result of this conviction, the appellant was dismissed from service sum marily, The appellant filled a suit for setting aside his dismissal from service, contending that since he was released under the , it was not permissible for the authorities to impose the penalty of dismissal from service.
The suit was dismissed on the ground that since the appellant was convicted of a criminal charge he was liable to be dismissed under clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The appellant 's first appeal was dismissed, but the second appeal to the High Court was allowed by a Single Judge OD the ground that by virtue of the provision contained in section 12 of the , the 164 appellant could not be dismissed from service without affording him a reasonable opportunity of being heard, as required by Article 311 (2) of the Constitution.
The Letters Patent Appeal I of the Government of India against the judgment was allowed by a Division Bench.
Allowing the appellant 's appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court in the Letters Patent is set aside, and the appellant shall be reinstated in service forthwith, with full back wages from the date of dismissal until reinstatement.
1168El 2.
Section 12 of the provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a person found guilty of an offence and dealt with under the provisions of section 3 or 4 thereof, "shall not suffer disqualification ' attaching to a conviction for an offence under such law.
The order of dismissal from service consequent upon a conviction is not a "disqualification" within the meaning of section 12.
There are statutes which provide that persons who are convicted for certain offences shall incur certain disqualifications.
For example, Chapter Ill of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, entitled "Disqualifications for membership of Parliament and State Legislatures" and Chapter IV entitled "Disqualifications for Voting ' ' contain provisions which disqualify persons convicted of certain charges from being members of legislatures or from being members of legislatures or from voting at elections legislatures.
That is the sense in which the word disqualification ' is used in section 12 of the .
[166F H] In the instant case, it is therefore not possible to accept the reasoning of the Single Judge in the Second Appeal.
Clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 31 l (2) of the Constitution confers on the Government the power to dismiss a person from service "on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge".
But, that power, like every other power has to be exercised fairly, justly and reasonably.
The Constitution dose not contemplate that a Government servant who is convicted for parking his scooter in a no parking area should be dismissed from service.
He may, perhaps not be entitle(l to be heard on the question of penalty since clause(a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) makes the provisions of that.
Article inapplicable when a penalty is to be imposed on a Government servant on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
But the right to impose a penalty carries with it the duty to act justly.
[168B C] In the instant case, the Government chose to dismiss the appellant in a huff without applying its mind to the penalty which could appropriately be imposed upon him in so far as his service career was concerned.
Considering the facts of the case, there can be no two opinions that the penalty of dismissal from service imposed upon the appellant is whimsical.
[167H; 168D] 165
