Tsubongse the election petitioner and the respondent herein who contested from the Longkhim Chre constituency of the Nagaland Legislative Assembly as a Congress (I) candidate in the election held on 10.11.82 lost by a margin of 133 votes to Horangse the appellant and who was the Deputy Speaker of the last legislative Assembly.
The respondent filed an election petition on the ground that the appellant was guilty of four instances of corrupt practice falling under Section 123(1) of the Representation of People Act, 1951 and on three other grounds, namely; (1) display of a banner with the caption "do not sell Nagaland to India", a corrupt practice within the meaning of Section 123 (3A) of the Act; (2) exceeding the limit of expenditure amounting to corrupt practice within the meaning of Section 123(6) of the Act and (3) use of government vehicles for the purpose of the election.
The learned Single Judge, who tried the election petition, found only one of the aforesaid grounds of corrupt practice, namely, presentation of four red waist coats proved and the other grounds not proved, and therefore, he allowed the election petition and set aside the appellant 's election on that ground.
Hence the appeal.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD :In an election petition, the petitioner who alleges corrupt practice must prove his case which is disputed by the returned candidate indepen 343 dently of the fact whether the returned candidate has proved his defence or not.
[348E] Here on the evidence of R.Ws. 1 to 5, the appellant got the waist coats distributed through P.W. 14 who was then a staunch worker of the Naga National Democratic Party in September, 1982 long before the election process had started, as per the custom of Nagas to make gifts in return for the gifts received by dignitaries.
The evidence let in by the respondent election petitioner to prove the item of alleged corrupt practice on the part of the appellant is wholly insufficient and unacceptable to prove the charge satisfactorily.
Though in the election petition it is clearly alleged that the appellant gave red waist coats to P.Ws. 11 to 13 and Lithsabha at 4 p.m.
On 27.10.82 for inducing them to cast their votes in his favour in the presence of P.Ws.
14 and 15 and they witnessed the offer and reported the matter subsequently to the respondent, P. Ws. 14 and 15 do not claim in their evidence personal knowledge about the offer on presentation of the waist coats by the appellant to these four persons and about the inducement of the appellant to cast their votes in favour.
Admittedly, P.W. 14 had asked P.Ws. 11, 12 and 13 to remember the date and time of the appellant 's visit to their houses where he claims to have gone alongwith P.W. 15 soon after the departure of the appellant from each of those places.
It is clear that these three witnesses, P.Ws. 11 to 13 have mentioned the date and month of the appellant 's visit only on the basis of what P.W. 14 told them to remember.
P. W. 14 who was a staunch worker of the NNDP and had switched over to the Congress (I) Party to which P.W. 15 belongs, sometime before the election, and P.W. 16 are interested witnesses.
P.W. 15 has stated in his evidence that the appellant appealed to the people of the village to cast their votes in his favour and that he went to the houses of P.Ws. 11 to 13 in Lirise village only thereafter.
If that is so, it is not likely that the appellant, then the Deputy Speaker would have carried the gunny or hessian bag containing the waist coats himself without being accompanied even by a single worker or sympathiser of the NNDP when he is stated to have visited those four houses for presenting the waist coats and inducing the recipients to cast their votes in his favour.
The evidence of P.Ws. 11 to 13 that P.Ws.
14 and 15 came to their houses within minutes after the appellant left the places and asked them about what had been given to them by the appellant and that when they told them that red waist coats have been given to then with a request to favour him with their votes, and they asked them to remember the date and time and not to deny the matter later P.W. 14 has stated so in his evidence is artificial and unreliable.
The evidence of P.Ws. 11 to 15 about the date of the appellant 's visit to Lirise village and the presentation of the red waist coats to P.Ws. 11 to 13 and another is equally not impressive.
Therefore, the appellant cannot be said to have committed any "corrupt practice".
[351B C; 350C H]
