There were 464 workmen designated as handling Mazdoors for handling foodgrains at Siliguri Depot set up by the respondent Food Corporation of India in West Bengal.
Prior to January 2, 1973, the work of handling foodgrains at the said depot was entrusted by the respondent to a contractor who used to engage workmen and the workmen received their salaries or wages or remuneration from the contractor as determined by the contractor or as agreed between the Contractor and the workmen.
The respondent introduced direct payment system with effect from January 2, 1973 pursuant to an agreement arrived at between the parties and the intermediary contractor disappeared from the picture.
The method adopted was that the bills for the piece rate wages payable to handling Mazdoors were prepared by the Depot staff.
The work rendered by each workmen had to be entered into a muster roll register.
The respondent Corporation distributed the wages calculated on piece rate to each workman through Sardars/Mondals and each workman was required to be a party to the acquittance roll to be retained by the respondent.
The Sardars Mondals used to accept payment and sign bills on behalf of the aforesaid workmen.
The respondent changed this method of direct payment with effect from March 10, 1975 superseding the direct payment system and reintroducing contractor system and that too without giving any notice of change to the Workmen 's Union appellant herein as contemplated by section 9(A) of the (I.D. Act, for short) Consequently the respondent discontinued employment of the aforesaid 464 workmen and brought in the intermediary contractor and treated the workmen as the workmen employed by the contractor.
The appellant Union raised an industrial dispute as to whether the discontinuance of employment of 464 workers of their Siliguri Depot w.e f. 21st July 1974 by the respondent is lawful and justified and the same was referred to the tribunal which negatived the claim of the appellant union and held that the discontinuance of contractor system in the year 1973 and 1066 introduction a direct payment system did not bring about any change in the status of the workmen and therefore they never became the workmen of the respondent Corporation.
As a corollary, it further held that reintroduction of the contractor system in 1975 did not constitute discontinuance of the services of the affected workmen.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
The appellant Union contended (i) that oven though the workmen were initially engaged by the contractor when the work of handling food grains brought to Siliguri Depot was entrusted to a contractor, but subsequently at least from April 1973, the intermediary contractor was removed and they became the workmen directly employed by the Corporation and wore therefore, the workmen of the respondent; and unless their services were legally terminated, they cannot be discontinued from service of the Corporation and some other master imposed upon them.
(ii) that apart from being an unfair labour practice, the changeover was illegal and vindictive and malicious in character and that the respondent was legally bound to give a notice of the said change to the Union as contemplated section 9A of the I.D. Act.
On the other hand, the respondent Corporation argued (i) that even when the so called direct payment system was introduced after removing the contractor.
it was basically a spill over of the old contract system save and accept that the contractor was replaced by Sardars/Mondals to whom total payment on piece rate was made and who distributed the wages to the individual workmen, the rate of payment remaining the same as was in vogue at the time the contractor handled the work and therefore at no point of time, the concerned workman ever became the direct workmen of the Corporation and no question of giving a notice of change arose as required by section 9(A) of the I.D. Act Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) 'Workmen ' has been defined in the Industrial disputes Act to mean any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do. ".
The expression employed has at least two known connotations but as used in the definition, the context would indicate that it is used in the sense of a relationship brought about by express or implied 1 ' contract of service in which the employee renders service for which he is engaged by the employer and the latter agrees to pay him in cash or kind as agreed between them or statutorily prescribed.
It discloses a relationship of command and obedience.
The essential condition of a person being a workman within the terms of the definition is that he should be employed to do the work in that industry and that there should be, in other words, an employment of his by the employer and that there should be a relationship between the employer and him as between employer and employee or master and servant.
Unless a Person is thus employed there can be no question of his being a 'workman ' within the definition of the term as contained in the I.D. Act.
[1075F H; 1076A B] Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd. vs State of Saurashtra, [l957] SCR 152; referred to.
1067 (2) No employer since the introduction of the I.D. Act, 1947 and A contrary to its Certified Standing Orders as statutorily required to be drawn up under the can dispense with the service of any workman without complying with the law in force Any termination of service contrary to the provisions of the Standing orders and the provisions of the I.D. Act, 1947 would be void.
It is not necessary to call in aid precedents to substantiate this too obvious and well established proposition.
Section 9A also makes it obligatory upon an employer who proposes to effect any change in the conditions of service applicable to any workman in respect of any matter specified in the Fourth Schedule to give a notice of desired or intended change.
It cannot do so without giving to the workman likely to be affected by the change a notice in the prescribed manner of the nature of the change proposed to be effected and within 21 days of giving such notice.
[1080B C;1082H;1083A B] 3(i) It is nowhere suggested that Sardars/Mondals were contractors.
They were merely the agents of the Corporation for distributing the salary/ wages earned by each workman as set out in the register to be maintained in respect of each workman by his name and the wages earned by him at the piece rate.
Once the rate remained unchanged even after the removal Of the contractor, the qualitative change in the position of workmen consequently would be, that the workmen 's earnings at piece rate accelerated upward because the contractor 's commission whatever he retained unto himself became available to the workmen and they benefitted Therefore, the abolition of the contract system and the introduction of direct payment system brought about a basic qualitative change in the relationship between the Corporation and the workmen engaged for handling foodgrains in that on the disappearance of the intermediary contractor, a direct relationship of master and servant came into existence between the contractor and the workmen .
[ 1078D G] 3(ii) Moreover, it was obligatory for the Corporation to arrange for handling the bags of foodgrains.
The workmen handled the foodgrains for the Corporation and none else For this service rendered, the Corporation agreed to pay and paid wages at piece rate to each workman whose name appeared in the register to be maintained for the purpose as per the directions given by the District Manager.
If the pay packets were actually distributed by Sardars/Mondals, they can be said to be doing clerical work on behalf of the Corporation in the same manner as a clerk in the Accounts Department prepares and distributes pay packets for each employee of the Corporation month to month.
If the clerk cannot be said to be the employer, ipso facto the Sardars/Mondals could not be clothed with the status of the replaced contractor.
The intermediary screen having disappeared, the direct relationship came into existence and the conclusion is inescapable that since the introduction of the direct payment system, the workmen became the workmen of the Corporation and a direct master servant relationship came into existence.
[1079A C] 3(iii) The findings of the tribunal when it observed something contrary to record that the contractor system was not discontinued but it 1068 was really snatched away by the Mazdoors from the contractor apart from being perverse is contrary to record and overlooks two important letters dated January l8, 1973 and April 28, 1977 by which the Union and the Managing Director respectively affirmed the voluntary settlement arrived at between the parties, both for abolishing the contract system and introducing the direct payment system.
The tribunal feel into a serious error in overlooking relevant evidence and drawing surmises contrary to the record.
Therefore, the award of the Tribunal rejecting the reference and denying the benefit must be quashed and set aside and an award be made that the aforementioned 464 workmen who had become the workmen of the Corporation continued to be the workmen employed by the Corporation and shall be entitled to all the rights, liabilities, obligations and duties as prescribed for the workmen by the Corporation.
[1019D E; 1083G H] (4) When workmen working under an employer are told that they have ceased to be the workmen of that employer, and have become work men of another employer namely, the contractor in this case, in legal parlance such an act of the first employer constitutes discharge, termination of service or retrenchment by whatsoever name called and a fresh employment by another employer namely, the contractor.
If the termination of service by the first employer is contrary to the well established legal position the effect of the employment by the second employer is wholly irrelevant.
No attempt was made to justify the termination of service of the aforementioned workers of the Corporation by the subtle device of introducing a contractor so as to briny about a cessation of contract of employment between the workmen and the Corporation and a fresh contract of employment between the workmen and the contractor.
If what was intended to be done was retrenchment, ex facie the action is contrary to the provisions of Sec.
25F of the I Act, 1947.
Viewed from either angle, the action of introducing so as to displace the Contract of service between the Corporation and the workmen would be illegal and invalid and ab initio void and such action would not alter, change or have any effect on the status of the afore mentioned 464 workmen who have become the workmen of the Corporation.
[1080C F] (5) If the workmen likely to be affected by the change are persons to whom the Fundamental and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and appeal) Rules, Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Service Regulations, Civilians in Defence Services (Classification Control and Appeal) Rules or the Indian Railway Establishment Code or any other rules or regulations that may be notified in this behalf by the appropriate Government in the Official Gazette, apply no notice of change would be necessary before effecting a change.
No attempt was made on behalf of the respondent Corporation to urge that any of the aforementioned rules would govern the conditions of service of the workmen involved in the dispute Now after introducing the direct payment system agreed to between the parties, if the Corporation of the employer wanted to introduce a change in respect of any of the matters set out in Fourth Schedule.
it was obligatory to give a notice of change.
Item 1 in the Fourth Schedule provides: 'wages, including the period and 1069 mode of payment '.
By cancelling the direct payment system and introducing the contractor, both the wages and the mode of payment are being altered to the disadvantage of the workmen.
Therefore, obviously a notice of change was must before introducing the change, otherwise it would be an illegal change.
Any such illegal change invites a penalty under Sec. 31 (2) of the I.D. Act, 1947.
Such a chance which is punishable as a criminal offence would obviously be an illegal change it must be held that without anything more such an illegal change would be wholly ineffective.
[1083C P] (6) The Food Corporation of India was set up under the The scheme of the would not permit the Corporation an instrumentality of the State, to act in a manner thoroughly arbitrary by first keeping a contractor, removing him and reinducting him without a semblance of consideration for the fate of the working for it or for its benefit or for some world connected with the functions of the Corporation.
Therefore, the scheme of the Act has hardly any relevance save and except that its action is likely to be struck down as arbitrary being violative of article 14, but it is not necessary to go so for because the relief under the is readily available to the workmen.
While the trend is in the direction of abolition of contract labour, this public sector undertaking appears to be completely oblivious to the trend and the pace setter as enacted by the Parliament in the .
The Act was enacted with a view to abolishing wherever possible or practicable, the employment of contract labour.
The Corporation attempted by its action to reverse that trend which does not credit to it.
Where the law helps, such anti labour practices must be thwarted or nipped in the bud [1081G H;1082C D]
