The appellant had taken a plot of land on lease under a lease deed for a term of 10 years for M/s Jain Motors.
At that time he was only a partner of M/s Jain Motors but later he became its sole owner.
The respondent took from the appellant on licence for one year under a deed the suitshed for carrying on work shop business Since he did not vacate the she dafter the expiry of the period the appellant terminated the licence and filed the suit for a mandatory injunction directing the respondent to vacate the premises.
The respondent opposed the suit contending that the appellant sub let to him a plot of land and he had raised a new construction thereon and is carrying on workshop business, and that the relationship between the parties was that of landlord and tenant and the suit for mandatory injunction was not maintainable.
The trial court dismissed the suit, for mandatory injunction as not maintainable.
On appeal, the Additional District Judge held that the relationship between the parties was only one of licensee and that suit for mandatory injunction was maintainable, allowed the appeal decreed the suit and directed the respondent to deliver vacant possession of the shed.
In the second appeal, the respondent filed an application for receiving as additional evidence a sale deed dated 27.8.1979 whereby he claimed to have purchased the entire property from its original owner.
On a finding called for 185 by the High Court, the trial court found that the respondent had purchased the property from its original owner by that sale deed.
The High Court held that after the commencement of the tenancy or the license a tenant or licensee who has purchased the property from its original owner cannot be evicted from that property on the basis of the lease or laciness.
The Second appeal was allowed, the judgment and decree of the additional District Judge was set aside and the trial court s decree dismissing the suit was restored.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
There is no merger of the whole property by it original owner in favor of the appellant by reason of the sale of the entire property by too original owner in favor of the respondent or of the license given by the appellant to the respondent which had been revoked prior to the date of the suit.
The lease in favor of the appellant continues and under the East Punjab Rent Restrictions Act 1949 even the tenant of a vacant land cannot be evicted therefrom except in accordance with the provisions of that Act.
[188F G] K.K Verma & Anr.
vs Union of India & Anr., AIR 1954 Bombay 358, Milka Singh vs Diana & Ors., AIR 1964 Jammu & Kashmir 99, relied upon.
In the instant case, it has not been shown that the appellant had filed the suit for mandatory injunction after considerable delay which will disentitle him to the discretionary relief.
Even if there was some delay, in a case of this kind attempt should be made to avoid multiplicity of suits and the licensor should not be driven to file another suit with all the attendant delay trouble and expense.
[189E F] 3.
The suit is in effect one for possession though couched in the form of a suit for mandatory injunction as what would be given to the plaintiff in case he succeeds in possession of the property to which he may found to be entitled.
Therefore, the appellant should not be denied relief merely because he had couched the plaint in the form of a suit for mandatory injunction.
[189G ] 4.
The respondent was a licensee and he must be deemed to be always a licensee.
It is not open to him, during the subsistence of the licence or in the licence or in the suit for recovery of possession of the property instituted after revocation of the licence to set up title to the property in himself or anyone else.
It is his plain duty to surrender possession of the property as a licensee and seek his remedy separately in case he has acquired title to the property subsequently through some other person.
He need not do so if he has acquired title to the property from the licensor or from some one else lawfully claiming under him, in which case there would be clear merger.
The respondent had not surrendered the possession of the property to the appellant even after the termination of the licence and the institution of the suit.
The appellant is, therefore, entitled to recover possession of the property.
The respondent is directed to deliver possession of the property to the appellant forthwith failing which it will be open to the appellant to execute the decree and obtain possession.
[189H; 190A C] 186
