Under Section 12(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 (for short, the Act), a tenant of a non residential building carrying on business in the said building is deemed to have ceased to occupy the premises on his admitting as a partner or a new partner a person who was not a member of his family.
The definition of "family" given in clause (g) of Section 3 of the Act does not expressly include a son in law or a daughter in law.
In each of the two appeals, the appellant/tenant admitted into his partnership firm his son in law and 'or daughter in law, as the case may be.
There upon, the landlord respondent in each appeal filed an application for release of his non residential building in his favour on the ground that there was a deemed vacancy under Section 12(2) of the Act.
The Rent controller held that there were deemed vacancies in respect of the two premises and ordered such deemed vacancies to be notified.
The appellants/tenants filed applications to set aside the said orders directing notification of deemed vacancy and for permission to urge their objections and to contest the said applications for release.
The Rent Controller negatived the contentions of the appellants and ordered such vacancies to be notified.
The appellants/tenants filed writ petitions in the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the two orders notifying deemed vacancies under sub Section (2) of Section 12 of the Act.
The High Court, relying upon a judgment of a two Judge Bench of the Supreme 385 Court in Trilok Singh & Co. vs District Magistrate, Lucknow, the amendment of the Act by Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Amendment Act 1976 (for short, the 1976 Amendment Act), dismissed both the petitions as pre mature holding that where a release of a building is sought, the matter lies only between the District Magistrate and the landlord and no other person has a right to object to the release of the premises to the landlord.
Hence these appeals.
Allowing the appeals and directing the High Court to `rehear on merits the writ petitions filed by the appellants.
the Court.
^ HELD: 1(i) Under the proviso to Section 16(1), in the case of a vacancy referred to in Section 12(4), the District Magistrate is to give an opportunity to the landlord or the tenant, as the case may be, of showing that the said Section is not attracted to his case before making an order under clause (a) of Section 16(1), that is, before making an allotment order; This proviso was inserted by the 1976 amendment Act.
Strangely enough, in the case of release of the premises to the landlord, the proviso does not require any such opportunity to be given to the tenant who would be the person affected by that order.
Sub section (2) of Section 16 sets out the circumstances in which a building or any part thereof may be released to the landlord.
Under Sub section (7) every order made under that Section, subject to any order made under Section 18, is to be final.
Under Section 18 as substituted by the 1976 Amendment Act, no appeal lies against any order of allotment, re allotment or release but any person aggrieved by a final order of allotment, re allotment or release may, within fifteen days from the date of such order, prefer a revision to the District Judge.
On such application being made, the revising authority may confirm or rescind the final order of allotment, re allotment or release or may remand the case to the District Magistrate for rehearing and, pending revision, may stay the operation of such order on such terms as he thinks lit Prior to the substitution of Section 18 by the 1976 Amendment Act, that Section provided for an appeal to the District Judge by a person aggrieved by an order of allotment, re allotment or release and where such order was varied or rescinded in appeal, the District Magistrate had the power, on p an application made to him in that behalf, to place the parties back in the position which they would have occupied but for such order or such part thereof as was varied or rescinded and to use or cause to be used for that purpose such force as may be necessary.
[393H; 394A B; H; 395A; D P] 1(ii).
The Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings.
(Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Rules, 1972, prescribe the procedure for ascertainment of vacancy and for allotment or release of premises.
Under Rule 8, before he makes any order of allotment or release in respect of any building which is alleged to be vacant under S.12 or to be otherwise vacant or to be likely to fall vacant, the District Magistrate is required to get the building inspected.
The facts mentioned in the inspection report are, wherever practicable, to be elicited from at least two respectable persons in the locality and the conclusion of the inspection report is to be posted on the notice board of the office of the District Magistrate for the information of the general public, and an order of allotment is not to 386 be passed before the expiration of three days from the date of such posting, and if in the meantime any objection is received, not before the disposal of suck objection.
Any objection received is to be decided after consideration of any evidence which the objector or any other person concerned may adduce [396A D] 2(i) The position under the Act as amended in 1976 is greatly changed and the right of appeal which was granted by S.18 has been substituted by a right of revision on the grounds set out in the substituted Section 18 and which are the same as those on which a revision lies to the High Court under Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
While in an appeal, findings of fact can also be challenged on the ground that the evidence was not properly appreciated, in revision the only question would be whether the District Magistrate had exercised a jurisdiction not vested in him by law or had failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in him by law or had acted in the exercise of his jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.
The scope of revision under Section 18 is.
therefore.
much narrower than in the case of an appeal [400E F] 2(ii).
Under the proviso to Section 16(1), which was inserted by the 1976 Amendment Act, the District Magistrate is required in the case of a vacancy referred to in sub Section (4) which includes a deemed vacancy under Section 12(2) to give an opportunity to the landlord or the tenant, as the case may be, of showing that Section 12(4) is not attracted to his case before he makes an order of allotment under clause (a) of Section 16(1).
Thus, this proviso gives a right of hearing to the tenant before an order of allotment is made.
The proviso, however, does not apply in the case of an order of release made under clause (b) of Section 16(1).
Even in the case of an application for allotment, it is doubtful whether a tenant whose objections to notification of a deemed vacancy have been negatived and thereafter the vacancy has been ordered to be notified could be permitted to reagitate the same contentions because such contentions would be barred by principles analogous to res judicata.
In such an event, it would be difficult to say that he can exercise his right of review on the ground that there was no p vacancy.
This would apply equally where an order of release is made.
Further, the revision which is provided for under Section 18 is against an order of allotment or release and not against a notification of vacancy and an issue, which was concluded earlier and on the basis of the finding on which the District Magistrate had proceeded to allot or release the premises, cannot be reagitated in revision.
Thus, the scheme of the Act would show that a tenant of premises in whose case it is found that there is a deemed vacancy has no efficacious or adequate remedy under the Act to challenge that finding.
A petition under article 226 or 227 of the constitution of India filed by such a tenant in order to challenge that finding cannot, therefore, be said to be pre mature.
