The respondent mortgaged different portions of a plot of land to different persons.
Five suits for redemption and actual possession of the mortgaged land against the mortgagees were filed, who contested the suits on the grounds that they were tenants of the suit land prior to the mortgage and were in possession thereof as such, that during the period of mortgage their tenancy rights remained in abeyance and after redemption their tenancy rights would revive again in view of the provisions of section 25A of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, and consequently the respondent could not get actual possession.
It was further contended that the respondent could not get actual possession over the disputed land from the civil court as the proper forum was a revenue court, The Civil Judge decreed the suits for possession holding that the defendants were not tenants of the suit land prior to the mortgage, and as such there was no question of revival of tenancy rights under section 25A of Act 404 In appeals the District Judge held that in only one suit the defendant was in possession of the suit land as a tenant on the date of the mortgage and so his tenancy would revive after redemption of the mortgage, However, relying on sections 2A and 3A of the Bombay Tenancy Act 1939 it was held that the defendants in the other four suits also became deemed tenants under section 2A and consequently a protected tenant under section 3A of the said Act as it stood amended in 1946 and could not, therefore, be evicted from the suit land.
All the appeals were, therefore, allowed, the defendants permitted to remain in actual possession of the suit land and the plaintiff respondent getting only symbolic possession.
The plaintiff filed appeals and the High Court reversed the judgment of the District Judge holding that the mortgagees in possession did not become 'deemed tenants ' under the provisions of section 2A of the Act of 1939 as amended in 1946.
The respondent defendants appealed to this Court.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.A mortgagee in possession cannot become a deemed tenant under section 2A of the Bombay Tenancy Act of 1939 on the strength of the saving provision in section 89(2)(b) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act of 1948.
[413F] Sidram Narsappa Kamble vs Sholapur Borough Municipality Salman Raje vs Madhavsang Banesang & Ors., 4 Guj.
L.R. 817 and Ishwara Bhau Sawant vs Pandurang Vasudeo Karmarkar, , overruled.
Dinkar Bhagwant Salekar vs Babaji Mahamulkar, 59 Bom.
L. R. 101 and Jaswantrai Tricumlal vs Bai Jiwi, 59 Bom.
L. R. 168 Shankar Kalyan Kulkarni Ors.
vs Basappa Sidramappa Kolar & Ors.
[1969]2 Mys.
L.J.77 and Patel Ambalal Manilal & Ors.
vs Desai Jagdishchandra Naginlal & Ors.
17 Guj.
L.R. 578, approved.
Two conditions were necessary in order to attract the provisions of section 2A(I) of the Bombay Tenancy Act, 1939.
But in the corresponding section 4 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act of 1948 one more condition was added in addition to the old two conditions as provided in section 2A(I) of the Bombay Tenancy Act, 1939 and that additional condition excludes the mortgagee in possession from acquiring the status of a 'deemed tenant ' within the meaning of section 4.
If the cases in hand were to be governed by the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act 1948, the mortgagees in possession would be out of the purview of section 4 of that Act 405 as mortgagees in possession have been excluded from being 'deemed tenants '.
As the Act of 1948 has no retrospective effect the suits giving rise to the aforesaid appeals will be governed by the Act of 1939.
[408H; 409A B] 3.
In the instant case, the plaintiff respondent was entitled to file an application for declaration before the Mamlatdar that the defendants were not tenants, within one year of the coming into force of the Amendment Act of 1946 as provided in sections 2A and 3A of the 1939.
But he did not choose to do so and, therefore, he lost whatever right he had.
[413G H]
