The percolated water of the coal mine of the respondent Company was pumped out and sold by the Company to a neighbouring glass factory which required such water for cooling and other purposes.
The respondent Company had been selling such percolated water for several years and was paying cess thereon under the Bengal Cess Act, 1880.
However for the year 1958.
59 when the cess authorities assessed cess on this income, the respondent for the first time claimed exemption from the assessment of cess in respect of the sale price of water.
The Cess Deputy Collector however disallowed the claim of exemption treating the amount in respect of sale price of water as one of the items constituting the annual net profit derived from the mine.
In appeal by the respondent Company, the Collector found that the cess levied was not contrary to the provisions of the Act.
The Commissioner dismissed the revision petition, taking the view that the water which is pumped out to save the colliery from drowning is sold at a vast profit and therefore it comes within the ambit of the term 'gross earnings ' and as such was liable to cess.
A further revision to the Board of Revenue, was also dismissed.
However, the respondent 's writ petition to the High Court was allowed, and the order levying cess was quashed, holding that the water discharged from the mine was neither a 'mineral ' and also nor 'land within the meaning of Section 6 of the Bengal Cess Act.
353 Allowing the Appeal of the State to this Court A ^ HELD: 1.
The Cess levied on the respondent Company is fully justified by Section 6 of the Bengal Cess Act 1880.
[356A] 2.
There is no doubt that water comes out of the mine and that water has got to be pumped out from the mine to save it from being inundated or to enable the working of the mine.
But if that water is sold away for a price and an income derived in that way it cannot be said that it is not a profit from the mine.
[356B C] 3.A bare perusal of Section 6 makes it evident that the income derived by the sale of water pumped out from the mine is a profit from the mine.
[356D] 4.
Section 6 does not make any distinction as to whether the income is casual or a regular one.
[357E] Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 199 referred to.
