Section 2(1) (f) of the Provides that an article of food shall be deemed to be adulterated if the article consists wholly or in part of any filthy, putrid, disgusting, rotten, decomposed or diseased animal or vegetable substance or is insect infested or is otherwise unfit for human consumption.
The respondent was prosecuted for an offence under section 7 read with section 16 of the Act.
The prosecution case was that a sample of lal mirchi powder was taken from the grocery shop of the respondent.
On an analysis by the Public Analyst it was found that the sample contained nine living meal worms.
Thor was no other evidence in support of the case of the prosecution that the lal mirch powder was adulterated.
The learned Magistrate found that the prosecution had failed to prove that the lal mirchi powder was adulterated and acquitted the respondent.
The High Court dismissed the Criminal Revision Petition filed by the appellant State in limine.
Dismissing the appeal by the State, ^ HELD: (I) The words 'worm ', 'infest ' and 'insect ' are defined in Webster 's New World Dictionary (1962 Edition). 'Worm ' means "any of many long, slender, soft bodied Creeping animals, some segmented, that live by burrowing underground or as parasites, as the earth worm, tapeworm," 'Infest ' means "to overrun or inhabit in large numbers, usually so as to be harmful or 465 bothersome, swarm in or about. 'Insect ' means "any of a large group of small invertebrate animals characterized, in the adult state, by division of the body into head, thorax, and abdomen, three pairs of membranes wings: beetles, bees, flies, wasps, mosquitoes, etc.
are insects.
" The same meaning is given of the above three words in the Shorter Oxford Dictionary.
Therefore, it is not possible to hold that a worm and an insect are the same.
[467C E] M/S Narkeklange Roller Flour Mills and another vs The Corporation of Calcutta 1973 (Prevention of Food Adulteration Cases) 257, referred to.
(2) Even if the nine worms found by the Public Analyst in the sample are considered to be insects, the certificate of the Public Analyst does not support the case of the prosecution that the lal mirchi powder was adulterated, for the Public Analyst has not expressed his opinion that the lal mirchi powder was either worm infested or insect infested or that on account of the presence of the meal worms the sample was unfit for human consumption.
Therefore, the prosecution has not established by any satisfactory evidence the requirement of Section 2(1) (f) of the Act.
Consequently no interference is called for with the Judgement of the High Court.
[473G H] Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Kacheroo Mal ; , Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Tek Chand Bhatia ; , held inapplicable.
Per Varadarajan J.
No opinion is expressed as to which of the two views expressed in Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Kacheroo Mal, ; , and Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Tek Chand Bhatia [1980] I S.C.R.910 is correct, Since this Bench also is of equal strength.
Moreover, it is not necessary to do so having regard to the facts of the present case.
[473F ] Per Ranganath Misra 1.
(concurring in the conclusion) The true meaning of section 2(1) (f) has been brought out in Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Tek Chand Bhatia, 11980] I SCR 910 and the conclusion that 'it would not be necessary in such a case to prove further that the article of food was unfit for human consumption ' is a correct statement of the law.
In the instant case, the prosecution evidence is inadequate to warrant interference.
[474B C]
