Respondents are owners of sugar mill situated in erstwhile Jaora State which merged in the State of Madhya Bharat.
After the merger, the Madhya Bharat Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1948 came into force.
By a notification dated 5th September, 1949 the said Act included 'sugar ' in the list of articles as an essential commodity.
By another notification dated 5th September, 1949 the Government delegated its powers to the Director, Civil Supplies to issue orders under the Act.
The Director of Civil Supplies by a notification dated 14th January, 1950 fixed ex factory prices for different sugar factories, which were to supply and despatch sugar of Grade E 27 at Rs. 32.400 per maund F.O.R. destination.
The supply price was higher than ex factory price.
The difference between the supply price and the ex factory price was to be credited to Madhya Bharat Government Sugar Fund.
On demand by appellants, the respondents deposited a sum of Rs. 50,000 under protest in the said Sugar Fund.
The respondents instituted a suit for the refund of the amount deposited by them towards Sugar Fund and Rs. 10,000 towards interest.
Tho suit was dismissed.
On appeal, the High Court set aside the Judgment and Decree of the trial Court and decreed the suit.
Allowing the appeal of the State, ^ HELD: 1.
The respondents had not to pay the amount from their coffers.
The burden of paying the amount in question was transferred by the respondents to the purchasers and, therefore, they were not entitled to get a refund.
Only the persons on whom lay the ultimate burden to pay the amount would be entitled to get a refund of the same.[568C] 562 2.
The amount deposited towards the Fund was to be utilised for the development of sugarcane.
If it is not possible to identify the persons on whom had the burden been placed for payment towards the Fund, the amount of the Fund can be utilised by the Government for the purpose for which the Fund was created, namely, the development of sugarcane.
There is no question of refunding the amount to the Respondents who had not eventually paid the U amount towards the Fund.
Doing so would virtually amount to allow the respondents unjust enrichment.
[568D E] The Orient Paper Mills Ltd. vs The State of Orissa & Ors.
[1962] I SCR 549.
State of Bombay vs The United Motors (India) Ltd. , Shiv Shankar Dal Mills etc.
vs State of Haryana ; , Newabganei Sugar Mills vs Union of India & Ors. ; , Sales Tax Officer, Banaras & Ors.
vs Kanhaiya Lal Mukundlal Saraf, , M s Amar Nath Om Parkash & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab & Ors., ; , relied upon.
