G.O.Ms.
No. 559 dated May 4.
1961 issued by the respondent State provides that the principle of reservation of appointments should be extended to all cadres of posts including posts involving promotions in all departments including the Departments of Secretariat to which it did not apply till then.
The appellant filed a Representation Petition before the Tribunal as late as 1977 contending that if appropriate action would have been taken at the time it was due as per G.O.Ms.
No. 559, he would have been eligible for promotion as Deputy Registrar of Cooperative Societies in 1965 and by denying him the said promotion in violation of the aforesaid Govt.
Order; his future promotion to the post of Joint Registrar has been adversely affected.
The Tribunal dismissed the petition holding that tho special rules for the Cooperative service did not contain any specific provision for the application of rule of reservation and, therefore.
the appellant was not entitled to claim the benefit of the rule of reservation for promotion to the rank of Deputy Registrar between 1965 and 1972 as claimed by him.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Condoning the delay in filing the special leave petition and disposing of the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1) On a proper interpretation of the relevant Government Order, the appellant was entitled to promotion as Deputy Registrar in the year 1965 which was postponed upto October 14, 1983 when he was promoted as Deputy Register.
Though the appellant made number of representation but he moved for an effective relief as late as 1977.
Moreover, This is not the lone case and if the Court grants him the Relief as claimed by him.
though he has 570 sought relief after a very long unexplained delay, it would create chaos in the service and many promotions and reversions will have to be effected.
The Court is, therefore not inclined to disturb the existing promotions and postings by holding that the appellant was entitled to promotion way back in 1965.
In this backgaround, be is entitled to some monetary compensation.
[572G H; 573A] (2) If the appellant is given the benefit of deemed promotion from 1965 the State cannot deny identical benefit to persons similarly situated and similarly circumstanced.
And they never questioned the alleged impropriety of not giving them the benefit of the Government Order in respect of reservations in promotion posts.
All these are relevant considerations and therefore the amount of backwages is fixed at Rs. 40,000 payable in one lump sum.
While computing the amount, the Court has kept in view the period during which , the appellant would be entitled to relief.
Therefore, The amount of Rs. 40,000 awarded as compensation in the form of backwages is to be spread over for the period 1965 to 1982.
Since the amount is payable in one lump sum, presumably the Government may resort to section 192 of the Income Tax Act, but let it be made distinctly clear that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of sec.
89 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and Rule 21A of the Income Tax Rules and is entitled to relief of spread over.
The pay of the appellant shall also be fixed at Rs. 1600 i.e. the maximum of the scale of Deputy Registrar effective from January 1, 1984.
[573E H; 574B C]
