The Respondent was an Income Tax Officer He was tried a d convicted of the offence under section 161 Indian Penal Code read and section 5(2) read with section 5(1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act The prosecution produced among other , PWs the managing partner of a firm known as M/s Hind Fertilizer , Bhavnagar an assessee before the accused from whom a bribe of Rs. 12 , 500 was demanded and accepted on 14.3.1972 Sri Parikh Manager Postal Store Department witness to the trap laid against the accused and Mr Judeja (PW 9) the Dy.
Supdt.
of Police The defence of the accused was that the prosecutions version of how the currency notes were seized from him was false and that PWs 2 gone to the toilet The Additional Special Judge Ahmedabad accepted the prosecution version convicted the respondent of the offences with which he was charged and sentenced hi n to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs. 2 000 on each of the two counts On appeal the High Court of Gujarat acquitted the accused of both the offences.
Hence the State appeal by special leave of the Court Allowing the appeal , the Court.
^ HELD 1 1 From the evidence of PWs 2 3 and 9 it is clear beyond doubt that a sum of R 12 500 Was paid to and received by the accused as a bribe and therefore his conviction by the Trial Court was wrongly set aside by the High Court This is not a case where the views were reasonably possible The only possible view was that the accused was guilty of both the offences under section 161 Indian Penal code and section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act , 1947 [741G H] 734 1.2 In the instant case , both Parikh (PW 3) and Panchal (not examined) arc certainly independent witnesses.
Both of them are government servants belonging to a different department , and if Inspector Sharma thought that they could be called as independent panch witnesses , no motive can be imputed to the investigating agency and no aspersions can be cast on the said witnesses.
The evidence of Parikh was truthful.
His evidence substantiates the evidence of PW 2 , about the acceptance of the bribe by the accused and his keeping the money in a folded newspaper.
From the circumstances that the accused did not keep open the doors of his house expecting PW 2 , that he was in conversation with PW 2 for more than 40 minutes instead of sending him away after taking the alleged bribe , the colour of the solution had changed to yellow when the Chemical Examiner , examined it and that the failure to examine Sharma the inspector no adverse inference can be drawn against the prosecution.
In fact , the prosecution offered Sharma for cross examination and kept him ready in court.
The counsel for the accused stated that since the witness had already been dropped by the prosecution , he did not want to examine him unless the court directed him to do so.
After the failure of the counsel of the accused to take advantage of the offer made by the prosecution it is not open to the accuses in the appeal by special leave to comment upon the so called failure of the prosecution to examine Inspector Sharma as a witness.
[740B D , F; 741B , B E] 2.1 In appreciating oral evidence , the question in each case is whether the witness is a truthful witness and whether there is anything to doubt his veracity in any particular matter about which he deposes.
Where the witness is found to be untruthful on material facts that is an end of the matter.
Where the witness is found to be partly truthful or spring from tainted sources , the court may take the precaution of seeking some corroboration , adequate and reason.
able to meet the demands of the situation.
[738F G] 2.2 But a Court is not entitled to reject the evidence of a witness merely because they are government servants , who , in the course of their duties or even otherwise might have come into contact with investigating officers and who might have been requested to assist investigating agencies.
If their association with the investigating agencies is unusual , frequent designed , there may be occasion to view their evidence with suspicion.
But merely because they are called in to associate themselves with the investigation as they happened to be available or it is convenient to call them , it is no ground to view their evidence with suspicion.
Even in cases where officers who in the course of their duties , generally assist the investigation agencies , there is no need to view their evidence h suspicion as an invariable rule.
For example , in rural areas , investigating officers would ordinarily think of calling in the village officers , such as , the Headman , the Patel or Patwari to act as punch witnesses , as they are expected to be respectable persons of the locality.
It does not mean that their evidence should be viewed with suspicion because they are government servants or because they are generally associated with investigating agencies whenever there is a crime in the village.
For that matter it would be wrong to reject the evidence of police officers either on the mere ground that they are interested in the success of the prosecution.
[708H; 739A D] 735 2.3 The court may be justified in looking with suspicion upon the evidence of officers who have been demonstrated to have displayed excess of zeal in the conduct and success of the prosecution.
But to reject the evidence of all official witnesses as the High Court has done in the present case , ii going far too far.
It is extremely unfair to a witness to reject his evidence by merely giving him a label.
[739D E]
