Pursuant to a policy decision arrived at an All India Conference on Co operative Societies, various State Legislatures, roughly at about the same lime introduced enactments providing for amalgamation of co operative societies.
The vires of the provisions, contained in sub sections 8 to 11 of section 13 of the Punjab Co operative Societies Act, 1961 providing for compulsory amalgamation of cooperative societies if it is necessary in the interests cooperative societies, is challenged in these appeals by special leave aud other special leave petitions.
Dismissing the appeals and petitions, the Cource, ^ HELD 1.
The vires of legislation is not to be decided on the basis of affidavits of underlings of the executive who can hardly be described as authorised to speak for the legislature.
As usual in these and such cases, 581 the Counter affidavits , where they have been filed , leave much to be desired and arc least helpful to the Court.
[584F G 585A] A 2.1 The law providing for amalgamation of co operative societies , in view of the constitutional bar contained in Article 31 A (1) (c) cannot be struck down as violative of the provisions of Article 19 (1) (c) of the Constitution , the right of a citizen to form a society or to be a member of a certain cooperative society is not interfered with if the society of which he has become a member is amalgamated with another society consisting of members with whom he may not be willing to be associated [588D G] In the cases here , the cooperative societies are governed by statute from their inception.
They are created by statute , they are controlled by statute and so there can be no objection to statutory interference with their composition on the ground of contravention of the individual right of freedom of association.
j 594C D] Damyanti Naranga vs Union of India , [1971] 3 S.C.R. 840 , explained and distinguished.
2.2 The expression "Corporations" occurring in Article 31 A (I) (c) of the Constitution cannot be given such a limited or narrow interpretations so as not to comprehend cooperative societies in its expanse.
011 the other hand , the very requirement of the Corporation mentioned in Article 31 A (I) (c) requires the expression to be given a broad interpretation since there can been higher interest than the public interest.[589C D] 2.3 Section 30 of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act , 1961 confers every registered co operative society the status of a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal , with power to hold property enter into contracts , institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings and to do all things necessary the purposes for which it is constituted Therefore , co operative society is a corporation as commonly understood [591G H , 592A] Board of Trustees , Ayurvedic , and Unani Tibia College , Delhi vs The State of Delhi , [1962] Suppl.
1 SCR 156 applied.
2.4 The scheme of the Constitution as enjoined in Entries 43 and 44 of List I of the Seventh Schedule an Entry 32 of List 11 does not make any difference either.
The mention of co operative societies both in Entry 43 of List I and Entry 32 of List II along with other corporations give an indication that the Constitution makers were of the view that co operative societies were of the same genus as other corporations and all were corporations.
In fact the very express exclusion; of co operative societies from Entry 43 of List I is indicative of the view that but for such exclusion , co operative societies would be comprehended within the expression "corporations".[592A , 592F G] 2.5 The statement of Objects and Reasons of the Constitution (4th) 582 amendment) Act and the report of the Joint Select Committee relating thereto , do now show that initially it was proposed to give protection to legislation pertaining to amalgamation of companies only but later it was thought fit to extend the protection to statutory corporations also and therefore , the expression "corporations" was substituted in the Act in the place of the expression "companies ' which had been mentioned in the Bill.
It was obviously thought by the Parliament that the protection should not be confined to companies only but should extend to all corporations which would naturally include Statutory Corporations.
The more generic expression "corporation" was used so that all companies statutory corporations and the like may be brought in.
There is no indication that notwithstanding the use of the generic expression "corporations" , the expression was intended to exclude corporations other than companies and statutory corporations.
Parliament apparently chose the broader expression not with a view to limit the protection of the legislation relating to amalgamation to any class of corporations but with a view to protect legislation pertaining to amalgamation of all classes of corporations.
[592H , 593D G] 2.6 The very philosophy and concept of the cooperative movement is impregnated with the public interest and the amalgamation of co operative societies when such amalgamation is in the interest of the co operative societies is certainly in the public interest or can only be to secure the proper management of the societies.
Therefore , it cannot be said that the protection of Art , 31 A(l) (c) was not available to section 13 (8) of the Punjab Co operative Societies Act , as the interest of a co operative society may not necessarily be in the public interest or for the proper management of the society.
[594D G] 2.7 Notice to individual members of a co operative society , is opposed to the very status of a cooperative society as a body corporate and is , therefore , unnecessary.
Once a person becomes a member of a co operative society he loses his individuality qua the society and he has no independent rights except those given to him by the statute and the bye laws He must act and speak through the society or rather , the society alone can act and speak for qua rights or duties of the society as a body.
So if the statute which authorises compulsory amalgamation of cooperative societies provides for notice to the societies concerned , the requirement of natural justice is fully satisfied.
The notice to the society will be deemed as notice to all its members.
That is why section 13 (9) (a) provides for the issue of notice to the societies and not to individual members.
Section 13 (9) (b) , however , provides the members also with an opportunity to be heard if they desire to be heard Further a member who objects to the proposed amalgamation within the prescribed time is given , by section 31 (11) the option , to walk out , as it were , by withdrawing his share , deposits or loans as the case may be.
[595A , C A] 2,8 A fresh notification would not be necessary where the Assistant Registrar even initially was authorised generally to perform all the functions of a Registrar.
A fresh notification would probably be necessary where the Assistant Registrar was authorised to perform certain specified functions only of the Registrar.
That is not claimed to be the situation here.
[596A B] 583 2.9 It cannot be said that the dignity of a human being is even remotedly affected by the amalgamation of a co operative society of which an individual is member with another co operative society.
Therefore the contention that both Article 31 A(l)(c) of the Constitution and section 13(8) of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act , offended the basic structure of the Constitution and therefore were void is misplaced.
OBSERVATION: [The Counsel appearing in the Supreme Court , particularly , when they appear before the Constitution Bench must avoid advancing totally unsustainable propositions.
The time of the Supreme Court is public time and as the mountainous arrears show that time is becoming increasingly dear and precious.
The counsel must carefully examine with a greater sense of responsibility the submissions which they propose to make before actually advancing them in the Court].
[596G H 593A B] 3.
It is not unusual for parties and counsel to raise innumerable grounds in the petitions and memoranda of appeal etc.
but , later , confine themselves , in the course of argument to a few only of those grounds , obviously because the rest of the grounds are considered even by them to be untenable.
No party or counsel is thereafter entitled to make a grievance that the grounds not argued were not considered.
If indeed any ground which was argued was not considered it should be open to the party aggrieved to draw the attention of the Court making the order to it by filing a proper application for review or clarification.
The time of the superior Courts is not to be wasted in inquiring into the question whether a certain ground to Which no reference is found in the judgment of the subordinate court was argued before that court or not .[596D E]
