The deceased a boy of 9 was playing with the children in the Pandal near a Shiva Temple on 26th March 1975 which was a day of 'Holi ' festival.
The prosecution 's case is that accused Nos. 1 and 2 kidnapped and murdered the deceased with a view to extract ransom from his father.
Accused No. 1 was arrest d on 10th April 1975 and on 11.4.75 he showed the place where the dead body of the deceased had been buried.
His interrogation also led to the arrest of other three accused Nos. 2, 3, and 4.
All the accused made their confessional statements on different dates before a Judicial Magistrate.
The four accused were subjected to test identification in the parade held by the Second Class Magistrate, P.W. 2 on 30.4.1975 and 4.9.1975.
Accused No.
I was identified by 12 witnesses without any mistake while accused No. 2 was identified by six witnesses without any mistake and accused No. 3 was identified by two witnesses without any mistake.
In their statements recorded under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure all the accused retracted their confessional statements and denied all the circumstances appearing against them in the evidence.
The learned Sessions Judge on a consideration of the evidence convicted all the four accused and sentenced accused No. I and accused No. 2 to death under section 302 read with section 34 I.P.C. for the murder of the deceased and to imprisonment for life under section 364 read with section 34 I.P.C. and rigorous imprisonment for seven years under section 201 read with section 34 I.P.C. and those two accused Nos. 3 and 4 to rigorous imprisonment for five years each separately under section 120B and section 387 read with section 34 I.P.C.
The sentences awarded to all the four accused were directed to run concurrently.
On appeals by the four accused.
the High Court rejected the confessional statements of the four accused as not being voluntary or acceptable and held that the circumstantial evidence against accused No. I taken cumulatively forms a chain so complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that the crime was commit 534 ted by him and none else and that each of the circumstances established against him is incriminating and they cumulatively prove the complicity of accused No.1 in the kidnapping and murder of the deceased.
The High Court found that the evidence is not satisfactory to prove the offence of conspiracy under s.120 I.P.C. against accused No 1 and acquitted him of that charge, but agreed with the trial court in regard to the finding on the other charges and held him guilty under ss.364,387, 302 and 201 I.P.C. The High Court thus allowed the appeal of accused No. I in part only 'as regards his conviction under section 120B I.P.C. and dismissed it in other respects and accepted the death sentence confirmation case against him and confirmed the sentence of death as well as the other sentences awarded to him by the trial court except under s.120B I P.C. As regards accused No.2, apart from the confession, which was rejected by the High Court, it found that there was no other evidence except the evidence let in to prove his presence with accused No. I in the temple and the pandal in the morning and evening of 26.3.1975 and it held that it is not sufficient to sustain his conviction and that as regards the other two accused No.3 and 4 there is no evidence except their retracted confessions which were rejected by it.
In that view, the High Court acquitted accused Nos. 2, 3 and 4 of all the charges framed against them and rejected the death sentence confirmation case against accused No. 2.
In appeals to this Court by accused No. I and the State and the father of the deceased, the Court.
^ HELD: 1.
It has to be noted that accused No. 1 had not told the Judicial Magistrate, P.W.3 that he was beaten by the police for causing him to make a confessional statement.
It is not possible to hold that accused No. 2 's confessional statement exhibit 7 was not voluntary from the mere fact that he had on a prior occasion declined to make a confessional statement.
The Judicial Magistrate, P.W. 3 would have been well advised if he had given more time for reflection to the accused than he has done.
But it is not possible to reject the confessional statements merely because only three hours ' time had been given for reflection, if they arc otherwise acceptable.
Therefore, it is necessary to note what accused Nos.
I and 2 have stated in their confessions to find out whether intrinsically they are voluntary statements or tutored ones made under coercion.
A perusal of the confessional statements of accused Nos. 1 and 2 shows that they are more or less exculpatory of the maker, for accused No. 1 had attributed everything to accused No .2 and stated that he had done every thing at the instance of accused No.2 while accused No. 2 had attributed the important role in the crime to accused No. 1.
This would not normally be the position if the confessions were the result of tutoring by the police.
The confessional statement of accused No. 1 is quite long while that of accused No.2 is much longer.
As remarked by the learned Sessions Judge these confessions are full of facts and minute details which would not be there normally if the confessions are the result of tutoring or of compulsion.
Pursuant to the confessional statement, Ex.33 (admissible portion) of accused No. 1 offering to show the place where the dead body of the boy had been buried, some skeletal remains including the skull which have been later found to be that of a nine or ten years old human being were recovered from a Pit or hole situate by the 535 side of a hillock in the Bapapung oil field area.
There is no reason to disagree with the findings of the courts below that the corpus delecti recovered from the place pointed out by accused No. 1 as per his confessional statement, exhibit 33 has been proved to be that of the deceased who had disappeared from the panda I at the temple in Tinsukhia town in the evening of 26.3.
I 975.
The circumstantial evidence relied upon by the trial court and the High Court lend assurance to the genuineness and voluntary nature of these confessions.
They have no doubt been retracted, but in view of the fact that they are gene rally corroborated by the circumstantial evidence in ample measure, there is no satisfactory reason for the confessions not being accepted and acted upon, In these circumstances the learned Sessions Judge was right in holding that the confessional statements of accused Nos. 1 and 2 are voluntary and can be acted upon, together with the circumstantial evidence, for basing a conviction.
[552F H; 553 A C3] 2.
The case rests purely upon circumstantial evidence, there being no direct evidence about the kidnapping and other offences alleged.
There is no evidence against accused Nos. 3 and 4 except their retracted confessions and they may not be sufficient to prove any of the charges against them.
There is also no satisfactory reason to interfere with the conclusion of the learned Judges of the High Court that the charge of conspiracy against all the four accused and the other charges against accused Nos. 1 and 2 have not been proved satisfactorily.
[553F;554D E] 3.
(i) The circumstances found by the trial Court and the High Court against accused No. I are very strong and can safely be relied upon.
They form a complete chain pointing unerringly to the guilt of accused No. I and arc inconsistent with his innocence Accordingly, accused No. I guilt has been proved by the prosecution satisfactorily beyond all reasonable doubt in respect of all the charges framed against him except the one under section 120B l.
P.C. [547C D] 3 (ii) The offences committed by accused No. 1, the originator of the idea of kidnapping children of rich people for extracting ransom, are very heinous and pre planned.
It had been attempting to extract money from the unfortunate boy 's father, P.W. 23 even after the boy had been murdered by making the father to believe that the boy was alive and would be returned to him if he paid the ransom.
Therefore, this is one of the rarest of rare cases in which the extreme penalty of death is called for the murder of the innocent young boy, Sanjay in cold blood after he had been kidnapped with promise to be given sweets.
Therefore, the sentence of death and the other sentences awarded to accused No. 1 by the High Court under sections 302, 364, 201 and 387 I.P.C. are confirmed and Criminal Appeal No. 545 of 1982 filed by him is G dismissed.[559E G] 3.
(iii) As regards accused No. 2, there is the evidence of P.Ws. 14, 15 and 21 about his presence in the pandal at the Shiva temple in Tinsukhia town m the forenoon and evening of 26.3.1975, There is no reason for not accepting the evidence of these three witnesses.
14. 15 and 21 about the 536 presence of accused No. 1 in the pandal at the Shiva temple in Tinsukhia town on 26.3.1976 when the deceased was playing there with other boys, P.Ws. 12 and 13.
There is also no reason for not accepting the evidence of P.W. 21 that accused No. 2 called the deceased when he was moving away along with her back to the place saying he would give him chocolates, that he called accused No. 2 as Driver ' a few minutes earlier and asked him to get chocolates, and that P.W. 21 left the deceased behind as desired by him and went away to her house at about 5.30 p.m.
On the day of the decease 's disappearance.
He has been identified by 6 witnesses in all without any mistake.
There is also the evidence of P.W. 41, the then officer in charge of Sibasagar Police Station that he arrested accused No. 2 on 14.4.
1975 from a house in Sibasagar town cremation ground after a long chase and that he was until then hunting for him in vain from 11.4.1975.
He has stated that he started to flee as soon as he saw him and that he succeeded in catching him after giving him a chase for 11/2 or 2 furlongs.
In his confessional statement, exhibit 7 accused No. 2 has admitted his presence with accused No. 1 in the pandal at Tinsukhia on 26.3.1975 and his arrest from the cremation round on 14.
1. 1975.
There are some other circumstances brought out in the evidence and his confessional statement extracted (supra) pointing to his guilt unmistakably.
But, there no satisfactory material on record to show that accused No. 2 either did anything for killing the deceased or that he shared the intention of accused No. 1 to kill the boy.
It appears that accused No.2 's intention as reflected in his confessional statement, exhibit 7 was only to kidnap and keep the boy for two or three days and send him back after collecting the ransom.
Having regard to all the circumstances of the case the offence proved against accused No. 2 is only kidnapping of Sanjay with intent to secretly and wrongfully confine him, an offence punishable under section 365 l.
P.C. [559B H; 559A] Therefore, Criminal Appeal No. 209 of 1983 filed by the father of the deceased, P.W. 23 against the acquittal of accused Nos. 2, 3 and 4 is allowed in part and only accused No. 2, is convicted under section 365 I.P.C, for having kidnapped Sanjay in order to secretly and wrongfully confine him and he is sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years and it is dismissed in other respect.
Criminal Appeal No. 211 of 1983 is allowed as indicated in Criminal Appeal No. 209 of 1983 and Criminal Appeals No. 210. 212 and 213 of 1983 are dismissed.
[559G H; 560AB]
