The appellant, an Advocate whose name was borne on the rolls of the Madras High Court and of the Supreme Court, was found guilty of gross professional misconduct by the Madras High Court on the report of the Bar Council Tribunal and debarred from 1093 practising in that Court.
The charge against him was that he did not utilise a particular sum of money entrusted to him by his client to clear a mortgage in order to secure a clear title for him in completion of a transaction of sale, for that purpose nor account for it.
The appellant preferred an appeal by special leave and this Court, being apprised of the order passed by the ' Madras High Court, issued a Rule under r. 30, 0.
IV of the Supreme Court Rules.
It was found by this Court that the charge against the appellant was fully supported by a large volume of evidence on record, both oral and documentary.
Held, that the appeal must be dismissed and the Rule made absolute and the appellant 's name removed from the roll of Advocates of this Court.
It is a great privilege to be an Advocate of this Court and only such persons as can satisfy a very high standard of integrity of character can be enrolled as such.
An Advocate who is found to have fallen from that standard and is debarred by the High Court cannot be considered fit to practise in this Court.
Proceedings under r. 30, 0.
IV Of the Supreme Court Rules should be treated as a natural sequel to proceedings in the High Court under the Bar Councils Act and although an order made by the High Court under that Act is not to be automatically followed by this Court, it is not necessary that this Court should start a fresh inquiry on evidence.
It would be enough for it to generally examine the record prepared by the Bar Council Tribunal and take into account the findings of the High Court based on such report.
Reasonable opportunity must, however, be afforded to the Advocate of being heard against the action proposed to be taken against him and adducing such additional evidence as this Court may think proper.
The Attorney General or any other Advocate representing the Legal Profession generally or the complainant or the aggrieved party may also be heard before the final decision is arrived at.
In the matter of an Advocate, Case No. XVI of 1942, decided on March 23, 1943, In Ye: D. A. Shammugasundaraswami, an Advocate Misc.
Case No. X of 1948, decided on January 24, 1949, In the matter of Mr. 'G ', a Senior Advocate of the Supreme Court, and In the matter of 'D ', an Advocate of the Supreme Court; , , referred to.
