The appellants, in execution of a decree passed in a suit filed by them under section 180 of the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939, on December 2, 1948 took back possession of the land in dispute from the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 (respondents for short).
On the advent of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 ( '1950 Act ' for short) the respondents moved an application under section 232 of the 1950 Act to regain possession of the land on the ground that they hand acquired the status of adhivasis udder that Act.
The Assistant Collector dismissed the application.
The respondents appealed to the Additional Commissioner.
The appellants contended that since the village in which the land in dispute was situated was put into consolidation under the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 ( '1953 Act ' for short), the Additional Commissioner had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
The appellants also submitted that a statement under section 8 and 8A of the 1953 Act was published in which they were shown as bhumidars of the land in question and the respondents had not objected to the entries.
The Additional Commissioner, by his order dated June 15, 1956, allowed the appeal.
Pursuant to that order the entries in the said statement were corrected and the respondents acquired possession of the land.
The Board of Revenue, before whom the Additional Commissioner 's order was challenged, held that the Additional Commissioner had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal on merits.
On September 11, 1958 the appellants moved an application under section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure before the Sub Divisional officer praying for restitution of possession.
This application and the subsequent appeals were rejected by the authorities.
Dismissing a writ petition filed by the appellants the High Court held that the proceedings under section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure could not succeed, but since the decision recorded by the authorities under the 1953 Act had become final, it was always open 288 to the petitioners to move the first appellate court to decide the appeal in terms of the decision of the consolidation authorities.
Thereupon, in August 1966, the appellants filed a suit under sections 209 and 229 (b) of the 1950 Act against the respondents for a decree for possession on the ground that they were bhumidhars of the land in question under the 1950 Act.
The Assistant Collector decreed the suit.
The Additional Commissioner allowed the appeal filed by the respondents.
The Board of Revenue dismissed the appellants ' second appeal.
The appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court.
A single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition.
A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the special appeal filed by the appellants.
Hence this appeal.
The respondents contended: (i) that the suit was barred by limitation and the appellants were not entitled to the benefit of section 14(1) of the ; and (ii) that the suit was barred by section 49 of the 1953 Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD. 1.
The party seeking benefit of section 14 (1) of the must satisfy the three conditions laid down in the section, namely, (i) that the Party as the plaintiff was prosecuting another civil proceeding with due diligence (ii) that the former proceeding and the later proceeding relate to the same matter in issue; and (iii) that the former proceeding was being prosecuted in good faith in a court which, from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain it.[297G H] 2.
The expression 'other cause of a like nature ' will have to be read ejusdem generis with the expression 'defect of jurisdiction '.
So construed the expression other cause of a like nature must be so interpreted as to convey something analogous to the preceding words from defect of jurisdiction '.
The defect of jurisdiction goes to the root of the matter as the court is incompetent to entertain the proceeding.
The proceeding may as well fail for some other defect.
Not all such defects can be said to be analogous to defect of jurisdiction.
Therefore, the expression other cause of a like nature on which some light is shed by the Explanation (C) to section 14 which provides "misjoinder of parties or causes of action shall be deemed to be a cause of like nature with defect of jurisdiction", must take its colour and content from the just preceding expression, defect of jurisdiction '.
Prima facie it appears that there must be something taking to a preliminary objection which if it succeeds, the court would be incompetent to entertain the proceeding on merits.
Such defect could be said to be of the like nature ' as defect of jurisdiction.
Coversely if the party seeking benefit of the provision of section 14 failed to get the relief in earlier proceeding not with regard to anything connected with the jurisdiction of the court or some other defect of a like nature, it would not be entitled to the benefit of s 14.
[300C G] India Electric Works Ltd. vs James Mantosh & Anr., ; , referred to.
In a proceeding under section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the party applying for restitution has to satisfy the court of first instance that a decree under which it was made to part with the property is varied or reversed or modified in appeal or revision or other proceeding or is set aside or modified in any suit instituted for the purpose and therefore, restitution 289 must be ordered.
In such a proceeding, the party seeking restitution is not required to satisfy the court about its title or right to the property save and except showing its deprivation under a decree and the reversal or variation of the decree.
[298C D; E] 4.
In the instant case, the High Court rightly declined to grant benefit of the provision of sec 14 of the to the appellants because the second and third condition laid down in section 14 (1) were not satisfied.
It may be assumed that the earlier proceeding under section 144 of Civil Procedure Code was a civil proceeding for the purpose of section 14 (1) and that the appellants were prosecuting the same with due diligence.
But it is difficult to accept that the subsequent proceeding relates to same matter in issue as was involved in the earlier proceeding.
The appellants merely claimed in their application under section 144 that in view of the reversal of the order by the Board of Revenue the respondents are not entitled to retain possession and that restitution should be evicted because the appellants lost possession under the order of the Additional Commissioner which was reversed by the Board of Revenue.
The cause of action was the reversal of the order of the Additional Commissioner.
When they failed to obtain restitution, the appellants filed a substantive suit under sections 209 and 229 (b) of the 1950 Act.
It was a suit on title as bhumidars for possession against respondents alleging unauthorised retention of possession.
It had nothing to do with the order of the Additional Commissioner.
Moreover, the appellants failed in the earlier proceeding not on the ground that the authority had no jurisdiction to entertain the application nor on the ground that there was any other defect of a like nature, but on merits inasmuch as the authorities and the High Court held that in view of the decision of the authorities under 1953 Act, the appellants are not entitled to restitution.
[301B; 299A; 298G H; 299A] 5.
Once an allotment under section 49 of the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 became final, a suit would not lie before a civil or revenue court with respect to rights in lands or with respect to any other matter for which a proceeding could or ought to have been taken under that Act.
[301G] 6.
In the instant case, once the village was denotified, as found by the authorities and the High Court the allotment made under the 1953 ACI became final and it could not be questioned in a suit before civil or revenue Court in view of the bar enacted in section 49.
[302A B] 7.
The appellants ' submission that after reversal of the Additional Commissioner 's order dated June 15, 1956 the respondents had neither a legal nor equatable right to be in possession, has no force.
Assuming that the appellants had acquired the status of bhumidars the same was subject to the provision contained in section 20 (b) read with Explanation I of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 according to which, as correctly found by single Judge of the High Court, the respondents would become adhivasis of the land.
Such adhivasis if they had lost possession were entitled to regain the same by making an appropriate application under section 232 of that Act.
The respondents did move such an application which ultimately was accepted by the Additional Commissioner.
Therefore, primarily, legally and additionally in equity, respondents have an iron clad case to be in possession against appellants.
[294H; 296D G] 290
