The services of the appellants workmen who were employed as loaders in a foreign air transport company was terminated by the respondent employer.
On a reference made by the Secretary (Labour) Delhi Administration the Labour Court held that the termination of services of the appellants constituted retrenchment within the meaning of section 25F read with Section 2(oo) of the Industries; Disputes Act , 1947 and as the provisions of section 25F have not been complied with the termination of service would be bad and illegal.
It was further held that even where section 25F of the Act is not complied with and the termination of service is illegal and invalid , there is certainly a discretion with the Labour Court whether to order reinstatement of the workmen or not.
While quantifying the compensation , the Labour Court observed that the termination of services of the two workmen was bonafide and not a colourable exercise of power in accordance with the service rules and awarded one year 's wages as compensation for the failure of the employer to comply with the requirements of section 25F.
The workmen appealed to this Court.
Partly allowing the Appeal.
^ HELD; 1.
Ordinarily , where the termination of service is found to be bad and illegal , in the field of industrial relations a declaration follows that the workman continues to be in service and has to be reinstated in service with full backwages.
The Labour Court has however , the discretion to award compensation in respect of reinstatement if the circumstances of a particular case , are unusual or exceptional so as to make reinstatement inexpedient or improper.
[625H , 626A B] 624 2.
Whenever it is said that something has to be done within the discretion of the authority then that something has to be done according to the rules of reason and Justice and not according to private opinion , according to law and not humor.
It must not be arbitrary vague and fanciful.
[626D] Hindustan Tin Works Pvt , Ltd. vs Employees of Hindustan Tin Works Pvt. Ltd. [1979] I SCR 563 , M/s. Hindustan Steel Ltd. , Rourkela vs A.K Roy & Ors. ; , Sharp vs Wekfield , & S.D. Jaisinghani vs Union of India & Ors. ; , relied on.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the instant case , the reasons given by the Labour Court for declining to grant the normal relief of reinstatement are not tenable.
The order of the Labour Court is , however , upheld.
The award giving one year wages as compensation is modified to the effect that each appellant should be paid Rs. 2,00,000 as and by way of back wages in lieu of relief of reinstatement.
[626B C] 4.
The Labour Court while declining to grant the relief of reinstatement which should have ordinarily followed , consequent upon its finding that the termination of service was bad and illegal , in exercise of its discretion awarded one year 's wages as compensation in lieu of reinstatement on the ground that 'the termination of service of each of the appellant was bonafide and not a colourable exercise of power in accordance with service rules '.
There is thus an error apparent on the face of the record.
inasmuch as if termination of service was according to service rules and was bonafide it could not be simultaneously held to be illegal and invalid.
Therefore.
this discretion was exercised on irrelevant and extraneous considerations or considerations not germane to the termination.
[626F H , 627Al 5.
The appellants are entitled to relief under section 89 of the Income Tax Act , 1961 read with Rule 21(A) of the income Tax Rules , 1962 because compensation herein awarded includes salary which was in arrears for 12 years and is being paid in one lump sum under orders of Court.
Respondent employer shall assist the appellants for obtaining the relief.
[628E F]
