The Special Officer , Town Planning Department , Jaipur issued a notice under section 52 (2) of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act , 1959 at the instance Or the Improvement Trust to the respondent company which owned extensive land on the outskirts of Jaipur City stating that it was proposed by the State Government to acquire the said land under 9. 52 (1) for a public purpose , the implementation of a developing scheme at public expense viz. the Civil Lines Extension Scheme , and the said notice was duly served on the respondents at their registered office at 18B , Brabourne Road , Calcutta.
In compliance therewith , the respondents appeared before the Special Officer and while denying the existence of a public purpose for acquisition of the said land under section 52 (1) of the Act , asserted that they needed the land to start new business in the State of Rajasthan viz. for establishment of a branch office , construction of residential houses for their Director and Senior Executives etc.
The Special Officer on being satisfied from the material on record that the alleged need of the respondents was not bona fide and that the land was required by the Improvement Trust for a public purpose viz. the Civil Lines Extension Scheme , recom 599 mended that the entire land be acquired under section 52 (1) of the Act.
Having failed in their effort to get the land released from acquisition , the respondents made an application to the State Government under section 20 of the Urban Land (Ceiling purview of that Act alleging that the land was needed for constructing a three star hotel , but it appears that they were not serious in undertaking any such venture.
While the matter was under the consideration of the State Government , the Improvement Trust represented that the notified land in entirety was needed for the aforesaid development scheme and accordingly the State Government issued the impugned notification.
The respondent company approached the Calcutta High Court by a writ petition.
A Single Judge entertained the petition under article 226 , issued a rule nisi to the appellants to show cause why a writ of mandamus should not be issued , and also passed an ex parte ad interim prohibitory order restraining them from taking any step to require the respondents to surrender or deliver possession of the lands acquired.
Allowing the Appeal , ^ HELD: 1. 1.
Normally , the High Court should not , as a rule , in proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution grant any ad interim prohibitory order staying the implementation of any development scheme framed by the Government or by the local authorities , save under very exceptional circumstances and particularly without notice to the Government or such authority.
The Court deprecated the tendency on the part of the High Court in spite of a long line of decisions of this Court starting from Siliguri Municipality vs Amalendu Das , ; to grant interlocutory orders for the mere asking.
[60IB E] 1.
2 Although the powers of the High Courts under Art 226 are far and wide and the Judges must ever be vigilant to protect the citizen against arbitrary Executive action , nevertheless , the Judges have a constructive role to play and therefore there is always the need to use such extensive powers with due circumspection There has to be in the larger public interest an element of self ordained restraint.
The effect of the impugned ad interim prohibitory order made by the learned Single judge virtually brought to 3 standstill a development scheme framed by the Improvement Trust in another State.
Such arbitrary exercise of power by the High Court , at the public expense , reacts against the development and prosperity of the country and is clearly detrimental to the national interest.
[606G H]; C D] G 2. 1.
The question whether service of notice is or is not an integral part of the cause of action within Art 226 (2) of the Constitution must depend upon the nature of the impugned order giving rise to a 'cause of action '.
'Cause of action ' is a bundle of facts which taken with the law applicable to them gives the petitioner a right to relief against the respondent.
[60SE , B C] 600 2 .2
There was complete lack of jurisdiction on the part of the Calcutta High Court to have entertained the writ petition.
The service of notice under section 52 (2) of the Act was not an integral part of the cause of action within the meaning of article 226 (2) of the Constitution and therefore the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition or issue an ad interim prohibitory order.
[601H 602A , 605D]
