On January 29, 1937 an agreement had been entered into between the Dhangadhra Chemical Works Ltd. and the Maharaja of Dhrangadhra whereunder the company purchased from the Government of Maharaja Shakti Alkali Works in Dhrangadhra and the Salt Works at Kuda with exclusive rights to manufacture salt at the Kuda Works on certain conditions.
In April 1948 , the princely State of Dhrangadhra got merged in the newly formed State of Saurashtra.
By a further agreement dated January 4 , 1950 entered into between the company and the Government Saurashtra , the company agreed to ply to the Government of Saurashtra royalty at the rate of Rs. 0 2 3 (2 annas , 3 pies) per Bengal Maund on the total quantity of salt sold by them every year.
The payment of royalty was to be made as and then delivery was given by the respondent company to the purchaser Under clause 3 of the said agreement the respondent company agreed to manufacture a minimum quantity of at least 50,000 tons of salt every year in addition to the quantity required by the respondent company for consumption in their Alkali factory.
Clause 5 of the agreement provided for the payment of a minimum royalty equivalent to an amount chargeable on the minimum quantity to be manufactured by the respondent company in accordance with clause 3.
For the years 1950 53 , there was a short fall in the production of salt by the respondent company aggregating to 27300 0 54 tons , and the respondent company made payments of royalty in terms of clause 2 of the agreement and refused to pay the minimum guaranteed royalty on 50,000 tons taking the stand that clause 3 of the agreement was void due to vagueness and uncertainty and since clause 5 was dependent for its operation on clause 3 the said clause 5 was also void due to vagueness.
In spite of repeated demands the respondent company persisted in its stand , 631 The State of Bombay , which became the successor State to the State of Saurashtra in 1956 therefore , instituted the suit in the court of Civil Judge , Senior Division , Surendranagar seeking to recover a sum of Rs. 506, 959 5 O with interest at 6 per cent per annum from the date of suit by way of royalty payable by the respondent company.
The trial court , after a careful and detailed consideration of the terms of the agreement as well as all the relevant aspects of the case came to the conclusion that the respondent company was liable to pay royalty on the minimum quantity of 50 , 000 tons in respect of each year in which the production of salt was less than 50,000 tons after excluding the quantity required for consumption in their own factory and that for the years during which the production exceeded the stipulated minimum of 50,000 tons, royalty was chargeable only on the quantity of salt sold and delivered by the company and not on the total quantity manufactured by it.
In this view it passed a decree in favour of the appellant which during the tendency of the trial became the successor Government to State of Bombay on bifurcation of the State for a sum of Rs. 2,66,462 0 9 and dismissed the appellants ' claim.
While , concurring with the trial court the view taken by it that under clause 2 charge to royalty wound get attracted not by mere manufacture alone but only at the point of sale and delivery of the salt to the purchasers , the High Court of Gujarat took the view in the two first and cross Appeals , that clause 5 could not be regarded as controlling clause 2 and the liability of the respondent company to pay royalty to government rested solely upon the terms of clause 2 and had that merely on account of the fact that the respondent company had during certain years failed to manufacture the minimum quantity of salt stipulated in clause 3 , it could not be saddled with liability for payment of royalty during those years since under clause 2 royalty was to be paid only on the quantity of salt actually sold and delivered.
The High Court .
accordingly set aside the decree passed by the trial court and dismissed the appellant 's suit , except regarding an amount of Rs. 16 , 631 which had been admitted by the respondent company to be payable by it to the appellant.
Hence the two State appeals by certificate granted by the High Court under Article 133 (1) (c) of the Constitution , as it stood prior to the Amendment of 1972.
Allowing the appeals , the Court F ^ HELD: 1.
On a combined reading of clauses 2 to 5 of the Agreement dated 4.
50 it is clear , that while clause 2 was intended to operate and govern the right , and liabilities of the parties in respect of payment of royalty during years when the company maintained its normal scale of production , clauses 3 and 5 had been deliberately inserted with the object and purpose of ensuring that even in respect of lean year when the production of salt by the company fell short of the stipulated minimum of 50,000 tons after excluding the quantity required for the consumption in the company 's own factory, the government was to be paid a minimum guaranteed royalty equivalent to the amount chargeable on 50,000 tons of salt which is stipulated as the minimum quantity to be manufactured under clause 3.
The interpretation put on clause 2 by the High Court the result of completely rendering clause 3 and 5 otiose.
[637B D] 632 2.
No doubt clause 2 is the principal clause providing for the payment of royalty but it was to be operative in respect of years when the production of salt by the company fell within the normal limits , that is above the stipulated minimum Clause 5 is a special provision for payment of a minimum guaranteed royalty in respect of periods when the production of salt by the company fell short of the quantity stipulated in clause 3.
Hence there is no conflict between clauses 2 and 5; on the contrary , they supplement each other.
[637E F3 3.
The terms of clause 2 are absolutely clear and provide for levy and collection of royalty only when the salt is sold and delivered by the company to the purchasers.
This obviously means that royalty can be charged thereunder only on the quantity actually sold and delivered by the company and not on the total quantity manufactured by it during the particular years.
[638A B]
