That Constitutional validity of the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for consumption , use or sale therein Act , 1979 , which came into force with effect from 1 6.1979 was challenged in the Karnataka High Court by a large number of traders though a batch of 1590 writ petitions including writ petition No. 7039/79 by M/s. Hansa corporation Bangalore.
A Division Bench of the Court, by a common judgment dated 24.8.79 reported in ILR 1980 (1) Karnataka 165 allowed all the writ petitions and issued writs of mandamus against the State Government forbearing it from taking any proceedings under the Act.
The State took the matter in appeal in this Court.
However , only one appeal was filed , numbered as 3049 of 1979 against writ petition No. 170 39 of 1979 filed by M/s Hansa Corporation , impleading this Corporation alone as respondent.
This Court by its judgment dated 25.9.80 which is reported in ; , allowed the appeal , set aside the judgment of the Karnataka High Court and upheld the validity of the Act.
During the pendency of the civil appeal No 3049 of 1979 Governor of Karnataka enacted the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into a Local Area 660 for Consumption , use or sale therein (Act with retrospective effect from 8.6.80 removing the infirmities in the 1979 Act.
After the judgment of the Supreme Court in the Hansa Corporation 's case the Governor of Karnataka promulgated another ordinance , Ordinance No. 11 of 1980 on 25.10.1980 repealing the Entry Tax Act , 1980 from its inception with certain other directions regarding adjustment of tax if any paid.
This was followed by Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas , Use or Sale therein Act , of 1981 , and Karnataka Act No. 10 of 1981 , repealing the 1980 Act.
however , did not repeal ordinance No. 11 of 1980.
In the meantime , Karnataka Ordinance No. 3 of 1981 came into force which was followed by Karnataka Act 12 of 1981 I which repealed Ordnance No. II of 1980.
As a result of the combined operation of ordinance No. 3 of 1981 and Act No 12 of 1981 , the 1979 Act was made to be Operative but only from 1.10.80 and not from 1.6.79 as originally enacted After the judgment of the Hansa Corporation 's case upholding the validity of the 1979 Act , the authorities appointed under the Act , issued notices under the Act to all the dealers including those who had filed writ petition earlier , calling upon them to register themselves under the Act , to file returns and to pay the amounts of tax due by them under the original Act of 1979.
Aggrieved by the said notices , the original writ petitioners again filed writ petitions before the High Court of Karnataka contending that the notices issued to them were bad in as much as the writ of mandamus issued in their favour by the High Court in the earlier judgment survived and was effective since no state appeals were performed against them and that the judgment of the Supreme Court could rescue the State from taking proceedings only against the Hansa Corporation and not against them.
The Statement this contention with the plea that the judgment of the Supreme Court was binding on all and no one could escape from it.
The writ petitions were dismissed by a single judge holding among other things , that section 3 of the Act No 10 of 1981 revived the 1979 Act and that action taken against the petitioners in the writ petitions was , therefore , valid.
Appeals were filed against the judgment and a Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court dismissed the appellants holding that section 3 of the re pealing Act of 1981 re enacted the 1979 Act and that , therefore , the appeals were not well founded i 1 their challenge against the action taken by the State.
Hence the appeals by special leave and also writ petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeals and the writ petition , the Court ^ HELD: 1.1 The judgment of the Supreme Court in Hansa Corporations ' case reported in ; is binding on all concerned whether they were parties to the judgment or not To contend that the conclusion therein applies only to the partly before the Supreme Court is to destroy the efficacy and integrity of the judgment and to make the mandate of Article 141 illusory.
By setting aside the common judgment of the High Court , the mandamus issued by the High Court is rendered ineffective not only in one case but in all cases.[675; 673 H] 1.2 In the instant case , though a large number of writ petitions were filed challenging the Act , all those writ petitions were grouped together , heard 661 together and were disposed of by the High Court by a common judgment.
No petitioner advanced any contention peculiar or individual to his petition , not common to others.
To be precise , the dispute in the cause or controversy between the State and each petitioner had no personal or individual element in it or anything personal or peculiar to each petitioner.
The challenge to the Constitutional validity of 1979 Act proceeded on identical grounds common to all petitioners.
This challenge was accepted by the High Court by a common judgment that was the subject matter of appeal before Supreme Court in Hansa Corporations ' case.
When the Supreme Court repealed the challenge and held the Act constitutionally valid it in terms disposed of not the appeal in Hansa Corporation 's case alone , but all petitioners in which the High Court issued mandamus on the non existent ground that the 1979 Act was constitutionally invalid.
Therefore , to contend that the law laid down by Supreme Court in that judgment would bind only the Hansa Corporation and not the other petitioners against whom the State of Karnataka had not filed any appeal , is to ignore the binding nature of a judgment of Supreme Court under Article 141 of the Constitution.
[673B C) 1.3 A mere reading of Article 141 bring into sharp focus its expanse and its all pervasive nature.
In cases like this , where numerous petitions are disposed of by a common judgment and only one appeal is filed , the parties to the common judgment could very well have and should have intervened and could have requested the court to hear them also.
They cannot be heard to say that the decision was taken by the Supreme Court behind their back or profess ignorance of the fact that an appeal had been filed by the State against the common judgment.[673B C] 2.
There is no inconsistency in the finding of the Supreme Court in Joginder 's case and Makhanlal Waza 's case the ratio Is the same and the appellants cannot take advantage of certain decisions made by this Court in the earlier case.
Both the decisions in Joginder 's and Makhanlal Waza 's case lay down identical principles and there is nothing to distinguish between the two.
in the earlier case, the Supreme Court , on its facts , overruled the preliminary objection that absence of appeals against the three petitioners let out.
would not render the appeal before the Supreme Court incompetent , holding thereby that the effect of decision in that appeal would be binding on the appellant therein.
In the latter case , the Supreme Court in unmistakable terms laid down that the law laid down in the earlier case , namely , Triloknath 's case, applied even to those who were not parties to the case.
These two decisions were given by two Constitution Benches of the Supreme Court , the fact that Joginder Singh 's case was not noted by the Bench that decided Makhanlal Waza 's case does not create any difficulty.
The two decisions , on the principles laid down by them , speak the same voice, that is the law laid down by the Supreme Court is binding on all , notwithstanding the fact that it is against the State or a private party and that it is binding on even those who were not parties before the court , State of Punjab vs Joginder Singh. ; Makhanlal Waza vs J & K. State. ; discussed and followed.
662 OBSERVATION: In the fitness of things , it would be desirable that the State Government also took out publication in such cases to alert parties bound by the judgment , of the fact that an appeal had been preferred before Supreme Court by them.
Here the State Government cannot be find fault with for having filed only one appeal.
It is , of course , an economising procedure.
[673C D] 3.1 A writ or an order in the nature of mandamus has always been understood to mean a command issuing from the Court , competent to do the same , to a Public servant amongst others , to perform which leads to the initiation of action.
3.2 In this case , the petitioners appellants assert that the mandamus in their case was issued by the High Court commanding the authority to desist or forbear from enforcing the provisions of an Act which was not validity enacted.
In other words , a writ of mandamus was predicated upon the view that the High Court took that the 1979 Act was constitutionally invalid.
Consequently the Court directed the authorities under the said Act to forbear from enforcing the provisions of the Act qua the petitioners; The Act was subsequently declared constitutionally valid by the Supreme Court.
The Act , therefore , was under an eclipse , for a short duration; but with the declaration of the law by the Supreme Court , the temporary shadow cast on it by the mandamus disappeared and the Act revived with its full the constitutional invalidity held by the High Court having been removed by the judgment of the Supreme Court.
If the law so declared invalid is held constitutionally valid , effective and binding by the Supreme Court , the mandamus forbearing the authorities from enforcing its provisions would become ineffective and the authorities cannot be compelled to perform a negative duty.
The declaration of the law is binding on everyone.
And therefore , the mandamus would not survive in favour of those parties against whom appeals were not filed.
[774B E] 3.3 Further , assuming that the mandamus in favour of the appellants survived not withstanding the judgment of this Court , the normal procedure to enforce the mandamus is to move the court in contempt when the parties against whom mandamus is issued disrespect it and if contempt petitions are filed and notices are issued to the State, the States ' obvious answer will be a reference to Article 141 and taking protection thereunder.
No Court can punish a party for contempt under these circumstances , because the mandamus issued by the High Court becomes ineffective and unenforceable when the basis on which it has issued falls, by the declaration by the Supreme Court of the validity of 1979 Act.
[674E; G H]
