By a written agreement , the respondent agreed to construct bridges and culverts for State Government.
The agreement contained an arbitration clause , the Arbitrator being the Superannuation intending Engineer.
However , no period was fixed for giving the And .
therefore , the statutory period of four months for giving the award prescribed in clause 3 of the First Schedule to the was applicable.
A dispute arose between the parties.
The respondent sent a notice to the Arbitrator requesting him to accept his claim and give his award.
The respondent claimed compensation on two counts , namely , (I) that the Sub Divisional Officer got certain bridges demolished which had been construed strictly in terms of the agreement , and (2) that the respondent had also been directed to stop the work.
The Arbitrator gave his award against the respondent after the expiry of the prescribed period , the respondent having participated period , in the proceedings before the Arbitrator even after the expiry of the statutory period.
The respondent challenged the award but the trial Court overruled the objection and upheld the award.
On appeal to the High Court , a Single Judge referred two points for decision by a Division Bench , (l) Whether the award given after the expiry of the prescribed period without extension of time by the Court was invalid ? and (2) Whether the participation in the arbitration proceedings even after the 650 expiry of the period of limitation prescribed would by necessary implication amount to extending the time under section 28 of the by the Court ? The Division Bench allowed the objection of the respondent regarding delay in giving the award , holding that a party to an arbitration agreement is not estopped from challenging the 'award of the ground of delay merely because it had participated in the arbitration proceedings even after the expiry of the prescribed period without any demur , that mere dismissal of the objection regarding delay in the award does not amount an extension of time by the Court under section 28 (l) of the , and that time can be extended by the court by the exercise of sound judicial discretion.
The appeal was allowed and the case remanded to the trial Court for deciding whether it was a fit case for condoning the delay in giving the award by the Arbitrator.
Allowing the Appeal of the State in part, ^ HELD: l.
The provisions of sections 3 and 28 (1) and (2) and clause 3 of First Schedule to the Act indicate that it is open to the parties to an arbitration agreement to fix the time within which the Arbitrator must give his award, but it has to be so stated in the agreement itself.
If per chance no time has been specified by the parties in the arbitration agreement , then by virtue of operation of s.3 with read clause 3 of the First Schedule the award must be given within four months of the arbitrator entering on the reference or after having been called upon to act by notice in writing from any party to the arbitration agreement or within such extended time as the Court may allow.
[654A B] 2.
Sub section (t) of s.28 is very wide and confers full discretion on the Court to enlarge time for the award at any time , which should , however , be exercised judiciously.
Sub section (2) of section 28 makes it evident that the Court alone has the power to extend time.
It further provides that a clause in the arbitration agreement giving the Arbitrator power to enlarge time shall be void and of no effect except when all the parties consent to such enlargement.
It is not open to Arbitrators at their own pleasure without the consent of parties to the agreement to enlarge the for making the award.[655 A B] H.K Wattal v V.N. Pandya ; , followed.
3 Once the law precedes parties from extending time after the matter has been referred to the Arbitrator , it will be contradiction to hold that the same result can be brought about by the conduct of the parties.
There can be no estoppel against a statute.
The time to be fixed for making the award was initially one of agreement between the parties but it does not follow , that in the face of a clear prohibition by law that the time fixed under clause 3 of the said Schedule can only be extended by the Court and not b y the parties at any stage.
It still remains a matter of agreement and the rule of estoppel operates.
The Act has injuncted the Arbitrator to give an award with in the prescribed 651 period of four months unless the same is extended by the Court.
The Arbitrator has no jurisdiction to make an award after the fixed time.
If the award made beyond the time is invalid the parties are not estopped by their conduct from challenging the award on the ground that it was made beyond time merely because of their having participated in the proceedings before the Arbitrator after the expiry of the prescribed period.
[656H; 657 A C] Shambbu Nath v Surja Devi , AIR 1961 All. 180; Shivlal vs Union of India AIR 1975 M.P.40; and Ganesh Chandra vs Artatrana AIR 1965 Orissa 17 over ruled.
The policy of law seems to be that the arbitration proceedings should not be unduly prolonged.
The Arbitrator, therefore , has to give the award within time prescribed or such extended time as the , Court concerned may in its discretion extend and the Court alone has been given the power to extend time for giving the award.
The Court has got the power to extended time even after the award has been given or after the expiry of the period prescribed for the award.
But the Court has to exercise its discretion in a judicial manner.
In the instant case , the High Court was justified in taking the view that it did.
This power can be exercised even by the appellants court.
In view of the policy of law and in view of the fact that the parties have been taking willing part in the proceedings before the Arbitrator without a demur , this will be a fit case for the extension of time.
the time for giving the award is extended and the award will be deemed to have been given in time The case is however , remanded to the High Court for decision on the other issued involved.
[657 E G; 658]
