By a notified order dated November s, 1955, the Government of India took over the management of certain Sugar Mills under section 18A(i)(b) of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, for one year and vested it in a Controller.
This was preceded by an investigation under section 15 of the Act and the Central Government had materials before it to be of the opinion that the management was being conducted in a manner highly detrimental to the undertaking and to public interest.
On November 7, 1956, this order was amended extending the Controller 's management for a further period of two years.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that the requirement of section 18A(i)(b) of the Act not having been satisfied before the amending order was made, the amendment was invalid and that, in any event, the appointment of the same person as the authorised Controller was not bona fide.
Held, per section R. Das C.J., jafer Imam, section K. Das and Govinda Menon JJ.that section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, read with sections 15 and 16 of the Act and properly construed, leaves no doubt that the two conditions mentioned in cl.
(b) of sub section
(i) of section 18A, relating to investigation and mismanagement, must relate to a period when the management of the undertaking was legally vested in its owner and once they are found to exist and the management is taken over by the Government, the conditions continue to exist by their very nature till the management goes back to the owner; therefore, the amending order also fulfilled the same conditions subject to which the original order was made.
When a notified order under the section is sought to be amended by the application Of section 21 of the General Clauses Act, 'like conditions ' mentioned in the latter section, to which such order of amendment must be subject, are the two conditions relating to investigation and mismanagement mentioned ins.
18A(i)(b) of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act.
1053 Strawboard Manufacturing Co. vs Gutta Mill Workers ' Union ; , held inapplicable.
The appointment of a suitable person as the Controller rests entirely with the Central Government and unless an appointment can be shown to have been made for any ulterior purpose contrary to what the Statute has in view, its bona fides is not open to question.
Consequently, in the instant case, both the original notification and its amendment were valid in law.
Per Sarkar J. 'Like conditions ' mentioned in section 21 of the General Clauses Act, when applied to section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, cannot mean the two conditions mentioned in cl.
(b) of sub section
(1) of that section on the fulfillment of which the Central Government has the right to issue a notification, but must mean the condition mentioned in sub section
(2) of that section, subject to which alone the right to issue a notification can be exercised, namely, that a notified order cannot have effect for more than five years and, consequently, the amending order in question which satisfied that condition must be valid in law.
