In all the writ petitions, the petitioners were dismissed from service on the ground of misconduct after an enquiry held against each of them.
They raised an industrial dispute contending that the orders imposing punishment of removal were illegal and invalid.
The conciliation proceedings also failed.
the State Government in W.Ps.
16226 29 of 1984 and the Central Government in W.P. No. 16418 of 1984 passed identical orders in each case refusing to make a reference to the Tribunal section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act 1917 holding that the punishment was imposed on the petitioners after an enquiry has been held in accordance with the rules and that the removal from service is neither malafide nor unjustified and therefore it was not a fit case for making the reference.
Hence this writ petitions.
Allowing the petitions, ^ HELD I.(i) In making a reference section 10(1) the appropriate government performs an administrative act and not a judicial or quasi judicial act and the fact that it has to form an opinion as to the factual existence of an industrial dispute :15 a preliminary step to the discharge of its function does not make it any the less administrative in character.
Assuming that making or refusing to make a reference under Sec.
10(1) is a quasi judicial function, there is 687 bound to be a conflict of jurisdiction if the reference is ultimately made.
A quasi judicial function is to some extent an adjudicatory function in a list between two contending parties.
The Government as an umpire, assuming that it is performing a quasi judicial function when it proceeds to make a reference.
would imply that the quasi judicial determination of this prima facie shows that one who raised the dispute has established merits of the dispute.
The inference necessarily follows from the assumption that the function performed under Sec.
10(1) is a quasi judicial function.
Now by exercising power under Sec. 10, a reference is made to a Tribunal for adjudication and the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that there was no merit in the dispute, prima facie a conflict of jurisdiction may emerge.
Therefore, the view that while exercising power under sec.
10(I) the function performed by the appropriate Government is an administrative function and not a judicial or quasi judicial function is beyond the pale of controversy.
[692F H; 693A C] C State of Madras v C.P. Sarathy & Anr at 347 Western India Match Co Ltd v Western India Match Co Workers Union & Ors and Sambu Nath Goyal v Bank of Baroda Jullundur ; followed (2) Every administrative determination must be based on grounds relevant and germace to the exercise of power.
If the administrative determination is based on the irrelevant, extraneous or grounds not germane to the exercise of power it is liable to be questioned in exercise of the power of judicial review.
In such a situation the court would be justified in issuing a writ of mandamus even in respect of an administrative order.
Maybe, the court may not issue writ of mandamus, directing the Government to make a reference but the court can after examining the reasons given by the appropriate Government for refusing to make a reference come to a conclusion that they are irrelevant.
extraneous or not germane to the determination and then can direct the Government to reconsider the matter.
[693F H; 694A] (3) In the instant cases, the workmen questioned the legality and validity of the enquiry which aspect the Tribunal in a quasi judicial determination was required to examine.
A bare statement that a domestic enquiry was held in which charges were held to be proved, if it is considered sufficient for not exercising power of making a reference under Sec.
10(1), almost all cases of termination of services cannot go before the Tribunal.
And it would render Sec.
2A of the Act denuded of all its content and meaning.
The reasons given by the appropriate.
Government in each case would show that the Government examined the relevant papers of enquiry and the Government was satisfied that it was legally valid an that there was sufficient and adequate evidence to hold the charges proved.
It would further appear that the appropriate Government in each case was satisfied that the enquiry was not biased against the workmen and the punishment was commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct charged.
All these relevant and vital aspects have to be examined by the Industrial Tribunal while adjudicating upon the reference made to it.
688 In other words, the reasons given by (he Government would tantamount to adjudication which is impermissible.
that is the function of the Tribunal and the Government cannot arrogate to itself that function.
Therefore if the grounds on which or the reasons for which the Government declined to make a reference under Sec. 10 are irrelevant.
extraneous or not germane to the determination, it is well settled that the party aggrieved thereby would be entitled to move the Court for a writ of mandamus.
Accordingly all the writ petitions are allowed directing the appropriate government in each case to re.
consider its decision and to exercise power section 10 on relevant and considerations germane to the decision.
In other words a clear case for reference uss.10(1) in each case is made out.
[694G H;695A D; 695A; 696 AB] State of Bombay v K.P. Krishnan & Ors [1971] I SCR 227 at 243 and hay Union of Journalists & Ors v State of Bombay
