The petitioner workmen styled as 'Project Casual Labour ' in these writ petitions and special leave petitions contended that even though they had put in continuous service for years, their services were terminated on the ground that the project on which they were employed has been wound up on its completion and their services were no more needed.
After the conclusion of the hearing in some of the matters, the Railway Ministry framed a scheme to find a just and humane solution affecting the livelihood of the petitioner It provided that casual labour employed on projects may be treated as temporary on completion of 360 days of continuous employment.
Disposing of the petitions, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) By and large the scheme certainly is an improvement on the present situation though not wholly satisfactory.
However the Railway being the biggest employer and having regard to the nature of its work, it would have to engage casual labour and therefore, as a preliminary step towards realisation of the ideal enshrined in Articles 41 and 42, this Court proposes to put its stamp of approval on the scheme with one major variation which is herein set out.
[841D] 1.
(ii) The scheme envisages that it would be applicable to casual labour on projects who were In service as on January 1, 1984.
The choice of this date does not commend, for it is likely to introduce an invidious distinction between similarly situated persons and expose some workmen to arbitrary discrimination flowing from fortuitous court 's order, since, in some matters, the court granted interim stay before the workmen could be retrenched while some other were not so fortunate.
Those in respect of when the Court granted interim relief by stay suspension of the order of retrenchment, they would be treated in service on l. l. 1981 while others who fail to obtain interim rel if though similarly situated 838 would be pushed down in the implementation of the scheme.
Therefore, those who could not come to the Court need not be at a comparative disadvantage to those who rushed in here.
If they are otherwise similarly situated, they are entitled to similar treatment.
Keeping in view all the aspects of the matter, the Court modifies part 5.1 (a) (i) of the scheme by modifying the date from 1.1.1984 to 1.1.
With this modification and consequent rescheduling in absorption from that date onward, the scheme framed by Railway Ministry is accepted and a direction is given that it must be implemented by re casting the stages consistent with the change in the date as herein directed.
[841E G; 842B C] (2) To avoid violation of article 14, the scientific and equitable way of implementing the scheme is for the Railway administration to prepare, a list of project casual labour with reference to each division OF each railway and then start absorbing those with the longest service.
If in the process any adjustments are necessary, the same must be done.
In giving this direction, the court is considerably influenced by the statutory recognition of the principle of last come first go or to reverse it first come last go as enunciated in s.25G of the .
[842D F]
