The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court , contending that his case be referred for the order of the State Administration under Paragraph 516 of the Punjab Jail Manual , on the , ground that though sentenced to life imprisonment , he had under gone a period of detention in Jail amounting to 14 years together with the remission earned by him and that he should be released.
The aforesaid petition was rejected by a Single Judge following the decision of this Court in Kartar Singh vs State of Haryana ; , on the ground.
That in computing: the period of 14 years , the period spent by the convict in the jail as an undertrial prisoner cannot be taken into account because section 428 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which allowed such a set off applied only when an accused had sentenced to imprisonment for a term , ' and that the sentence of life imprisonment was not an 'imprisonment for a term '.
In the companion writ petition , the petitioner contended that the remis 744 sions earned by him as a convict must be taken into account while computing the period of 14 years under paragraph 516 B of the Punjab Jail Manual , and that in any case , ht ought to be given the benefit of sections 432 and 433 of the Code of Criminal Procedure because , his case merits a favorable consideration by the State Administration.
Allowing the Appeal and Writ Petition , ^ HELD: 1.
The period of detention undergone by the two accused as undertrial prisoners , shall be set off against the sentence of life imprisonment imposed upon them , subject to the provision contained in section 433A and , provided that orders have been passed by the appropriate authority under section 432 or section 433 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[753C D] 2.
The fact that the term of life is of an uncertain duration does not justify the conclusion that the sentence of imprisonment for life.
is not for a term .
[752C] 3 There can possibly be no dispute that a person sentenced to life imprisonment is sentenced to imprisonment.
The term to which such person has been sentenced b the term of his life Therefore a person who is sentenced to life imprisonment , is sentenced to imprisonment for a term.
[752C] 4.
Under section 432 of the Code of Criminal Procedure , the appropriate Government has the power to remit the whole or any part of the punishment to which a person has been sentenced.
Under section 433 of the Code , the appropriate Government has the power to commute the sentence of imprisonment for life to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen year or to fine.
The question of setting off the period of detention undergone by an accused as an undertrial prisoner against the sentence of life imprisonment can arise only if an order is passed by the appropriate authority under r section 432 or section 433 of the Code.
In the absence of such an order passed generally or specially , and apart from the provisions if any , of the relevant Jail Manual , imprisonment for life would mean imprisonment for remainder of life.
[750D F] 5.
The assumption that the word term ' implies a concept of ascertainability or conveys a sense of certainty is contrary to the letter of the law , as found in section 428.
Even the marginal note to the section does not bear out that assumption.
It rather belies it.
[748F] 6.
Marginal notes are now legislative and not editorial exercises.
The marginal note of section 428 shows that the object of the Legislature in enacting the particular provision was to provide that 'the period of detention undergone by the accused ' should be 'set off against the sentence of imprisonment ' imposed upon him.
There are no words of limitation either in the section or in its marginal note which would justify restricting the plain and natural meaning of 745 the word 'term ' so as to comprehend only sentences which are imposed for a fixed or ascertainable period.
[748F G] 7.
To say that a sentence of life imprisonment imposed upon an accused is a sentence for the term of his life does offence neither to grammar nor to the common understanding of the word 'term .
To say otherwise would offend not only against the language of the statute but against the spirit of the law , that is to say , the object with which the law was passed.
A large number of cases in which the accused suffer long undertrial detentions are cases punishable with imprisonment for life.
Usually , those who are liable to be sentenced to imprisonment for life are not enlarged on bail.
To deny the benefit of section 428 to them is to withdraw the application of a benevolent provision from a large majority of cases in which such benefit would be needed and justified.
[748H; 748A B] 8.
Equity sustains law and the twain must meet.
They cannot run in parallel streams.
Equitable considerations must have an important place in the construction of beneficient provisions , particularly in the field of criminal law.
To exclude such considerations is to denude law s benevolence of its true and lasting content.
[752F] 9.
Graver the crime , longer the sentences , greater the need for set offs and remissions.
Punishments are no longer retributory.
They are reformative.
[752F] Kartar Singh vs State of Haryana ; over ruled , Sukhlal Hansda vs State of West Bengal Writ Petitions (Crl.) 1128 29 of 1982 , Gopal Vinayak Godse vs The Slate of Maharashtra [l961] 3 SCR 440 , 444 & Maru Ram vs Union of India [1981] I SCR 1196 referred.
