The respondent was not arrested till September 29 , 1983 , when he appeared before the Sessions Judge , and moved an application under s.438 Cr.
P.C. for anticipatory bail , and by order dated September 30 , 1983 it was granted with a direction that if the respondent was taken into custody by the police he must be released on bail on his furnishing security in the amount of Rs. 5,000 on condition that he will assist in the investigation and will not go out of India.
The appellant moved the High Court questioning the correctness of the order granting anticipatory bail and for cancellation of the same.
A Single judge held that he had locus standi to move the High Court for cancellation of the anticipatory bail but on merits held that no grounds were made out for its cancellation , and accordingly rejected the application.
The Appellant appealed to this Court.
Allowing the Appeal , ^ HELD: 1.
Relevant considerations governing the Court 's decision in granting anticipatory bail under s.438 are materially different from those when an application for bail by a person who is arrested in the course of an investigation as also by a person who is convicted and his appeal is pending before the 781 higher court and bail is sought t during the pendently of the appeal.
In the instant case, the High Court unfortunately fell into error in mixing up all the consideration , as if all the three become relevant in the present situation.
[785B C] 2.
The distinction between an ordinary order of bail and an order of anticipatory bail is that whereas the former is granted after arrest and, therefore means release from the custody of the place, the latter is granted in anticipa tion of arrest and`is, therefore, effective at the very moment of arrest.
Unlike a post arrest order of bail, it is a pre arrest legal process which directs that if the person in whose favour it is issued is thereafter arrested on the accusation in respect of which the direction is issued, he shall be released on bail.
A direction under s.438 is intended to confer conditional immunity from the touch as envisaged by s.46(1) or confinement.
[78D E] 3.
In regared to anticipatory bail, if the proposed accusation appears to stem not from motives of furthering the ends of justice but from some ulterior motive, the object being to injure and humiliate the applicant by having him arrested, a direction for the release of the applicant on bail in the event of his arrest would generally be made.
It cannot be laid down as an inexorable rule that anticipatory bail cannot be granted unless the proposed accusation appears (1) to be actuated by malafides; and, equally, that anticipatory bail must be granted if there is no fear that the applicant will abscond.
Some of the relevant considerations which govern the discretion of the Court while deciding an application for anticipatory bail are the nature and seriousness of the proposed charges, the context of the events likely to lead to the making of the charges, a reasonable possibility of the applicant s presence not being secured at the trial, a reasonable apprehension that witnesses will be tampered with and "the larger interests of the public or the State " In the evaluation of the consideration whether the applicant is likely to abscond.
there can be no presumption that the wealthy and the mighty will submit themselves to trial and that the humble and poor will run away from the course of justice, any more than there can be a presumption that the former are not likely to commit a crime and the latter are more likely to commit it.
[785G H; 786A D] 4.
The incident in which Bhanwaria was injured with fire arm occurred on August 23,1983 in respect of which the First Information Report was lodged on August 24, 1983 and it was in clear and unambiguous terms alleged that the respondent was at the relevant time armed with a gun and fired towards Bhanwaria who suffered injuries by the gunshot.
Amongst others the offence registered was under s.307 I.P.C. that is attempt to commit murder.
The first information report thus discloses use of fire arm with which the respondent attempted to commit murder of Bhanwaria.
Surprisingly, the Investigating Officer had not arrested him till September 29, 1983 when he moved an application for anticipatory bail under s.438 Cr.
P.C. presumably after coming to know that injured has succumbed to his injuries and the offence would be one of murder punishable under s.302 I.P.C.
This conduct of the Investigating Officer leaves the Court guessing.
The affidavit led in the High Court states that the Respon 782 dent is the Sarpanch of the village and is an influential person and that his father is Ex M.L.A. and is at present Pradhan of the Panchayat Samiti.
They are not relevant considerations for cancelling anticipatory bail, when it appears to have been granted by a clear misconception of the relevant considerations governing the grant of anticipatory bail, [786F H; 787A B] 5.
The accusation against the respondent is that he has committed an offence of murder punishable under s.302 I.P.C. Surprisingly, when anticipatory bail was granted on September 30, 1983 there is not a whisper of it in the order of the learned Session Judge.
When a person is accused of an offence of murder by the use of a fire arm the Court has to be careful and circumspect in entertaining an application for anticipatory bail.
Relevant considerations are conspicuous by silence in the order of the Session Judge, In the instant case, it cannot be said that the accusation does not appear to stem from motives of furthering the ends of Justice but from some ulterior motive and the object was to injure and humiliate the respondent by having him arrested.
What prompted the Sessions Judge to grant anticipatory bail leaves the Court guessing and the Court is none the wiser by the order of the High Court declining to interfere.
[787D F] 6.
The order of the Session Judge clearly directs that if the respondent is taken into custody by the police, he must be released on bail on his furnishing security in the amount mentioned by him.
The order is styled as one under s.438 Cr.
P.C. [787H] 7.
Unquestionably, no case was made out for granting anticipatory bail in this case.
Status in life, affluence or otherwise, are hardly relevant considerations while examining the request for granting anticipatory bail.
Anticipatory bail to some extent intrudes in the sphere of investigation of the crime and the Court must be cautious and circumspect in exercising such power of a discretionary nature.
In the instant case, the power was exercised sub silentio as to reasons or on irrelevant or considerations not germane to the determination.
This Court, to avoid miscarriage of justice, must interfere .
[787D E] 8.
Some very compelling circumstances must be made out for granting bail to a person accused of committing murder and that too when the investigation is in progress.
In the instant case the Investigating Officer did not even attempt to arrest the appellant though the initial accusation was under s.307 I.P.C. punishable with imprisonment for life and as 50 n as the victim of the assault succumbed to his injuries and offence under s.302 was registered, promptly an application for anticipatory bail was made and granted.
If such an order is allowed to stand, faith of public in administration of justice is likely to be considerably shaken Therefore, the order granting anticipatory bail is cancelled.
[789D F] 9.
Settling aside the order granting anticipatory bail should in no way prejudice the respondent.
It si open to him to move an application for being 783 enlarged on bail and the Court would consider the same on merits wholly uninfluenced by the earlier orders, the judgment of the learned Single Judge of the High Court and this Judgment.
[789G H] Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and Ors.
vs State of Punjab, ; , relied upon.
Gurcharan Singh and Ors.
State(Delhi Administration), ; , State vs Capt.
Jagjit Singh, ; , Delhi Admn.
vs Sanjay Gandhi, ; and Bhagirath Singh Judeja vs State of Gujarat, [1984] I S.C.C. 284, referred to
