The petitioners , Deputy General Secretary of the Canara Bank Officers ' Association and the Canara Bank Officers ' Association.
filed a writ petition in the High Court alleging that the Chairman and Managing Director , the General Manager and the top officials of the Management of Canara Bank have been using their official position and authority to coerce the officers and staff of the Canara Bank to collect funds for the Canara Bank Relief and Welfare Society and the Kamakoti Prabha Trust and one of the principal modes of collecting funds was the sale of greeting cards by the officials of the bank to their customers.
They also alleged that officers , who protested against the directive to sell greeting cards , were victimised by the bank , and officers , who were highly successful 'card sellers ' were given accelerated promotion over the heads of seniors.
The respondent Bank made a statement before the High Court "that it has never at any time whatsoever compelled its employees to sell greeting cards or collect funds for the Canara Bank Relief and Welfare Society or any other institution; nor has the first respondent bank at any time considered the same as a relief factor for evaluating performance of its employees for promotion; nor shall the first respondent bank do so in future.
" The High Court accepted the statement of the respondent bank and dismissed the writ petition.
But , the petitioners were not satisfied with the assurance given by the respondent bank and filed the present special leave petition and the writ petition repeating the same allegations and praying for "the issue of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to forbear from using the bank officials/bank machinery bank/resources for the purpose of collections of funds in the garb of any welfare organisation.
755 While dismissing the petition and the special leave petition as malicious and as designed to denigrate the management of the bank , it was found by the Court during the course of the hearing that the petitioners themselves were indulging in rash and feckless activities of the very nature of which they were complaining against the respondents.
Pursuant to several orders made by the Court from time to time calling for detailed information from both the parties about the activities of the Canara Bank Relief and Welfare Society and the Canara Bank Staff Officers ' Association and the collections made for them and by them , it transpired that the Canara Bank Officers ' Association was formed in the year 1971.
On August 18 , 1981 the Association started the Canara Bank Officers ' Association Trust Fund registering it as a Public Trust under the Bombay Public Trust Act , 1950.
Five officers of the bank who were also office bearers of the Association were made life trustees of the Association Trust Fund.
Right from the date of formation of the Trust , donations were collected by the members of the Officers ' Association from the customers of the bank.
In the short span of about two years , the funds of the Trust have swelled to more than Rs. twenty four lakhs.
The so called donations range from sums in hundreds to thousands of rupees.
The number of donors is also quite large. ^ HELD: 1.1 While one does appreciate that there must be several charitable inclined persons amongst the bank 's customers , there is no doubt that most of the customers that gave donations to the Trust Fund must have felt obliged to do so because of favour received or expected to be received by them.
Even if no coercive methods were employed by the members of the Association to collect donations , the customers must have felt morally pressurized that otherwise their interests would not be properly taken care of or would be jeopardised or neglected by the officers with whom they were compelled to deal in the course of their business.
[769C D] 1.2 No employee of a nationalised bank or any other Public Sector Corporation should engage himself in collecting 'donations ' for any trust or other organisation from persons with whom he comes into contact in the course of his employment.
It is not desirable.
It is likely to lead to unhealthy practices and harmful results , intended or unintended.
In the world of commerce , quid pro quo and not charity is the rule , Those in a position of advantage by reason of their office have to be very wary.
Otherwise , they may unsuspectingly walk into traps.
That is why the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules , 1964 , for example , provide that no Government servant shall , except with the previous sanction of the Government or of prescribed authority , ask for or accept contributions to , or otherwise associate himself with raising of any funds or other collections in cash or in kind in pursuance of any object whatsoever (Rule 12).
It is a rule of prudence It is a rule of common sense.
It is born of wisdom gained by experience.
[771G H; 772A B] 2.
The question , therefore , is what was to be done with the Canara Bank Officers ' Association Trust Fund First , an injunction on the same lines as that which was in force during the pendency of the writ petition in this Court shall issue , that is , the officers of the Canara Bank , their agents nominees are restrai 756 ned from directly or indirectly recovering or manipulating to get any fund or contribution to the Trust Fund.
Second , no officer of the Canara Bank shall be permitted to hold the office of life trustee , trustee or any other office of the Canara Bank Officers ' Association Trust Fund.
Third , the Union of India , who has been impleaded as a party shall be entitled to nominate five trustees who are not connected with the Canara Bank to administer the Canara Bank Officers ' Association Trust Fund.
Fourth , the trustees nominated by the Union of India shall administer the Trust Fund in accordance with the provisions of the Bombay Public Trusts Act and the deed of trust by which the Canara Bank Officers ' Association Trust Fund was created.
fifth , the trustees appointed by the Union of India shall hold office until appropriate arrangements are made by the Charity Commissioner , Maharashtra on an application to be moved by the Central Government within six months from today.
Sixth , there shall be an inquiry by the CBI into the conduct of the five life trustees in relation to the Trust Fund and such further action as may be necessary may be taken by the CBI.
Any further direction which may be necessary may be sought from the High Court of Bombay.
[772D G]
