The appellants joined the State Police Force as Constables, were promoted as Assistant Sub Inspectors of Police, and later as officiating Sub Inspectors of Police and confirmed as Sub Inspectors.
In the meanwhile, a large number persons were directly recruited as Sub Inspectors, and also confined.
All these persons were ranked above the appellants in the seniority list.
In writ petitions to the High Court, the appellants contended that their seniority must be reckoned from the date of their continuous officiation as sub Inspectors, and that they were never considered for promotion to the next higher post of Inspector of Police, because of their delayed confirmation, and of the insistence of the Rules that they should be confirmed as Sub Inspectors of Police before they could be considered for promotion to the post of Inspector of Police and that the offending Rule be quashed.
The State supported the claim of the appellants to seniority on the basis of continuous officiation, but the direct recruits contested the writ petition.
The High Court refused to recognise the claim of the appellants to seniority from the dates of their continuous officiation, on the ground that their promotion as officiating Sub Inspectors of Police could only be considered as promotion to posts outside the cadre.
It further held, that their seniority could only be reckoned from the date of their confirmation, and that the rule pres 915 cribing confirmation as Sub Inspector as a condition precedent for promotion to the Post of Inspector of Police was not invalid.
Allowing the Appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The three appellants are entitled to have the benefit of their continuous officiating service as Sub Inspectors of Police counted for seniority as Sub Inspectors of Police.
A writ will issue, directing the state to re fix the seniority of the appellants and other officers similarly situated.
[939 F] 2.
It is not undisputed, that in the absence of Rules to the contrary, regulating the question of seniority between 'direct recruits ' and the 'promotees ' the general principle to be implied and followed to determine seniority is to base it on continuous offication in non fortuitous vacancies.
[929B] In the instant case, the officiating Sub Inspectors of Police were obviously appointed to officiate in permanent or temporary vacancies in the existing subordinate ranks of the Calcutta Police, governed by the same Rules and Regulations as other Sub Inspectors of Police, drawing the same pay and discharging the same duties.
There was not and there could never be any question of officiating Sub Inspectors constituting a different cadre, class or category by themselves.
[934G H] 3.
Rule 4 of the West Bengal Services (Determination of Seniority) Rules, 1981 which deals with seniority amongst direct recruits, broadly provides that their relative seniority shall be according to the cadre of merit when they are selected at the same examination persons appointed on the basis of an earlier examination taking precedence over those appointed on the basis of a later examination.
It further provides that where seniority has not been previously determined it shall be determined according to the actual date of joining.
Rule 5 deals with determination of seniority of promotees and provides that seniority of a person appointed to any post, cadre or grade shall be determined from the date of joining such post, cadre or grade, which by Rule 3 (vi) means tho date of continuous officiation in the post, cadre or grade.
Rule 6 prescribes that the relative seniority between a promotee and a direct recruit shall be determined by the year of appointment or promotion of each in the post, cadre or grade irrespective of the date of joining, and that the promotees shall he en bloc senior to the direct recruits of the same year.
Rules 4, 5 and 6 constitute a single scheme and if read together the scheme becomes clear.
While date of joining is important to decide the question of seniority amongst promotees, it is the year of joining that is relevant when the question of relative seniority is to be deter mined between promotees and direct recruits.
If direct recruits are appointed and promotees are promoted in the same year, all promotees are to take precedence over the direct recruit, irrespective of the actual date of their joining but as amongst the promotees themselves, the seniority is to be based on the date of joining.
That is the true and appropriate construction of Rules 4, 5 and 6, and that was what the State Government wanted to do and was done.
[935 F H ;936 A C] 916 Ganga Ram vs Union of India, ; , Katyani Dayal vs Union of India ; , distinguished.
S.B Patwardhan vs State of Maharashtra, ; Baleshwar Dass vs State of UP.
[1981] 1 SCR 449; A. Janardhana vs Union of India, ; , O.P. Singla , .
Union of India; , ; G.S. Lamba & Ors.
vs Union of India; , , B.S. Gupta vs Union of India, [1975] SUPP SCR 491; A.K. Subramana vs Union of India, P.S. Mahal vs Union of India. ; ; referred to.
