The respondent desired to construct a cinema theatre on a plot of land.
He submitted an application under Rule 3 of the U.P. Cinematograph Rules 1951 to the District Magistrate, for obtaining a certificate signifying his approval of the site selected for constructing a permanent building to be used for cinematograph exhibition.
The District Magistrate as the licensing Authority issued a public notice specifying the request of the respondent for grant of a certificate and calling objections.
An organisation called the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan alone submitted its objection, The District Magistrate referred the application of the respondent to the State Government, which directed the District Magistrate to carefully examine the matter.
The District Magistrate was of the opinion that the Sammelan can neither be styled as an educational institution nor a residential institution within the contemplation or Rule 7(2)(b) because it was an institution wedded to and working for the propagation of Hindi language, and even though it may provide some research facility on its campus it has no regular programme of class teaching, and that having regard to all the 1022 relevant circumstances, the construction of a cinema building at the proposed site was not against public interest.
On the contrary, it was held that a modern beautiful fully air conditioned cinema building apart from adding to the beautification of the city would enrich the coffers of the State exchequer in the form of entertainment tax.
The District Magistrate granted the certificate informed the respondent that construction of a cinema house and be completed within two years from the date of the issuance of the order.
Chagrined by the grant of the certificate, the Sammelan initiated action for acquisition of the plot over which the cinema building was being constructed, should under the Land Acquisition Act.
The respondent successfully assailed the acquisition order in the High Court.
In the meantime as the period of two years specified in the certificate issued under Rule 3 was about to expire, the respondent moved an application for extension of time for completion of the construction of cinema building, and during the pendency of this application, the building was completed.
The respondent made an application under section 3 of the U.P. Cinema (Regulation) Act, 1955 for a licence to exhibit films in the cinema building.
The District Magistrate refused to grant the licence.
The respondent preferred an appeal under Sec.
5(3) of the 1955 Act to the State Government, which allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to the District Magistrate with a direction to re examine the grounds on which he had refused to grant licence to run the cinema in accordance with the rules and pass suitable and legal order after giving an opportunity of hearing.
Against the aforesaid order of remand the respondent filed a Writ Petition in the High Court.
A Division Bench held that even though the order under challenge was one of remand, as the respondent has journeyed to and fro on numerous occasions, it was necessary to dispose of the petition on merits, and held that while granting a certificate under Rule 3 of the 1951 Rules, it was open to the licensing authority to take into consideration whether it would be in public interest to grant the necessary certificate or to refuse the same, but after the grant of certificate when a full fledged cinema building comes up and is shown to comply with the relevant rules and regulations, cinematograph licence cannot be refused on the vague consideration that it would not be in public interest to grant the licence.
It was also held that the failure to complete the construction of the cinema building within the prescribed time, if properly explained would not be a ground to refuse the cinematograph licence, more so because the requirement of rule 3(3) is directory and not mandatory.
The High Court accordingly made the rule absolute and in modification of the order of the State Government, it directed the District Magistrate Licensing Authority to forthwith grant to the petitioner the requisite licence subject to reasonable condition and restrictions.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant state that the scheme o f the U.P. Cinema (Regulation) Act, 1955 and the U.P. 1023 Cinematograph Rules 1951 reveal that the licensing authority has to take into consideration public interest both at the time of granting a certificate of approval as contemplated by Rule 3 as also public interest while granting a cinema licence under Sec.
3 read with See. 5, and that the High Court was in error in holding that one while granting a certificate of approval under Rule 3, public interest has been taken into consideration.
The question of examining whether such building should be licensed for exhibition of cinematograph does not call for a re examination whether the grant is not otherwise contrary to public interest.
Public interest cannot be fitted into a straight jacket formula and what relevant considerations would constitute public interest at the time of granting a certificate of approval under Rule 3 may materially vary or differ from the relevant considerations which may constitute public interest while licensing the cinema theatre for exhibition of a cinematograph under See.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1 The High Court was, clearly in error in issuing a mandamus directing the District Magistrate to grant a licence.
The High Court was hearing a Writ Petition praying for a Writ of Certiorari for quashing the order of removal.
The High Court should have quashed the order of remand if it was satisfied that the order of suffers from an error apparent on the record.
But there its jurisdiction would come to an end.
The High Court cannot then proceed to take over the functions of the licensing authority and direct the licensing authority by a mandamus to grant a licence.
To that extent the judgment of the High Court is set aside.
[1040D,F] 2.
Where a statute confers power and casts a duty to perform any function before the power is exercised or the function is performed, to the Court cannot in exercise of writ jurisdiction supplant the licensing authority and take upon itself the function of the licensing authority.
[1040 E] 3.
The High Court was in error in holding that once the public interest has been taken into consideration while granting certificate of approval, consideration of public interest would not arise and cannot be countenanced while granting a cinematograph licensee under See.
3 read with Sec. 5.
[1037H, 1038] 4.
Licensing powers, an indisputable adjunct of controlled economy, take various forms and they are numerous.
They are generally couched in a language giving wide scope for exercise of powers.
Therefore the Courts have been vigilant to see that they are not exercised in an oppressive or arbitrary manner.
The powers being vide, the question of its exercise on relevant or considerations germane to the determination more often arises.
If the licence is refused on grounds which appear to be irrelevant, the court can legitimately interfere.
[1039H,1040A] The scheme manifested by U.P. Cinema (Regulation) Act, 1955 and the U.P. Cinematograph Rubs 1951 establish the legislative intention that the 1024 licensing authority has to keep in view public interest both at the time of granting the certificate of approval under Rule 3 and granting a cinematograph licence under Sec. 5.
While granting a certificate of approval under Rule 3, the licensing authority may take into consideration the various aspects set out in Rule 4 as well as the conditions prescribed in Rule 7.
But even where all the conditions prescribed in Rule 4 and Rule 5 as well as various other relevant rules are satisfied still the licensing authority may refuse to grant the certificate of approval, if it is satisfied that the location of cinema at the site in question is not a public interest.
[1034G , 1035A] 6.
Rule 7(2)(c) casts an obligation to record the reason in writing which must necessarily sufficient reasons for refusing to grant the certificate on the ground that the location of a cinema at the site of the building is not in public interest.
The licensing authority has not an absolute discretion but it is hedged in by relevant considerations as also by the proviso that if the licensing authority is inclined to refuse the licence on the ground that the location of a cinema at the site of the building is not in public interest, it cannot do so except without the prior approval of the State Government.
[ 1035C D] In the instant case, the District Magistrate while granting the certificate of approval on March 24,1972 bad in terms held that Hindi Sahitya Sammelan is neither an educational institution nor a residential institution nor it has a public hospital and that it cannot be styled as an educational institution for the purpose of Rule 7(2)(b)(i).
This determination is final and conclusive.
[1035F] 7.
While granting the cinema licence under Sec. 3 the licensing authority has to keep in view the provision of Sec.
provides that no licence shall be granted unless the licensing authority is satisfied that the grant of licence is not otherwise contrary to public interest.
Undoubtedly, the para meters of public interest while refusing to grant licence under Sec.
5(1)(c) for exhibition of cinematograph would be materially different than the one which would enter the verdict while considering the application for granting a certificate of approval under Rule 7(2)(c).
[1035G 1036]
