"Excise duty" as defined in section 2(10) of the A.P. Excise Act, 1968 is leviable on the manufacture of liquor and the manufacturer cannot remove the same from the distillery unless the duty imposed under the Excise Act has been paid.
Buyers of Indian liquor from the appellant 's distillery obtain distillery passes for release of liquor after making payment of excise duty and present the same at the distillery there upon the bill of sale or invoice is prepared by the distillery showing the price of liquor but excluding excise duty.
The appellant 's books of account also did not contain any reference to excise duty paid by the purchaser.
The appellant, there ore, paid sales tax under the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957 on the basis of turnover which excluded excise duty.
This position was not accepted by the Sale Tax Authorities and the matter was contested right upto the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court in Mc Dowell & Company Ltd. etc.
vs Commercial Tax Officer VIIth Circle, Hyderabad, etc.
reported in ; held that the Sales Tax Authorities were not competent to include in the "turnover" of the appellant, the excise duty which was not charged by it, but was paid directly to the Excise 792 Authorities the buyers of the liquor, inasmuch as the excise duty did not go into the common till of the appellant and did not become a part of the circulating capital.
After the judgment of the Supreme Court Rules 76 and 79(1) of the A.P. Distillery Rules were suitably amended with effect from August 4, 1981.
Amended Rule 76(a) provides that "No spirit of liquor" manufactured or stored shall be removed unless the Excise duty specified in rule 6 has been paid by a holder of D 2 licence before such removal and the amended rule 79(1) provides that on payment of the excise duty by the holder of D 2 licence a distillery pass for the removal of spirit fit for human compensation may be granted in favour of any of the named persons therein.
The appellant, being a D 2 licence holder was served with a notice, on the basis of the amended provisions, by the respondent proposing to include a sum of Rs. 4,49,09,532.40 representing the excise duty paid directly by buyers of appellants ' liquor in the appellants, turnover for a part of the year 1982 83, Thereupon, the appellant again moved the High Court for quashing the said notice.
The High Court considered the effect of the amended Rules and held that the primary liability to pay excise duty was indisputably of the holder of the D 2 licence.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition on the findings (a) that the turnover related to liquor; and (b) that the excise duty which was payable by the appellant but had by amicable arrangement been paid by the buyer was actually a part of the turnover of the appellant and was, therefore, liable to be so included for determining liability for sales tax.
When leave was granted by a Division Bench of the Supreme Court to appeal against the judgment of the High Court, the correctness of the decision in appellants ' case reported in ; , was doubted and the matter was referred to a larger Bench.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: (Per Chinnappa Reddy, J. (concurring) 1.1 Much legal sophistry and Judicial exposition both in England and India have gone into the attempt to differentiate the concepts of tax evasion and tax avoidance and to discover the invisible line supposed to exist which distinguishes one from the other.
Tax avoidance, it seems, is legal; tax evasion is illegal.
Though initially the law was, and law still is, there is no equity about a tax.
There is no presumption as to a tax.
Nothing is to be read in, nothings to be implied", during the period between the two world wars the theory came to be propounded and developed that it was perfectly open for persons to evade (avoid) income tax if they could do so legally.
In the wake of World War II huge profiteering and racketeering became the order of the day, something which persists till today but on a much larger scale.
Therefore, the attitude of the entire English Courts towards avoidance of tax perceptibly changed and hardened, The march of the law against Tax avoidance schemes des 793 cribed as magic performance by lawyer turned magician continued and then came a significant departure from the West mininister and the Fisher Executors principle in 1982 and finally "the ghost of West minister" has been exercised in England.
Thus, in the very country of its birth, the principle of West minister has been given a decent burial and in that very country where the phrase "tax avoidance" originated the judicial attitude towards tax avoidance has changed and the smile, cynical or even affectionate though it might have been at one time, has now frozen into a deep frown.
The courts are concerning themselves not merely with the genuineness of a transaction, but with the intended effect of it for fiscal purposes.
No man now can get away with a tax avoidance project with the mere statement that there is nothing illegal about it.
[797 G H, C, 807 A D] Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Fishers Executors, ; ; Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Duke of West minister, [19361 AC 1; Lord Howard De Waldan vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, ; Latilla vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, Griffiths vs J.P. Harrizan Ltd. ; Morgan vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1963] Chancery 438; Public Trustee vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1965] Chancery 286; Campbell vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1967] Chancery 651; Greenberg vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1971] 3 All E.R. 136; W.T. Ramsay vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, 11982] AC 300: Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Burmah Oil Company Ltd, 1982 STC 30: Furniss vs Dawson, ; ; Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat vs A. Raman & Co., [1968]1 SCR 10; Commissioner of Income tax.
Gujarat vs Kharwar, referred to. 2.
The evil consequence of tax avoidance are manifold: (i) there is substantial loss of much needed public revenue particularly in a welfare State like ours; (ii) there is the serious disturbance caused to the economy of the country by the piling up of mountains of blackmoney directly causing inflation; (iii) there is "the large hidden loss" to the community by some of the best brains in the country being involved in the perpetual war waged between the tax avoider and his expert team of advisers, lawyers and accountants on the side and the tax gathered and his perhaps not so skillful, advisers on the other side; (iv) there is the "sense of injustice and inequality which tax avoidance arouses in the breasts of those who are unwilling or unable to profit by it"; and (v) last but not least is the ethics (to be precise, the lack of it) of transferring the burden of tax liability to the shoulders of the guideless, good citizens from those of the "artful doggers".
[808 H, 809 A C] 3.
The proper way to construe a taxing statute, while considering a device to avoid tax, is not to ask whether the provisions should be construed literally or liberally, nor whether the transaction is not unreal and not prohibited by the statute, but whether the transaction is a device to avoid tax, and whether the transaction is such that the judicial process may accord its approval to it.
[809 E F] Wood Polymer Ltd. vs Bengal Hotels Limited, referred to.
794 4.
It is neither fair nor desirable to expect the legislature to intervene and take care of every device and scheme to avoid taxation.
It is upto the Court to take stock to determine the nature of the new and sophisticated legal devices to avoid tax and consider whether the situation created by the devices could be related to the existing legislation with the aid of 'emerging ' techniques of inter pretation, to expose the devices for what they really are and to refuse to give Judicial benediction.
[809 G H 810 A] W.T. Ramsay vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, ; ; Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Burmah Oil Company Ltd. 1982 STC 30; Furniss vs Dawson, [1984] I All E.R. 530 quoted with approval.
HELD: (Per Ranganath Misra, J.) 1.
Tax planning may be legitimate provided lt is within the framework of law, Colourable devices cannot be part of tax planning and it is wrong to encourage or entertain the belief that it is honourable to avoid the payment of tax by resorting to dubious methods.
It is the obligation of every citizen to pay the taxes honestly without resorting to subterfuges.
[823 H, 824 A] Commissioner of Income tax vs A. Raman & Co. (1968) 67 ITR II SC J Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat II vs B.M. Kharwar, SC; Bank of Chettinad Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; Jiyajeerao Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Commission of Income Tax and Excess Profits Tax, Bombay, Commissioner of Income Tax vs Sakarlal Balabhai referred to.
Latilla vs I.R. quoted with approval.
2.1 The incidence of excise duty is directly relatable to manufacture but its collection can be deferred to a later stage as a measure of convenience or expediency.
[815 A B] The Province of Madras vs M/s. Boddu Paidanna & Sons R.C. Jall vs Union of India, [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 436; Re.
Sea Custom Act, [1964) 3 SCR 787; M/s Guruswamy & Co. etc.
vs State of Mysore & Ors.
, ; Jullundur Rubber Goods Manufacturers ' Association vs Union of India & Anr. ; ; A.B. Abdul Kadir & Anr.
vs State of Kerala, referred to.
2.2 On an examination of the provisions of the A.P. Excise Act, the Rules were framed thereunder and the pronouncements of the Supreme Court, it is clear, that the conclusion of the Court in Mc Dowells & Company Ltd. etc.
vs Commercial Tax Officer, Vllth Circle, Hyderabad etc.; , at page 921 of [1973] 1 SCR, that intending purchasers of the Indian liquors who seek to obtain distillery passes are also legally responsible for payment of the excise duty is too broadly stated.
The "duty wag primarily a burden which the 795 manufacturer had to bear and even if the purchasers paid the same under the Distillery Rules, the provisions were merely enabling and did not give rise to any legal responsibility or obligation for meeting the burden.
[815 B D] The change in Rule 76 of the AP Distillery Rules has clearly affirmed the position that liability for payment of excise duty is of the manufacturer and the provisions of rules 80 to 84 do not militate against it.
These rules do not detract from the position that payment of excise duty is the primary and exclusive obligation of the manufacturer and if payment be made under a contract or arrangement by any other person it would amount to meeting of the obligation of the manufacturer and nothing more.
[815 D F] 2.3 The definition of "turnover", in section 2(s) of the A.P. General Sales Tax Act, which is to the effect.
namely 'the total amount set out in the bill of sale (or if there is no bill of sale, the total amount charged) as the consideration for the sale or purchase of goods (whether such consideration be cash, deferred payment or any other thing or value) Including any sums charged by the dealer for anything done in respect of goods sold at the time of or before the delivery of the goods and any other sums charged by the dealer, whatever be the description, name or object thereof" clearly indicates that the total amount charged as the consideration for the sale is to be taken into account for determining the turnover.
Where a bin of sale is issued (and obviously the bill has to state the total amount charged as consideration), the total amount set out therein is to be taken into account.
In every transaction of sale, there is bound to be a seller at one end and a buyer at the other and transfer of title in the goods takes place for a consideration.
[815 H,816 A C] 2.4 Excise duty though paid by the purchaser to meet the liability of the appellant, is a part of the consideration for the sale and is includible in the turnover of the appellant.
The purchaser has paid the tax because the law asks him to pay it on behalf of the manufacturer.
Here, admittedly, the bills issued by the appellant did not include the excise duty; Payment of excise duty is a legal liability of the manufacture, its payment is a condition precedent to the removal of the liquor from the distillery and payment by the purchaser is on account of the manufacturer.
According to normal commercial practice, excise duty should have been reflected in the bill either as merged in price or being shown separately.
As a fact, in the hands of the buyer the cost of liquor is what is charged by the appellant under its bill together with excise duty which the buyer has directly paid on seller 's account.
The consideration for the sale is thus the total amount not what is reflected in the bill.
[818 C F] 2.5 True, the excise duty component of the price would not be an addition to the coffers of the dealer, as it would go to reimburse him in respect of the excise duty already paid by him on the manufacture of the goods.
But even so, it would be part of the sale price because it forms a component of the consideration for the sale of the goods that the amount representing excise duty would be payable by the purchaser, There is no other manner of liability, statutory or 796 otherwise, under which the purchaser would be liable to pay the amount of excise duty to the dealer.
And on this reasoning, it would make no difference whether the amount of excise duty is included in the price changed by the dealer or is shown as a separate item in the bill, The position is not different when under a prior agreement, the legal liability of the manufacturer dealer for payment of excise duty is satisfied by the purchaser by direct payment to the excise authorities or to the State exchequer.
[816 G H, 817 A D] 2.6 The conclusion reached in the appellants ' case in ; on the second aspect of the matter namely, when the excise duty does not go into the common till of the assessee and it does not become a part of the circulating capital, it does not constitute turnover, is not the decisive test for deter mining whether such duty would constitute "turnover".
The relevant consideration is not whether the law permits the incidence of the duty to be passed on to the purchaser but whether there is a prohibition against passing of it.
If there is no bar, the incidence would be passed on to the purchaser in accordance with normal commercial practice.
[819 A C 821 B C] The Province of Madras vs M/s. Boddu Paidanna & Sons, ; RC Jall vs Union of India, [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 436; Re.
Sea Customs Act; , ; M/s, Guruswamy & Co. etc.
vs State of Mysore & Ors, ; jullundur Rubber Goods Manufacturers ' Association vs Union of India & Anr. ; ; A.B. Abbul Kadir & Ors.
vs State of Kerala, referred to.
Hindustan Sugar Mills vs Rajasthan State, [1979] I SCR 276 applied.
Paprika Ltd. & Anr.
vs Board of Trade, []944] All.
E.R. 372; Love v, Norman Wright (Builders) Ltd. [1944] I All E.R. 618 quoted with approval.
M/s George Oakes(P) Ltd. vs The State of Madras, ; , Anand Swarup Mahesh Kumar vs The Commissioner of Sales Tax, ; discussed and distinguished.
3.A stand which has not been taken in the writ petition before the High Court cannot be allowed to be taken in the Supreme Court.
Here the contention based on item 26 of the amended First Schedule to the Sales Tax Act that the appellant had already paid tax on the basis of 50 p. in the rupee on the fooling that the consideration for its liquor did not include duty of excise pay able under the Excise Act and the appellant cannot, therefore, be made liable for sales tax on a different footing cannot be sustained.
Such a stand had not been taken in the writ petition before the High Court and there has been no 797 factual examination of the position as to whether the classification indicated is not intended to cover a totally different situation.
Further for resolving the dispute as to whether excise duty is a part of the turnover, reference to the Schedule is indeed wholly irrelevant.
[820 A D] George Oakes (P) Ltd. & Ors.
vs The State Madras, 13 STC 98, distinguished.
