In the respondent Company there were two rival Unions of workmen, namely, Karamchari Union and Sharmik Sangh.
The Karamchari Union espoused the demand of the workmen employed by the Company in its Kanpur unit for upward revision of dearness allowance following an award of the Industrial Tribunal Delhi by which the dearness allowance of the workmen employed in the Delhi unit was linked to the consumer price index for Delhi prepared by Labour Bureau, Simla, which substantially increased the dearness allowance of workmen posted at Delhi.
The Company in its attempt to thwart the demand being pursued by the Karamchari Union, entered into a settlement with the Shramik Sangh in respect of dearness allowance and then approached the Labour Commissioner for registering the settlement Failing to obtain the registration, the Company utilaterally enforced the new scheme of dearness allowance linked to all India average consumer price index prepared by Labour Bureau, Simla.
The Karamchari Union did not accept the revised formula and pressed its demand.
The dispute was referred for adjudication.
Before the Tribunal the Company contended: (1) that the settlement would be binding on the members of the Karamchari Union and the dispute does not require adjudication on merits, and (2) that the Company is desirous of linking dearness allowance to all India average consumer price index for 112 working class with base 1960 100 and the Tribunal should avoid accepting the demand of a few workmen.
The tribunal directed that the workmen of the Kanpur unit of the Company should be paid dearness allowance linked to the all India consumer price index (1960 100) for Kanpur Centre compiled by the Labour Bureau, Simla.
On the question of neutralisation, no change was allowed.
Partly allowing the appeal of the workmen, ^ HELD: 1.
The workmen of the Kanpur unit of the Company should be paid the dearness allowance according to all India consumer price index number for Kanpur (1960 100) compiled by Labour Bureau Simla after applying conversion factor also called the linking factor of 4.83.
Their dearness allowance cannot be linked to all India average consumer price index.
[125 B C] 2.
The Tribunal Committed a grave error in accepting collusive settlement as the starting point of the revision.
[122 H] 3, Uniformity, to an uninformed mind, appears to be attractive.
But, sometimes uniformity amongst dissimilar persons becomes counter productive.
Uniformity and equality have to be amongst equals measured by a common denominator.
The implementation of the Constitutional aspiration of `equal pay for equal work ' can be appreciated.
In the matter of basic wages it is a consummation devotedly to be wished.
But when it comes to dearness allowance any attempt at uniformity between workmen in metropolitan areas and in smaller centres would be destructive of the concept of dearness allowance.
[116 G H] Dearness allowance is directly related to the erosion of real wages by constant upward spiraling of the prices of basic necessities and as a sequal to the inflationary input, the fall in the purchasing power of the rupee.
It is a notorious phenomenon hitherto unquestioned that price rise variee from centre to centre, [117 A] Dearness allowance is inextricably intertwined with price rise, it being an attempt to compensate loss in real wages on account of price rise considered as a passing phenomenon by compensation.
That is why it is called variable dearness allowance.
Any uniformity in the matter of dearness allowance may confer a boon on persons employed in smaller centres and those in bigger metropolitan areas would be hard hit.
Dearness allowance by its very form and name has an intimate relation to the prevailing price structure of basic necessities at the centre in which the workman is employed.
[117 B C] Dearness allowance to workmen at a particular place should therefore depend upon the place where the workman is working irrespective of the fact that the industrial undertaking in which the workman is employed is a unit of an industrial enterprises having an all India or inter State operations.
[117 E] 113 4.
In the matter of dearness allowance the Court should lean in favour of adjudication of dispute on the principle of industry cum region because dearness allowance is linked to cost of living index of a particular centre which has a local flavour.
A workman is exposed to the vagaries of the market where he resides and works, even though he may be an employee of a national, multi national or transnational industrial empire.
Therefore.
the region cum industry principle must inform industrial adjudication in the matter of dearness allowance.
In the instant case the Tribunal has overlooked this important principle of industrial adjudication.
[117 G; 120 H; 121 A; 121 C] Dunlop Rubber Co. (India) Ltd. vs Workmen & Ors., ; , referred to.
Remington Rand of India Ltd. vs The Workmen , woolcombers of India Ltd. vs Woolcombers Workers Union & Anr. ; and Greaves Cotton & Co. and Ors.
vs Their Workmen ; and Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. vs Its Workmen ; , followed.
Any attempt of a company introducing uniformity in the matter of dearness allowance linked to the all India average consumer price index prepared by Labour Bureau, Simla would be destructive of the concept of dearness allowance.
Not only unequals will be treated as equals but the former would suffer irreparable harm.
Such an approach would deal a fatal blow to the well recognised principle of industrial adjudication based on region cum industry because there cannot be any uniformity in the dearness allowance of the workmen working in metropolitan areas and the workmen working in smaller areas.
[118 A C] 6.
Where for a certain industrial centre a dearness allowance formula is in vogue and it is linked to some consumer price index number, whenever the base year for consumer price index number is changed, a fresh linkage requires a conversion ratio.
In the absence of a conversion ratio, the whole scheme falls out of gear and becomes unworkable, ineffective and in fact unjust.
In the instant case the conversion ratio of 4.83 in valid and correct and the Tribunal ought to have accepted the same.
[123 D; 124 F] Ahmedabad Mill Owners ' Association etc.
vs The Textile Labour Association, [1966) 1 S.C.R. 382, followed.
In the matter of dearness allowance usually the paying capacity of the employer is examined.
In the instant case, it has not at all been contended that the respondent company cannot bear the additional burden.
[124 G]
