Prior to this judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. Pradeep Jain 's case delivered on 22nd June, 1984, admissions to the post graduate medical courses in the State of Uttar Pradesh were governed by the old rules which provided for reservation of 75% seats for students passing the MBBS examination from the same institution in which admission is sought, that is on the basis of institutional preference with the remaining 25% seats open for students who had passed the MBBS examination from any medical college in the State of Uttar Pradesh and who satisfied the residential requirements in that State.
In Dr. Pradeep Jain 's case the Supreme Court held that admission to post graduate course, such as MD, MS and the like, should be entirely on the basis of all India merit, subject only to Constitutional reservations in favour of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
However, keeping in view equality of opportunity and institutional continuity in education a certain percentage of seats may be reserved on the basis of institutional preference "in the sense that a student who has passed MBBS course from a medical college may be given preference for admission to post graduate course in the same medical college or University but such reservation should not in any event exceed 50% of the total number of open seats available for admissions to the post graduate 42 course".
Subsequently, on 26th July, 1984 it was directed that the aforesaid judgment shall be implemented with effect from the academic year 1985 86.
According to the rules prevailing in all the medical colleges in the State of Uttar Pradesh, a student has to do house job for one year and then seek admission to the two year post graduate course, barring some exceptions, only in the speciality in which he has done his house job.
The petitioners passed their MBBS examination in July 1982 from Motilal Nehru Medical College and completed obligatory internship of one year in July 1983.
At that time admission to the post graduate medical courses were governed by the old rules.
The petitioners could not secure admission to the post graduate medical courses for the academic year 1984 85 on the basis of the old rules.
For the academic year 1985 86, the Principal of the College granted admissions to 50% of the seats reserved on the basis of institutional preference by selecting institutional students on the basis of merit and having regard to the speciality in which they had done their house job and so far as the remaining 50% open non reserved seats were concerned, he admitted students coming from different parts of the country on the basis of the marks obtained by them at the different MBBS examinations.
Thus the petitioners could not secure admissions in the post graduate courses even for the academic year 1985 86.
Therefore, they filed the present Writ Petitions challenging the admissions made for the academic year 1985 86.
The petitioners contended: (i) that when they completed their internship in July 1983 the admissions to post graduate courses were governed by the old rules and so far as admissions to academic year 1984 85 were concerned they knew that having regard to the number of students, who had completed their house job in 1983 and would be eligible for admission to the post graduate courses in the academic year 1984 85, some seats in the post graduate courses for the academic year 1984 85 would remain vacant and would be available to them on completion of their house job in July 1984 in addition to the seats in the post graduate courses for the academic year 1985 86.
On the basis of 75% seats for the academic years 1984 85 and 1985 86 being available to the students passing MBBS examination from Motilal Nehru Medical College they reasonably anticipated that if they took a particular speciality, they would be able to secure admission to the post graduate course in that speciality on the basis of institutional preference and basing themselves upon this anticipation, they selected their speciality for the house job.
If the old rule of 75% and 25% had continued to prevail for the academic year 1985 86 and had not been set at naught by the judgment dated 22nd June 1984, they would have been able to secure admission to the post graduate course in the speciality chosen by them for the house job.
But by reason of the reduction of the percentage reserved for institutional candidates from 75 to 50 commencing from the academic year 1985 86, they could not secure admission to the post graduate course for the academic year 1985 86.
Therefore, in those cases where the system of post graduate education adopted is to have house job for one year followed by a two year post graduate course, the applicability of the judgment to the post graduate course should be deemed to commence from the time when the students take up house job in any particularly speciality and (ii) that even in regard to the 50% non reserved seats they were denied an opportunity 43 of competing for them, because no entrance examination was held either by the Government of India or by the State Government or even by the concerned University for testing the relative merits of the students seeking admission to the post graduate courses.
Partly disposing of the petitions, ^ HELD: 1.
Admissions to 50% open seats not reserved on the basis of institutional preference for post graduate courses can not be made on the basis of marks obtained by the students at different MBBS examination held by different Universities, since there would be no comparable standards by reference to which relative merits of the students seeking admission to post graduate courses can be judged.
In order to meet the demands of the equality clause, the admissions to 50% non reserved seats for the post graduate courses must be made on the basis of comparative evaluation of merits of the students through an entrance examination, to be held by the Government of India or the Indian Medical Council sufficiently in advance.
The students seeking admission in MBBS course as well as in post graduate courses can express their preference for any particular University of Medical College or colleges as also for any speciality or specialities which they wish to take up for the post graduate course and admissions should be granted on the basis of marks obtained at such entrance examination and while granting admissions, the preferences expressed by the students must be kept in mind and as far as possible, effort should be made to conform to such preferences.
[51 E F; 52 B D] 2.
The Principal of the Motilal Nehru Medical College cannot be blamed for granting admissions for the academic year 1985 86 in accordance with the new principle since the order dated 26th July 1984 says that the judgment dated 22nd June 1984, shall be effective from the academic year 1985 86 and on a literal interpretation of that order even admissions to the two years post graduate courses for the academic year 1985 86 would have to be in accordance with the new principle.[59 B C] 3.
The grievance of the petitioners that even in regard to the 50% non reserved seats, they were denied an opportunity of competing for them because no entrance examination was held for testing the relative merits of the students seeking admission to the post graduate courses, is based on the premise that the admissions were governed by the new principle.
This premise was unjustified and the admissions were governed not by the new principle but by the old rules.
Even if the admissions were governed by the new principle, the Principal was clearly wrong in granting admissions to 50% non reserved seats on the basis of the marks obtained by the candidates at the different MBBS examination held by different universities, without testing the relative merits of the candidates on the basis of a common standard.
The admissions purported to have been made to 50% non reserved seats in the post graduate courses were invalid.[59 H; 60 A B] 4 The admissions already made cannot be struck down because the students who have already been admitted are not parties to the present writ petitions and without giving them an opportunity of being heard their 44 admissions cannot be struck down.
Secondly, such admissions were made in January 1985 and since then the students are prosecuting their studies.
Striking down their admissions at this stage would cause immense hardship to them.
It would be fair and just if the petitioners are also allowed admission to post graduate courses in the Motilal Nehru Medical College on the basis of institutional preference according to old rules.
The petitioners shall be admitted to the post graduate courses in the specialities respectively chosen by them for their house job, for the academic year 1985 86 either in the Motilal Nehru Medical College or in any other five medical colleges in the State of Uttar Pradesh at the option of the State Government.[60 G H; 61 A; G H] 5.
The judgment in the case of Dr. Pradeep Jain has been misinterpreted to mean that 30% of the total seats available for admission to MBBS course in a Medical College should be kept free from reservation on the basis of residence requirement or institutional preference.
That is a total mis reading of that judgment.
True import of that judgment is that after providing for reservation validly made, whatever seats remain available for non reserved categories, 30% of such seats at the least, should be left free for open competition and admission to such 30% open seats should not be based on residence requirement or institutional preference but students from all over the country should be able to compete for admissions to such 30% open seats.
[51 A C] 6.
Some of the State Governments and universities are proposing to fill up the minimum 30% non reserved seats for the MBBS course on the basis of marks obtained by the students at the qualifying examinations held by the different States and or Universities, totally ignoring the fact that the standard of judging at these different qualifying examinations cannot, by its very nature be uniform.
It would be wholly unjust to grant admissions to students by assessing their relative merits with reference to the marks obtained by them, not at the same qualifying examination where standard of judging would be reasonably uniform but at different qualifying examinations held by different State Governments or Universities where the standard of judging would necessarily vary and would not be the same.
That would indeed be blatantly violative of the concept of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.
Therefore, no State Government or University or Medical College shall grant admission to students to fill the minimum 30% non reserved seats for the MBBS course, on the basis of comparison of the marks obtained by them at different qualifying examinations.
The admissions must be based on evaluation of relative merits through an entrance examination which would be open to all qualified candidates throughout the country.
Such entrance examination should be held by the Government of India or the Indian Medical Council on an all India basis and admissions should be granted to various Medical Colleges in the country on the basis of marks obtained at such entrance examination and while granting admission any preference expressed by the students for any particular State or University or Medical College or Colleges shall be kept in mind and; as far as possible, efforts should be made to conform to such preferences so that the students who secure admission are least inconvenienced and they are able to carry on their studies near their place of residence.
[49 D H; 50 A B] 45 7.
There is no difficulty in giving effect to the judgment from the academic year 1985 86 so far as three year post graduate courses are concerned and the admissions will be governed by the principle laid down in the judgment.
But in cases where students seek admissions to the post graduate courses of two years duration after the completion of the house job, if the principle laid down in that judgment were to govern such admissions from the academic year 1985 86, it would cause considerable hardship to the students who have selected house job in a particular speciality prior to the delivery of the judgment on 22nd June, 1984.
In order to meet the demand of equality and justice it is directed, that in case of Universities and Medical Colleges, where the system in vogue is to have one year house job in a particular speciality followed by admissions to a two year post graduate course in the same speciality, the admissions to the two year post graduate courses for the academic year 1985 86 should be governed, not by the new principle laid down in the judgment, but by the old rules which prevailed prior to the delivery of the judgment, provided the students seeking admissions had commenced their house job prior to the delivery of the judgment on 22nd June 1984.
If however, the house job was commenced subsequent to the delivery of the judgment on 22nd June 1984, the admissions to the two year post graduate courses for the academic year 1985 86 would be governed by the new principle laid down in the judgment.
[57 A D] 8.
In most of the States, the post graduate course is of three years ' duration and during the first year, the student is expected to do house job in the speciality in which i e has been admitted to the post graduate course.
This system is more advantageous to the students since it gives an opportunity to the students to secure admission to the post graduate course in any speciality that is available, on the basis of the marks obtained at the MBBS examination in case of 50% seats reserved on the basis of institutional preference and on the basis of marks obtained at the entrance examination in the case of 50% non reserved seats.
It is, therefore, recommended to the Indian Medical Council as also to the State of Uttar Pradesh and other "states which follow the system of one year house job followed by two years post graduate course to uniformly adopt the system of three years post graduate course with house job in the first year.
So far as post graduate education in the Medical Faculty is concerned there should, be uniformity throughout the country.
[54 B D] 9.
All India Entrance Examination should be conducted in at least one centre in each State.
Having regard to the size of population, the number of students seeking admission and the geographic area of a State, there may be more than one centre in some States both in regard to admissions to the post graduate courses and MBBS course.
As directed earlier the Indian Medical Council should submit a positive scheme for holding an all India entrance examination for regulating admissions to the minimum 30% non reserved seats for MBBS course on the next hearing so that necessary directions could be issued for holding such entrance examination well in time before the next academic year begins in June or July, 1985.
The writ petitions shall be finally disposed of after such directions are issued.
[52 F; 50 E. 62 B] Dr. Pradeep Jain and Ors vs Union of India & Ors. ; explained and Jagdish Saran vs Union of India ; referred to. 46
