A Hindu father executed a registered deed of trust giving away his properties to public charities and appointed himself and two others as trustees.
The son in assertion by his right to a moiety share therein started to alienate them.
There was litigation between the trustees and the son which ultimately ended in a compromise decree for partition between the father and the son, the two other trustees having retired pending litigation.
After the death of both the father and the son a suit was brought under 1123 section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure for the framing of a scheme for the administration of the trust.
The trial court held that the trust deed had been substituted by the compromise decree which itself created a trust and decreed the suit on that basis.
On appeal by two of the defendants who were transferees in possession of some of the properties in suit, the High Court affirmed the decision of the trial court holding that the compromise decree created a trust for public charities in respect of the properties allotted to the third plaintiff, meaning the father.
The said defendants appealed to this Court.
The principal question for decision was one of construction of the compromise decree, whether it created a trust or a charge.
The relevant terms of the compromise decree were as follows: " that as regards the aforesaid schedule property, the third plaintiff should be the 'sole trustee ' till his lifetime for the purpose of conducting the charities described in the trust deed, dated 17th March, 1919, and he should utilise the income derived therefrom for the charities according to the necessity and should enjoy the said property till his lifetime without rights to gift, sale etc.
, therein ; that after his death, the said entire property should pass on to his grandson Ramalingeswara Rao subject to the (performance of) the aforesaid kainkaryams (charities) ; that if the third plaintiff should die before the expiry of the minority of the aforesaid Ramalingeswara Rao arrangement should be made to have a guardian appointed through Court for the property made to pass to the said Rainalingeswara Rao, the said guardian should take possession of the property and conduct the aforesaid charities and deliver possession of the same to the said Ramalingeswara Rao as soon as the minor attains majority ; that, thereafter the said Ramalingeswara Rao should conduct the above mentioned charities and enjoy the properties :" Hald, that the courts below were in error in construing the compromise decree in the way they did and the appeal must succeed.
There can be no doubt from the terms of the compromise decree read as a whole that what was intended to be created was a charge and not a trust in respect of the properties allotted to the father which retained their private character.
The principles of Hindu Law applicable to questions relating to charitable trust are well settled.
Whether or not a dedication to charity is complete must depend on the intention of the donor which has to be gathered from the terms of the document in any particular case read as a whole.
If the dedication is complete, a trust is created, if not, a charge follows.
The mere use of the word 'trust ' or 'trustee ' cannot by itself be conclusive as to the intention of the donor and the real test is whether private title 1124 over the property is sought to be extinguished by a complete transfer of it to the charity.
Maharani Hemanta Kumati Debi vs Gauri Shankar Tewari, (1940) L. R. 68 I.A. 53, Jadu Nath Singh vs Thakur Sita Ramji, (1917) L.R. 44 I.A. 187, Pande Har Narayan vs Surja Kunwari, (1921) L.R. 48 I.A. 143, Sonatun Bysack vs Sreemutti juggul soondyee Dossee, 8 Moo.
I.A. 66 and Gopal Lal Sett vs Purna Chandya Basak, (1921) L.R. 49 I.A. 100, applied.
