Section 77(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 provides that every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by his election agent, keep a separate and correct account of all expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorised by him or by his election agent, between the date of publication of the notification calling the election and the date of declaration of the result thereof, both dates inclusive.
Section 77(3) provides that the total of the said expenditure shall not exceed such amount as may be prescribed by the Rules framed under the Act.
In Kanwarlal Gupta the Court observed that when the political party sponsoring a candidate incurs expenditure in connection with his election, as distinguished from expenditure on general party propaganda, and the candidate knowingly takes advantage of it or participates in the programme or activity or fails to disavow the expenditure or consents to it or acquiesces in it, it would be reasonable to infer, save in special circumstances, that he impliedly authorised the political party to incur such expenditure and he cannot escape the rigour of the ceiling by saying that he has not incurred the expenditure, but his political party has done so.
In order to get over the judgment in Kanwarlal Gupta, the Representation of the People(Amendment) Ordinance, 1974 was issued which was replaced by the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1974.
Section 2 of the Amending Act added two Explanations to section 77(1).
Explanation 1 provides that notwithstanding any judgment, order or decision of any court to the contrary, any expenditure incurred or authorised in connection with the election of a candidate by a political party or by any individual (other than the candidate or his election agent) shall not be deemed to be, and shall not ever be deemed to have been, expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorised by the candidate or by his election agent for the purpose of sub Section (1) of Section 77.
623 In the writ petition under article 32 the petitioner challenged the validity of Explanation 1 to section 77(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 on the grounds: (i) that it enables political parties to spend unlimited monies for the election of the candidates sponsored by them, (ii) that this is arbitrary and violative of article 14 because it sanctions serious discrimination between one political party or individual and another on the basis of money power,(iii) that it not only permits but encourages and legitimises the influence of big money in the electoral process and thus militates against the fairness and purity of the electoral process, (iv) that it denies to the citizen right to have full and effective participation in the electoral process and (v) that it nullifies the salutary object of imposing a ceiling on a candidate 's expenditure.
On behalf of the respondent Union of India it was contended: (i) that Explanation 1 to section 77(1) of the Act was introduced to restore the law as expounded in the decisions of this Court prior to the decision in Kanwarlal Gupta, (ii) that the expenditure incurred by political parties in connection with the election of their candidates do not fall within the mischief of section 77(1) read with section 123(6) of the Act, (iii) that Explanation 1 is not violative of article 14 and (iv) that legislative policies bearing upon matters governing elections are not open to judicial review.
Dismissing the Writ Petition and C.M.Ps.
, ^ HELD: 1.
Explanation 1 to section 77(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 neither suffers from any constitutional infirmity nor it violates article 14.
Explanation 1 classifies all political parties or associations in one group and confers upon them the same or similar advantage.
Political parties or, politically motivated associations or bodies of persons or, individuals interested in political happenings, are characterised by common attributes, the dominant attribute being that they engage themselves in activities of a political nature.
Elections constitute the core of such activities.
A classification of this nature bears reasonable relationship with the object of the statute that expenses incurred by those who fall within the particular group should not be regarded as expenditure incurred or authorised by the candidates or his election agent.
Classification has to be broadly reasonable in order to sustain the challenge of unconstitutionality.
One cannot dissect that process and discover shades within shades to nullify it on the ground of inequality.
[636 G H; 637 A;C] 2.
Explanation 1 to section 77(1) of the Act says that a political party or any other association or any individual, other than the candidate or his election agent, can incur expenses, without any limitation whatsoever, in connection with the election of a candidate.
Such expenses are not deemed to be expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorised by the candidate or by his election agent for the purpose of section 77(1).
[636 E F] 3.
As independent candidate who contests an election without the support of a political party, is at a considerable disadvantage as compared with candidates supported by political parties.
But, that does not violate the rule of equality.
It is not the election law which creates such inequalities.
Inequalities 624 exist apart from that law and are implicit in the unequal positions in which the citizens find themselves.
What the law does is to allow, in an equal measure, all political parties, associations or bodies or persons or individuals (other than the candidate or his election agent) to incur expenses in connection with the election of candidate, which need not be included in the return of election expenses which the candidate is required to file.
[637 C E] 4.
Preferring political parties for exclusion from the sweep of monetary limits on election expenses, is not so unreasonable or arbitrary as to justify the preference being struck down upon that ground because the statute neither makes the affluence of a political party and electoral standard for acquiring eligibility prescribed by the Explanation nor is it an unwise policy to ensure reasonable reduction in the number of contesting candidates, which can be done by conferring special privileges upon political parties.
In any democratic system of government political parties occupy a distinct and unique place.
It is through them that the people attempt to voice or ventilate their grievances.
Considering the power which they wield in the administration of governmental affairs, a special conferment of benefits on them in the matter of modalities governing the election process cannot be regarded as unreasonable or arbitrary.
[637 G H; 638 B C] 5.
In Kanwarlal Gupta the Court drew a distinction between the expenses incurred by a political party specifically in connection with the election of a particular candidate and the expenditure incurred by it on general party propaganda, the latter not being includible in the return of election expenses which the candidate has to file.
The rationale of that decision is that by reason of the important position which political parties occupy they are entitled to incur expenditure for projecting their programmes and popularising their policies.
Explanation I obliterates the dividing line drawn in Kanwarlal Gupta between expenses incurred "in connection with ' the election of a particular candidate and expenses incurred on 'general party propaganda '.
All persons, except the candidate and his election agent, are now free to incur expenditure of the former kind too, without the constraints of ceiling imposed upon election expenditure by section 77(3) read with Rule 90 of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.
[638 C E] 6.
Whether Explanation I restores the law as it was understood before Kanwarlal Gupta or, it makes an innovation is irrelevant for deciding upon its validity.
Every law, whether restorative or innovative, has to be tested on the touchstone of the Constitution.
[638 G] 7.
Election laws are not designed to produce economic equality amongst citizens.
They can, at best, provide an equal opportunity to all sections of society to project their respective points of view on the occasion of elections.
[639 B] 8.
If it is correct that different political parties have been treated equally though they are situated unequally, or that individuals have been discriminated against either inter se or in relation to political parties and associations, the only method which would measure up to the required constitutional standard is 625 the one in which the State would have to allocate funds from its own exchequer in order to enable the various candidates to contest elections.
That would be the fairest form of fairness.
[639 D E] 9.
Explanation I would not become unconstitutional for the reason that it allegedly renders the main provisions in section 77(1) nugatory by taking away with one hand what is given by the other.
The Explanation does not denude the section of its meaning and make it purposeless.
Section 77(1) deals with the expenditure incurred or authorised by ' a candidate or his election agent, in connection with the election.
It is obligatory to keep a separate and correct account of such expenditure.
Explanation I deals with the expenditure incurred or authorised by a political party or any other association or body of persons or by an individual other than the candidate or his election agent.
It is not obligatory for the candidate or his election agent to keep a separate and correct account of such expenditure, because such expenditure is not incurred or authorised by the candidate or his election agent and that such expenditure cannot be deemed to be incurred or authorised by the candidate or his election agent.
Section 77(1) on the one hand and Explanation 1 on the other, deal with two different situations wherefore, the latter cannot render the former meaningless.
[639 F H; 640 A B] 10.
If an expenditure which purports to have been incurred, for example, by a political party has in fact been incurred by the candidate or his election agent, Explanation I will not be attracted.
It is only if the expenditure is in fact incurred or authorised by a political party or any other association or body of persons or by an individual, (other than the candidate or his election agent) that the Explanation will come into play.
For seeking protection under Explanation I it must be shown that the source of the expenditure incurred was not the candidate or his election agent.
Explanation I does not create a fiction.
It deals with the realities of political situations.
It does not provide that expenditure in fact incurred or authorised by a candidate or his election agent, shall not be deemed to be incurred or authorised by them, if the amount is defrayed by a political party.
The object of the Explanation is to ensure that the expenditure incurred, by a political party on its own, without using the funds provided by the candidate or his election agent shall not be deemed to be expenditure incurred or authorised by the candidate or his election agent.
If the expenditure is incurred from out of the funds provided by the candidate or his election agent section 77(1) and not Explanation 1 would apply.
[640 C H] 11.
The reason why the expression 'shall not be deemed to be ' is used in Explanation 1 is that Parliament wanted to get over the effect of the judgment of this Court in Kanwarlal Gupta 's case.
Similarly, the expression 'shall not ever be deemed to have been ' is used in the Explanation, to get over the effect of that judgment retrospectively, except to the extent mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of the Proviso to the Explanation.
[641 B C] 12.
The limited range of Explanation I ought not to be enlarged.
The ceiling placed on election expenses is a basic commandment of the Act, not a 626 pious edict.
Its object is to keep a check on the expenditure incurred by candidates on their own elections, directly or through their election agents.
They cannot be permitted to resort to subterfuges in order to evade the restraint imposed by section 77(1) and 77(3) of the Act.
Homage to the principle of free and fair elections has to be real, not formal.
[641 C D] 13.
The Court is not to lay down policies in matters pertaining to elections.
The Court cannot negate a law on the ground that it does not approve of the policy which underlies it.
The Court might have its own preferences and perceptions but, they cannot be used for invalidating laws.
[641 E F] 14.
The right to contest an election or to vote at it is not a Common Law right.
[641 G] 15.
The question as regards the constitutional validity of Explanation 1 has to be determined regardless of the consideration as to whether the said Explanation restores the law as it stood before the decision of this Court in Kanwarlal Gupta or whether it introduces a new provision altogether.
[642 E] 16.
Influence of big money on the election process is regarded universally as an evil of great magnitude.
Kanwar Lal Gupta vs Amar Nath Chawla explained.
Rananjaya Singh vs Baijnath Singh ; ; Ram Dayal vs Brijraj Singh ; ; Magraj Patolia vs R.K. Birla ; ; Smt.
Indira Gandhi vs Raj Narain ; Lok Sabha Debates Vol.
XLVII, Nos.
21 27, 12 20 December, 1974 page 279; Vatal Nagaraj vs R. Dayanand Sagar ; , 399; Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. AIR 1958 Bombay 155; Indian Iron and Steel Co. Ltd AIR 1958 Calcutta 234; Report of the Santhanam Committee on Prevention of Corruption 1962, Section 11, 'Social Climate ' Paragraph 11.5; Report of the Expert Committee on 'Companies and MRTP Acts ' 1978, Chapter XIII pages 99 104; Jyoti Basu vs Debi Ghosal ; , 326, 327; Halbury 's Law of England, Fourth Edition, Volume 15, Paragraph 721, referred to.
