In Vijay Textile Mills vs Union of India reported in (1979) 4 E.L.T.J. 181, the Gujarat High Court by its decision dated 21 1.1979 held that cotton fabrics subjected to bleaching, dyeing and printing could not be subjected to excise duty under Item 19 (1) (b) of the First Schedule to the is at twenty per cent ad valorem these activities not being taxable event in the light of section 3 read with 2(d) of the Act.
The Gujarat High Court proceeded on the footing that the processes of bleaching, dyeing and printing were manufacturing processes and held that excise duty would at least be leviable under residuary Item No. 68 of the First Schedule and therefore, liable to levy at eight per cent ad valorem, the High Court directed the "Excise authorities to calculate the ad valorem excise duty during the period of three years immediately preceding the institution of each petition before the Court and calculate the excise duty payable by each of these petitioners under Item 68 only in respect of the value added by each of the petitioners by the processing of the fabric concerned.
The excise duty paid in excess of such ad valorem duty under Item 68 during the period of three years immediately preceding the institution of the respective Special Application is ordered to be refunded to the petitioners concerned in each of their petitions." In Real Honest Textiles and Ors.
vs Union of India (now in appeal) the Gujarat High Court passed similar directions after declaring that the levy and collection of excise duty and additional duty on processed man made fabrics 293 under Tariff ' Item 22(1) of the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 was ultra vires.
Since the decisions of the Gujarat High A Court on 24.1.1979 in these two cases, the petitioners and the processing houses like the petitioners have been claiming refund.
The President of India promulgated an Ordinance being Central ordinance No. 12 of 1979 called the Central Excises and Salt and Additional Duties of Excise (Amendment) Ordinance 1979.
The said Ordinance was replaced by the Act VI of 1980 called the Central Excises and Salt and Additional Duties of Excise (Amendment) Act, 1980, giving retrospective effect to the Act from 24th February 1979.
By section 2 of the Act, section 2(f) of the Excise Duty Act was amended by adding three sub items in the definition "manufacture" so as to include the activities like bleaching, dyeing, printing etc.
covered by the two decisions of the Gujarat High Court.
Similar amendments were made in items 19(1), 21 (1) and 22 (1) of the First Schedule with retrospective effect.
Section 5(2) (b) of the Amending Act provided "no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any other Court for the refund of the duty collected and no enforcement shall be made by any Court of any decree or order directing the refund of such duties of excise which have been collected and which may have been collected." as if the provisions of section 5 of the Act VI of 1980 had been in force on and from the appointed day as defined in the Act VI of 1980.
After the Act VI of 1980 was passed, the same was challenged before the Bombay High Court by several writ petitions.
Dismissing W.P. 623/1979 titled New Shakti Dye Works Pvt.
and Mahalakshmi Dyeing and Printing Works vs Union of India along with 24 other writ petitions on 16117 June, 1983, the Bombay High Court upheld the Constitutional validity of the impugned Act as well as the levy of duty on certain goods.
Special Leave was granted in this case as in the two earlier Gujarat High Court 's cases.
Empire Industries Limited also filed a petition under Article 226 of the cases though Indian Textile Processor Association withdrew it from the file of the Bombay High Court and by the writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution has challenged the Constitutional validity of the Act VI of 1980 and the validity of the levy of excise duty under section 4 of the Act.
Some other petitioners similarly situated have also filed their petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution.
In these petitions and appeals the following main points fell for consideration: 1.
Whether cotton fabrics subjected to the process of bleaching, mercerising, dyeing, printing, water proofing etc.
specially the processes conducted and carried out by the petitioner company in respect of cotton fabrics and woolen fabrics/man made fabrics as mentioned under Items 19 or 22 of the Schedule to the amount to 'manufacture ' as the Act stood prior to the impugned Act of 1980.
In other words whether these various processes carried out by the petitioners 294 company amount to bringing into existence different and distinct goods, A commercially known as such, to attract levy of duty under section 4 of the . 2.
Whether and in any event after the impugned Act, the levy is valid.
In connection with the said contention it has to be examined whether the impugned Act is intra vires entry 84 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and if not, whether the said impugned Act can be said to be valid in any event under entry 97 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
Whether the impugned Act violates Article 14 or Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
Allowing the Revenue appeals in C.A. Nos.
586 to 592 of 1979 and dismissing all the petitions and other appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
In view of the amendments made in section 2(f) of the by Amending Act VI of 1980 as well as the substitution of new Item 19(1) and 22(1) in Excise Tariff in place of the original items, the activities of the petitioner company, namely, as an independent processing unit engaged in job activities of dyeing, printing and finishing of man made/cotton fabrics attract the exigibility to excise duties under section 3 and 4 of the Act.
Excise duty will be charged on processed printed material.
[328 D E] Section 3 of the clearly indicates that the object of the entries in the First Schedule is firstly excisable goods and secondly to specify rates at which excise duty will be levied.
Under sub rule 2 of Rule 56A, a manufacturer will be given credit of the duty which is already paid on the articles used in the manufacture, subject to certain conditions.
Therefore, the processors will be entitled to credit for the duty already paid on the grey cloth by the manufacturers of the grey cloth.
[328 E P] New Shakti Dye Works (Pvt.) Ltd vs Mahalakshmi Dyeing and Printing Works vs Union of India & Anr.
(W.P. Nos. 622 and 623 of 1979 dated 16 and 17 June 1983 Bombay) approved.
2.1 Excise duty is a duty on the manufacture of goods and not on sale.
Manufacture is complete as soon as by the application of one or more process, the raw material undergoes some change.
If a new substance is brought into existence or if a new or different article having a distinctive name, character or use result from particular processes, such process or processes would amount to manufacture.
Therefore, the taxable event under the Excise Law is `manufacture '.
The moment there is transformation into a new commodity commercially known as a distinct and separate commodity having its own character, use and name, whether be it the result of one process or several processes `manufacture ' takes place and liability to duty under section 4 is attracted.
[312 C D; 316 B C] 295 Union of India vs Delhi Cloth & General Mills, [1963] 1 Supp.
S.C.R. 586; Union of India vs H.U.F. Business known as Ramlal Mansukhnai, Rewari &; Anr.
A ; Allenburry Engineers vs Ramakrishna Dalmia & Ors., 11933] 2 S.C.R. 257; Deputy Commissioner, Sales Tax (Law) Board of Revenue (Taxes) Ernakulam vs Pio Food Packets, ; and Chowgule and Co. Pvt. Ltd. and Anr.
vs Union of India and Ors.
11981] I S.C.C. 653 referred lo.
Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. Lucknow vs Harbilas Rai and Sons [1968] S.T.C. Vol.
21 p. 17 (S.C.) followed.
Hiralal Jitmal vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, [1957] S.T.C. Vol.
VIII 325 (MP); East India Cotton Manufacturing Company Pvt. Ltd. vs The Assessing Authority cum Excise and Taxation Officer, Gurgaon and Anr., [1972] S.T.C. Vol.
30 p. 489 (Punjab and Haryana); Kores (India) Ltd vs Union of India and Ors., [19821 E.L.T. Vol.
10, p. 253 and K. Venkataraman and Company and Ors.
vs Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Coimbatore IV and Ors., [1972] S.T.C. Vol.
10 p. 57 (Mad) approved.
Extrusion Process Pvt. Ltd. vs N.R. Jadhav, Superintendent of Central Excise, 119791 4 F. L.T. J. 380 (Gujarat); Swastik Products, Baroda vs Superintendent of Central Excise, and Kailash Nath and Anr.
vs The State of U.P. and Ors., [1957] S.T.C. Vol.
VIII p. 358 (SC) distinguished.
Mc Nicol and Anr.
vs Pinch, quoted with approval.
2.2 Etymologically the word "Manufacture" properly construed would doubtless cover the transformation.
Here, in the light of several decision of the Supreme Court and the High Courts and on the construction of the expression, the process of bleaching, dyeing and printing etymologically means manufacturing process.
The processes of the type which have been incorporated by the Act VI of 1980 were not so alien or foreign to the concept of `manufacture ' that these could not come within that concept covered by entry 84, of List I of the Seventh Schedule.
After the Act VI of 1980 was passed these processes indubitably fall within the expression `manufacture '.
[323A,E H] 2.3 The question whether the impugned Act is covered by entry 84 can be looked from another point of view namely the actual contents of entry 84.
The word `produced ' appearing in entry No. 84 of List I of the Seventh Schedule is used in juxtaposition with the word `manufactured ' and used in connection with the duty of excise and consequently it contemplates same expenditure of human skill in bringing the goods concerned into the condition which would attract the duty.
It was not required that the goods would be manufactured in the sense that raw material should be used to turn out something altogether different.
It would still require that these should be produced in the sense that some human activity and energy should be spent on them and these should be subjected to some processes in order that these might be brought to the state in which they might become fit for consumption.
Here, expenditure 296 of human skill and material have been used in the processing and it may not be that the raw material was first transformed but over the transformed material, further transformation was done by the human labour and skill making this fit for human consumption.
In any event under entry 97 of List I of the Seventh Schedule this would apply if it is not under entry 84.
[324 A, G] Aluminium Corporation of India Ltd. vs Coal Board AIR 1959 Cal.
222, approved.
The King vs Caledonian Collieries, Ltd. referred to.
2.4 To contend that if the legislation was sought to be defended on the ground that it is a tax on activity like processing and would be covered by the a powers enumerated under entry 97 of List I of the Seventh Schedule there was no charging section for such an activity and as such the charge must fail and there cannot be any levy is wrong and misconceived.
The charging section is the charging section 3 of the .
It stipulates the levy and charge of duty of excise on all excisable goods produced or manufactured.
`Manufactured ' under the Act after the amendment would be the 'manufacture ' as amended in section 2(f) and Tariff Item 19(1) and 22 and the charge would be on that basis.
[324 ;325 A B] 3.1 Imposition of tax by legislation makes the subjects pay taxes.
It is well recognised that (i) tax may be imposed retrospectively; and that by itself would not be unreasonable restriction on the right to carry on business and (ii) the Parliament has powers to make retrospective legislation including fiscal legislation and such legislation per se is not unreasonable.
[326 D F] 3.2 Here there is no particular feature of this legislation which can be said to create any unreasonable restriction upon the petitioners.
The concept of process being embodied in certain situation in the idea of manufacture, the impugned legislation is only making 'small repairs ' and that is permissible mode of legislation.
[326 E F] 3.3 Nor does the impugned legislation act harshly nor there is any scope for arbitrariness or discrimination.
It is clear from the objects and reasons wherein it was stated that the Central Excise Duty was levied for the first time on cotton fabrics in 1969, on man made fabrics (rayon of artificial silk fabrics) in 1954 and on woolen fabrics in 1955.
From the very early stages of the textile tariff, with a view to achieving progression in the rate structure and to aligning excise control with the demands of different producing sectors duties has been levied not only on grey fabrics but also at the stage of processing such as bleaching, dyeing and printing.
The Judgment of the Gujarat High Court in Real Honest Textiles and Ors.
vs Union of India (under appeal) according to the statement of objects and reasons of the Act VI of 1980 had upset the arrangements regarding levy of excise duties of textile fabrics.
The judgment also had the effect of disturbing the balance evolved between different sectors of the textile industry.
Furthermore, it was made clear that in so far as past assessments were concerned, refund of excise duties to manufactu 297 rers as ordered by the High Court would have only meant a fortuitous windfall so as to benefit such persons without any relief to the ultimate consumers A who had purchased the fabrics and had borne the burden of the duties.
In order to avoid this, the Act was passed.
[325 E H; 326 B C; 327 C] Krishnamurthi & Co. etc.
vs State of Madras & Anr., , referred to.
3.4 Where for the purpose of calculating assessable profits, a notional and conventional sum is laid down by the legislature to be arrived at on a certain basis, it is not permissible for the courts to engraft into it any other deduction or allowance or addition or read it down on the score that the said deduction or allowance or addition was authorised elsewhere in the Act or in the Rules.
A conventional charge should be measured by its own computation and not by facts relating to other method of computation.
The circumstances that thereby the benefit of any exemption granted by the legislation may be lost and that in some cases hardship might result are not matters which would influence courts on the construction of the statute.
A tax payer subject is entitled only to such benefit as is granted by the legislature.
Taxation under the Act is the rule and benefit and exemption, the exception.
And in this case there is no hardship.
[327 E G] D 3.5 When the textile fabrics are subjected to the processes like bleaching, dyeing and printing etc.
by independent processes, whether on their own account or on job charges basis, the value of the purposes of assessment under section 4 of the Central Excise Act will not be the processing charges alone but the intrinsic value of the processed fabrics which is the price at which such fabrics are sold for the first time in the wholesale market.
That is the effect of section 4 of the Act.
The value would naturally include the value of grey fabrics supplied to the independent processors for the processing.
However excise duty, if any, paid on the grey fabrics will be given proforma credit to the independent processors to be utilised for the payment on the processed fabrics in accordance with the Rules 56 A or 96 of the Central Excise Rules, as the case may be.
[327 G H; 328 A B] F 3.6 Read in that context and in the context of the prevalent practice followed so long until the decision of the Gujarat High Court in Real Honest case, there is no hardship and no injustice to the petitioners or the manufacturers of grey fabrics.
The fact that the petitioners are not the owners of the end product is irrelevant.
Taxable events is manufacture not ownership.
[328 B D] G 4.
Documentary evidence not produced earlier cannot be admitted at the late stage of final hearing of the case by the Supreme Court [308 E] (Per majority Varadarajan J. dissenting).
Different Courts sometimes pass different interim orders as the courts think fit.
The interim orders passed by particular courts on certain considerations arc not precedents for other cases may be on similar facts.
To contend 298 that once an interim order has been passed by the Supreme Court on certain A factors specially in fiscal matters, in subsequent matters on more or less similar facts, there should not be a different order passed nor should there by any variation with that kind of interim order passed.
In as much as that such variance creates discrimination is an unfortunate approach.
[329C E ] 2.
Every bench hearing a matter on the facts and circumstances of each case should have the right to grant interim orders on such terms as it considers fit and proper and if it had granted interim order at one stage, it should have right to vary or alter such interim orders.
The court made the following suggestions (i) A consensus, however, should be developed in matters of interim orders in fiscal matters specially in cases involving indirect taxes where normally taxes have been realised from the consumers but have not been paid over to the exchequer or where taxes are to be realised from consumers by the dealers or others who are parties before the court, interim orders staying the payment of such taxes until final disposal of the matters should not be passed.
It is a matter of balance of public convenience Large amounts of taxes are involved in these types of litigations Final disposal of matters unfortunately in the present state of affairs in our courts takes enormously long time and non realisation of taxes for long time creates an upsetting effect on industry and economic life ceasing great inconvenience to ordinary people.
Governments are run on public funds and if large amounts all over the country are held up during the pendency of litigations, it becomes difficult for the governments to run and become oppressive to the people.
Government 's expenditures cannot be made on bank guarantees or securities.
In that view of the matter the Supreme Court shall refrain from passing any interim orders staying the realisations of indirect taxes or passing such orders which have the effect of non realisation of indirect taxes.
This will be healthy for the country and for the courts.
[329 E H; 330 A C]
