The two appellants, who were railway servants under the Government, were put up on trial under section 120B of the Indian Penal Code and section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(c) and 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The Sessions judge who tried the case found, in agreement with the unanimous opinion of the assessors, the appellants guilty and sentenced appellant No. i to rigorous imprisonment for three years and appellant No. 2 to rigorous imprisonment for two years.
The High Court on appeal affirmed the order of conviction and sentences passed on the appellants.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants in this court that the order of conviction and the sentences passed on them were illegal as they were not public servants under section 2 Of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
Held, that it was apparent from the words " for any of the purposes of that Code " used by section 137(4) Of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, as it stood prior to its amendment in 1955, that the bar created by that sub section applied, and was confined, to the purposes of the Indian Penal Code and could not be extended beyond its provisions.
In respect of offences other than those under the Code, therefore, neither sub section
(1) Of section 137, which applied only to offences under ' Ch.
IX of the Code, nor sub section
(4) of that section could apply and the question whether a railway servant charged with offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, was a public servant or not must be, decided under section of that Act.
29i Section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act adopts, the definition of a public servant contained in section 21 Of the Indian Penal Code, and since the main offences charged against the appellants were under that Act, and not under the Code, section 2 Of the Act would apply and they would be public servants within the meaning thereof.
Devi Ram Deep Chand vs The State, A.I.R. 1954 Punj.
189 disapproved.
Ram Krishan vs The State of Delhi, ; and C. A. Montorio vs The State of Ajmer, ; , considered.
