The Indian Railways Medical Service consists of Assistant Divisional Medical Officers Class I (before January 1, 1973 described as Assistant Medical Officers Class II), Divisional Medical Officers, Medical Superintendents, Chief Medical Officers and Director General of Medical Services.
The Petitioners in the writ petition who were Assistant Medical Officers Class II were confirmed, one in 1962 and the others in 1963.
During the years 1970 to 72 they were selected by Departmental Promotion Committees for officiating appointments to the Class I post of Divisional Medical Officers.
At that time the Indian Railway Medical Service (District Medical Officers) Recruitment Rules 1965 were applicable.
Those Rules were repealed and replaced by the Indian Railway Medical Service (District Medical Officers) Recruitment Rules 1973.
Under the Rules of 1965 and the Rules 1973 the posts of District Medical Officers were treated as selection posts.
819 The existing pay scale of Rs. 350 900 attached to the post of Assistant Medical Officer was revised by the Third Pay Commission and split into two A pay scales, a higher Class I scale of Rs. 700 1600 and a lower Class II scale of Rs. 650 1200 and the posts of Assistant Medical Officers were divided into those carrying the higher pay scale and those carrying the lower pay scale.
The upgraded posts in the higher pay scale of Rs. 700 1600 were designated as "Assistant Divisional Medical Officers".
The petitioners were placed in the higher pay scale of Rs. 700 1600 and were designated as Assistant Divisional Medical Officers with effect from January 1, 1973.
The Rules of 1973 were replaced by the Indian Railway Medical Service (Divisional Medical Officers/Senior Medical Officers) Recruitment Rules 1975, which were further replaced by the Indian Railway Medical Service (Chief Medical Officers, Additional Chief Medical Officers, Medical Superintendents and Divisional Senior Medical Officers) Recruitment Rules, 1978.
Under these Rules promotion is effected on the principle of "non selection", that is, on "seniority cum suitability" basis.
The Rules of 1965 showed that there were 101 posts in the grade of Divisional Medical Officers.
The Rules of 1973 mentioned 109 posts and referred to them as permanent posts only.
The Railway Ministry for the promotion of Assistant Medical Officers to the Class I posts of Divisional Medical Officers indicated the number of anticipated vacancies for the purpose of permanent promotion and the number of anticipated vacancies for the purpose of officiating appointments, the number under each category being specified zone wise.
A Class I Departmental Promotion Committee met on several occasions and considered the cases of candidates who had completed five years and above of service as Assistant Medical Officers for substantive promotion and for officiating promotion, the field of choice being extended to six times the number of vacancies.
The petitioners were selected on the basis of merit and appointed to officiate as Divisional Medical Officers on different dates in 1971 and 1972, except petitioner No. 7 who was promoted and appointed in 1974.
The Railway Board on October 30, 1979 published a combined seniority list of Divisional Medical Officers recruited directly or by promotion.
Respondents Nos. 4 to 64 included both promotees and direct recruits and were shown in that list.
The petitioners did not find place in the seniority list.
Subsequently on the basis of that seniority list, some of the respondent Divisional Medical Officers were appointed on August 31, 1934 to of officiate as Medical Superintendents.
In the Writ Petition under article 32 the petitioners challenged the validity of the combined seniority list dated 30th October, 1979 of Divisional Medical Officers and of the officiating promotions to the posts of Medical Superintendents as violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, contending: that they were promoted as Divisional Medical Officers much earlier than the promotee respondents; that their promotion was made by selection on the basis of merit 820 adjudged by the Departmental Promotion Committees under the Rules of 1965; that they had continued in service as Divisional Medical Officers against vacancies in permanent posts without interruption for periods ranging between 8 years to 12 years, and that the promotee respondents, who had held such posts for shorter periods, had been confirmed before the petitioners and shown senior in the seniority list and preferred for promotion as Medical Superintendents; that the petitioners should have been confirmed in the normal course; that the promotee respondents have been confirmed zone wise, and such confirmation cannot serve as a proper reference for determine seniority because when confirmation is granted zone wise, it depends on the fortuitous accrual of vacancies arising arbitrarily at different times and in different numbers in different individual zones; that if the date of confirmation is adopted as the criterion, confirmation should not be reckoned on a zonal basis.
Promotion to the post of Medical Superintendents, which is an all India cadre post should properly be drawn on an All India basis and that if confirmation has to be considered zone wise then for the purpose of promotion to the all India cadre of Medical Superintendents the only logical and uniform criterion should be the total length of continuous service as Divisional Medical Officers reckoned from the date of promotion; that for the purpose of fixing seniority in the grade of Divisional Medical Officers the seniority in the grade OF Assistant Medical Officers or Assistant Divisional Medical Officers is of no material significance because under the Rules in force when the promotion in the instant case were made, the petitioners were governed by the principle of selection on the basis of merit; that the quota prescribed for direct recruitment and for promotion under the Rules has been wrongly applied at the stage of confirmation when it should have been applied at the stage of appointment and that there is no provision for applying the principle of rotation of vacancies between direct recruits and promotees for the purpose of determining relative seniority between them.
The respondents, however contended: that the seniority list has been correctly prepared, it contains the names of only those officers who were either directly recruited as Divisional Medical Officers or had been approved for permanent promotion against the quota of posts reserved for them in vacancies allotted among the individual Railways on the basis of the cadre position of each Railway, and that none of the petitioners qualified for inclusion in the seniority list as they had been promoted in an officiating capacity to temporary vacancies in the posts of Divisional Medical Officers; that the petitioners have no right to be treated at par with those officers who were holding permanent posts on a confirmed basis, as confirmation was made on the basis of their selection for permanent promotion as Divisional Medical officers and their seniority was also fixed on that basis.
According to the practice followed by the Railway Administration three select lists were prepared.
List A set out the names of officers selected for substantive promotion against permanent vacancies.
List included the names of officers selected for officiating promotion against temporary vacancies.
The petitioners were placed in List B. The third list.
List C, bore the names of officers included in List by earlier Depart mental Promotion Committees but not considered as "suitable yet" for substantive promotion by subsequent Departmental Promotion Committees.
The inter se seniority between the direct recruit and the promotee Divisional Medical 821 Officers has been carefully fixed with reference to the direct recruitment and promotional quotas in force from time to time, without affecting the date of confirmation of the Divisional Medical Officers.
The petitioners cannot claim inclusion in the impugned seniority list as none of them had been promoted as Divisional Medical Officers on a permanent basis against the quota of seats reserved for such promotions under the relevant Rules, and cannot get weightage of five years of substantive service rendered in the lower grade because the principle providing such weightage for seniority has not been applied to the Medical Department of the Railways.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: 1.
The seniority list published by the Railway Ministry 's letter No. 752 E/530 (EI A) dated November 22, 1979 as well as the appointments made to the posts of Medical Superintendents by the Railway Ministry 's letter No. E(O) III 81 PM6 199 dated August 31, 1981 are quashed.
The Railway Administration is directed to draw up a fresh Seniority List of Divisional Medical Officers and to make fresh appointments from among Divisional Medical Officers to the posts of Medical Superintendents.
[847 H; 848 A B] 2.
There is nothing to indicate why the Railway Ministry sought to fill some of the vacancies in the permanent posts on a substantive basis and the others on an officiating basis.
The explanation offered is that substantive appointments were made to permanent vacancies and officiating appointments were made to temporary vacancies.
The documents on record do not speak of temporary vacancies at all.
There is no material suggesting the need for treating some of the vacancies as temporary and to show that some vacancies would have ceased to exist within the foreseeable future or upon the happening of some anticipated contingency On the contrary, the petitioners had continued to fill the vacancies to which the petitioners were appointed should be regarded as permanent vacancies.
[831 D G] 3.
The explanation that officiating appointments were made when some of the candidates considered for substantive appointment were found to be of inferior calibre for such appointment and, therefore, some of the vacancies were left to be filled on an officiating basis is not plausible.
The communication of the Railway Ministry to the Departmental Promotion Committee specifying the number and nature of the appointments to be made was issued long before the cases of individual officers were examined for promotion.
It was only after the Departmental Promotion Committee had been informed of the Railway Ministry 's requirement that it commenced its task of selecting candidates for substantive appointment and for officiating appointment.
The material produced by the respondents shows that the petitioners did not at any time fall within the field of choice for making substantive appointments.
That was because their seniority in the grade of Assistant Medical Officers did not at the relevant time bring them within the field of choice for substantive appointment.
They were considered for officiating appointment only, and not for substantive 822 appointment.
It was the mere statistical fact of their seniority as Assistant Medical Officers, and not their merit, that precluded their consideration for substantive appointment as Divisional Medical Officers at the relevant time.
[831 H; 832 A D] 4.
If from the outset the temporary vacancies had been regarded as permanent vacancies, and substantive appointments had been made instead of officiating appointments, the petitioners would have been appointed substantively to those permanent vacancies.
In the entire field of choice in which they fall, they were found to be the most meritorious.
Ever since their respective appointments in 1971, 1972 and 1974 the petitioners have continued to serve without interruption as Divisional Medical Officers and were doing 50 when this writ petition was filed in 1981.
They have continued to serve in the posts for a significant number of years, and there is no indication that their appointments will come to an end merely because the vacancies have been described as temporary.
There is no material to show that their confidential Records contained any adverse entries or that otherwise they were not fit on their merit for substantive appointment to permanent vacancies.
The petitioners have now been appointed Divisional Medical Officers on a substantive basis.
The only reason why they were not originally appointed substantively to permanent vacancies as Divisional Medical Officers is that only a limited number of substantive appointments was desired by the Railway Ministry and the petitioners were not considered for those substantive appointments because they did not fill within the field of choice, having regard to their place of seniority in the lower grade of Assistant Medical Officers.
[832 F H; 833 A B] 5.
The petitioners are entitled to say that they should be considered at par, for the purpose of fixing seniority, with those appointed to permanent posts in a substantive capacity.
There is nothing to indicate why they should not be entitled to the benefits which the substantive holders of permanent posts enjoy.
For the purpose of determining seniority among promotees the petitioners should be treated as having been appointed to permanent vacancies from the respective dates of their original appointment and the entire period of officiating service performed by them should be taken into account as if that service was of the same character as that performed by the substantive holders of permanent posts.
[834 A C] Baleshwar Prasad vs State of UP.,[1981] 1 S.C.R. 449, 462 and O.P. Singla vs Union of India, , followed.
In the instant case, as the petitioners are continuing to hold the posts of Divisional Medical Officers for several years, the inclusion of their names in List is wholly meaningless.
[834 D] 7.
If length of continuous service reckoned from the date of promotion furnishes the criterion for determining seniority between the petitioners and the substantively appointed Divisional Medical Officers, that principle should apply 823 with equal vigour as between the petitioners and those promotee respondents who also began to serve, like the petitioners, in officiating appointments as Divisional Medical Officers.
There is no reason why such promotee respondents, although appointed subsequently to the petitioners, should be treated as senior to them.
[834 F] 8.
The date of confirmation is the material date for determining relative seniority.
The Railway administration in according confirmation has been influenced by two principle factors.
One is that confirmation has been considered zone wise.
Confirmation has been made as vacancies have arisen within a particular zone.
The vacancies differ from zone to zone.
They no not arise equally in different zones but turn on factors peculiar to each zone, such as the strength of the cadre within the zone, and the differing number of vacancies arising in different zones at different times.
In other words, confirmation based on the placement of an officer within a particular zone must necessarily be determined by factors confined to that zone and unrelated to an all India standard.
It is apparent that confirmations limited by such a local perspective cannot serve as a legitimate base for drawing up a seniority list intended for effecting promotion, to the all India cadre of Medical Superintendents.
To adopt the date of confirmation as the governing point in such circumstances is to inject an element of inequality into the very foundation of the promotion process.
It is conceivable that the Railway Administration has adopted the rule of according confirmations zone wise for certain practical consideration and the validity of that practice need not be adjudicated on.
But such confirmations cannot legitimately constitute the basic norm for drawing up a seniority list of Divisional Medical Officers for the purpose of promotion to the grade of Medical Superintendents.
The principle must be that seniority should be related to the length of continuous service as Divisional Medical Officers reckoned from the date of promotion to the post; such service should not include any period served in a fortuitous, stop gap or adhoc appointment.
[834 G H; 835 A E] 9.
After implementation of the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission, all the officers comprising the two groups were Assistant Medical Officers, and an Assistant Medical Officer was nothing but as Assistant Medical Officer who drew the higher revised scale of pay.
The conclusion is inescapable that Assistant Divisional Medical Officers were, for the purpose of promotion as Divisional Medical Officers, governed by the Rules of 1965 and the Rules of 1973.
Those Rules mention Assistant Medical Officers as a source of recruitment, without referring to any limiting qualification that they should be officers drawing a Class II scale of pay.
The expression "Assistant Medical Officer" in those Rules is comprehensive enough to include all Assistant Medical Officers, whether drawing the class II revised scale of pay or entitled to the Class I revised scale of pay.
And all such Officers were, under those Rules, governed by the principle of selection on merit for promotion as Divisional Medical Officers.
The Assistant Medical Officers were designated as Assistant Divisional Medical Officers with effect from January 1, when the Rules of 1965 were still in force The Rules of 1973 came into force in August, 1973.
It is true that when Assistant Medical Officers were designated as Assistant Divisional Medical Officers in the revised Class I scale of Rs. 700 1600 by 824 Notification No. E(GP) 74/1/153 dated July 24,1976, the notification spoke of the "appointment" of Class II Assistant Medical Officers as Assistant Divisional Medical Officers, but having regard to the terms of the schedule to the letter dated December 31, 1974 such notifications must be understood to mean that the Assistant Officers had been assigned the Class I scale of Rs. 700 1600 and merely described as Assistant Divisional Medical Officers.
They continued to belong to the broad category of "Assistant Medical Officers".
Upon Assistant Medical Officers being designated as Assistant Divisional Medical Officers under the new scheme, there was no corresponding amendment in the Rules of 1965 or the Rules of 1973.
It is for the first time, under the Rules of 1978, that the post of Divisional Medical Officer is described as a "non selection" post to be filled by promotion from the ranks of Assistant Divisional Medical Officers and by direct recruitment.
The only Assistant Medical Officers now entitled to promotion as Divisional Medical Officers were those drawing the Class I scale of Rs 700 1600 and designated as Assistant Divisional Medical Officers".
The new sub division of Assistant Medical Officers described as Assistant Divisional Medical Officers was deemed to have taken birth on January 1, 1973 five and a half years before the Rules of 1978 were brought into force.
It could never have been intended that this class of Officers should exist in a vacuum where no rules operated.
There was no vacuum because they were comprehended within the expression "Assistant Medical Officer" in the Rules of 1965 and the Rules of 1973, and therefore, no amendment was considered necessary in those Rules to take congnisance of this class.
[837 E H; 838 A G] 10.
The principle of selection by merit, enunciated in the Rules of 1965 and the Rules of 1973 governed the promotion of Assistant Medical Officers (including Assistant Divisional Medical Officers) to the posts of Divisional Medical Officer before the Rules of 1978 came into force Both before and after January 1, 1973, during the period before the Rules of 1978 came into force the principle of "non selection", that is seniority cum suitability in the lower grade, which was provided in the Rules of 1978 did not apply to the promotion of Assistant Medical Officers (including Assistant Divisional Medical Officers to the posts of Divisional Medical Officers.
[838 G H; 839 A] 11.
The confirmation of the petitioners and all other officers appointed to the posts of Divisional Medical Officer before the Rules of 1978 came into force must be governed by the Rules of 1965 and the Rules of 1973.
The promotions and appointments made under the Rules of 1965, on the repeal of those rules by the Rules of 1973, fall to be governed by the Rules of 1973.
[839 D E] 12.
The inter se seniority between the members of a service will ordinarily depend on the date of entry into the grade.
That is an event governed by the Rules of recruitment, whether it be direct recruitment or pro motion on the basis of selection on merit or on the basis of seniority in the lower grade or some other factor.
Where seniority is fixed in a grade according to the length of service in that grade, that implies a reference back to the date of entry.
It is wholly immaterial when the seniority list is prepared.
[840 C E] In the instant case, applying the criteria for determining seniority vis a vis the promotee respondents and the petitioners to the case of petitioners and the 825 direct recruits, the petitioners must be held senior to the direct recruits appointed subsequently to them.
[842 D E] O.P. Singla vs Union of India, , followed.
The rules themselves do not lay down any principle of rotation.
They specify the quotas only.
It was for the first time on May 26/27, 1976 that the Railway Ministry by its Letter No E(O) I 74/SR 6/10 directed that the seniority of Class II officers of the Medical Department, promoted to Class I Senior Scale against the quota earmarked for a particular year vis a vis the officers recruited against the direct recruitment quota for that year will be filed on a rotational basis with reference to the direct recruitment and promotional quotas in force from time to time.
" This directive, however, can be of no assistance to the respondents.
It may be open to an administration to work the quota rule through a principle of rotation, but that implies that a quota rule is being actively operated and effect is being given to it.
In the present case, the quotas laid down by the Rules were not observed at all and no direct recruitment was made, during the years 1973 to 1976.
Indeed, the process of direct recruitment was employed on a substantial basis only from 1978 onwards.
There was power under Rule 7 of the Rules of 1973 to relax the provisions of those rules, which would include the provision requiring the observance of specified quotas for recruitment from promotional and from direct recruitment sources.
[843 G H; 844 A D] A. Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors., [1983] 3 S.C.C. 601, followed, and A.K. Subraman & Ors. etc.
vs Union of India & Ors., [1975] 2 S.C.R. 979 inapplicable.
P.S. Mahal vs Union of India, ; and Bishan Sarup Gupta vs Union of India, [1975] Supp.
S.C.R 491, referred to.
[847 E] 14.
The directly recruited Divisional Medical Officers are entitled to seniority only from the date of their entry into service and not from any anterior date, and therefore cannot enjoy seniority above the petitioners.
