The appellants manufactured Mopeds under three different brand names.
Mopeds were liable to excise duty under the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944.
The bulk of the Mopeds manufactured were delivered to various dealers at depots maintained by the appellants.
The appellants entered into agreements with these dealers in connection with the sale of the Mopeds.
The agreements provided that the dealer shall keep a deposit with the appellants as a guarantee for due fulfillment of the agreement, that the dealers were entitled to get a commission on each Moped, that the dealers were to insure the Mopeds against all risks of pilferage, non delivery etc.
(Clause 5), and that, the dealers were to maintain adequate organisation for sale and service of the Mopeds including show rooms, service stations, repair shops etc.
(clause 6).
The appellants submitted their price lists for approval to the excise authorities and the price lists showed the price charged by the dealers after deducting the commission of Rs. 110, Rs. 145 and Rs. 165 or the three different brands of the Mopeds.
The price lists were approved by the excise authorities and excise duty was paid by the appellants on the basis of these price lists at the time of clearance of the Mopeds.
This practice continued till 30th April, 1979, when the Assistant Collector of Central Excise took the view that the appellants were not entitled to deduction of the aforesaid commission from the price charged to the dealers for arriving at the excisable value of the Mopeds.
The Assistant Collector thereupon issued a notice of demand under clauses (a) and (b) of Rule 10(1) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 dated 15th May, 1979 to the appellants demanding a sum of Rs. 6,96,177.09 representing the amount of differential duty in respect of Mopeds manufactured and cleared during the period 1st October 1975 to 30th April, 1979.
955 The appellants assailed the aforesaid notice in a writ petition in the High Court contending, that they were entitled to deduction of the amount of commission in arriving at the excisable value of the Mopeds and that the demands made by the Assistant Collector was not justified.
The Division Bench however dismissed the writ petition and held that the discount of Rs. 110, Rs. 145 and Rs. 165 for the different varieties of Mopeds was being given for organising sale and providing facilities and this was clearly an example of the mutual interest which the 'related person 's and the appellant were having in the business of each other, and that the commission of Rs. 110, Rs. 145 and Rs. 165 in respect of the different varieties of Mopeds was not 'trade discount ' and therefore not liable to be deducted from the price charged to the dealers and the Assistant Collector was right in making the demand from the appellants.
In the appeal to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that: (1) there was absolutely nothing to show that the dealers were related persons vis a vis the appellants and that the High Court was clearly wrong in taking that view, and (2) the Division Bench was not right in taking the view that the commission of Rs. 110, Rs 145 and Rs. 165 per Moped in respect of the different varieties of Mopeds sold to the dealers could not be said to be trade discount.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The amounts allowed to the dealers by the appellants in respect of different varieties of Mopeds of Rs. 110, Rs. 145 and Rs. 165 were clearly trade discount liable to be deducted from the price charge to the dealers for the purpose of arriving at the excisable value of the Mopeds.
[963G] 2.
The judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court set aside.
The notice dated 15.5.79 issued by the Assistant Collector of Central Excise and the order dated 25.9.79 made in pursuance of that notice are quashed.
The respondents will refund to the appellants any payments made by the appellants under the order dated 25th September, 1979 within 3 months [963H; 964A] 3.
The concept of 'related person ' was for the first time introduced in the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 by the Amending Act 22 of 1974 and the expression 'related person ' came to be defined in clause (c) of sub section (4) of Section 4.
[960G] 4.
In Union of India vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd it has been held that the definition of 'related ' person in sub section (4) (c) of Section 4 is not unduly wide and does not suffer from any constitutional infirmity and, Union of India vs Attic Industries Ltd, ; that the person who is sought to be branded as a 'related person ' must be a person who is so associated with the assessee that they have interest, directly, or indirectly, in the business of each other.
It is not enough that the assessee has an interest, direct or indirect, in the business of the assesses.
It is essential that the assessee and the person alleged to be a 'related person, must have interest direct or indirect, in the business of each other.
[961A; F G] 956 In the instant case, the terms of the agreement indicate that the dealers where wholesale buyers of the Mopeds manufactured by the appellants and since the transactions between them were on principal to principal basis, the dealers could not, therefore, be said to be related persons vis a vis the appellants.
The excise duty on the Mopeds were hence liable to be determined only on the basis of the wholesale price charged by the appellants to the dealers.
[962 D E] 5.
The amount allowed to the dealers has been referred to in the agreement as 'commission ' but the label given by the parties cannot be determinative because it is for the court to decide whether the amount is trade discount, or not whatever be the name given to it.
[963B] In the instant case, the clauses of the agreement clearly show beyond doulet that under the agreement the Mopeds were sold by the appellants to the dealers and the dealers did not act as agents of the appellants for the purpose of effecting sales on their behalf.
It is clear from clause 5(a) that the bills in respect of the Mopeds delivered to the dealers were to be sent by the appellants through their bankers and it was the responsibility of the dealers to collect the bills for the purpose of taking delivery.
Clauses 5(b) laid an obligation on the dealers to insure the Mopeds against all risks, pilferage, non delivery etc.
and under clause (6) the dealers were liable to maintain adequate organisation for sale and service of the Mopeds.
The Relationship between the appellants and the dealers was clearly on principal to principal basis and in these circumstances the amount of Rs. 110, Rs. 145 and Rs. 165 allowed to the dealers in respect of the different varieties of Mopeds could not be regarded as anything other than 'trade discount '.
[963 B F]
