Notwithstanding the provision in section 105 of the Representation of the People Act (Act XLIII) of 1951 that every order of an Election Tribunal made under the Act shall be final and conclusive, the High Court and the Supreme Court have unfettered jurisdiction to examine whether the tribunal, in the exercise of its undoubted jurisdiction, has acted legally or otherwise, This jurisdiction cannot be taken away by a legislative device that purports to confer power on a tribunal to act illegally.
The legality of an act or conclusion is something that exists outside and apart from the decision of an inferior tribunal.
It is a part of the law of the land which cannot be finally determined or altered by any tribunal of limited jurisdiction.
The High Courts and the Supreme Court alone can determine what the law of the land is vis a vis all other Courts and tribunals and they alone can pronounce with authority and finality on what is legal and what is not.
All that an inferior tribunal can do is to reach a tentative conclusion which is subject to review under Articles 226 and 136 of the Constitution.
The jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226, with that of the Supreme Court above them, re main it , fullest extent despite section 105 of the Representation 2 of the People Act.
Limitations on the exercise of, such jurisdiction can only be imposed by the Constitution.
The powers of the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution are discretionary and, though no limits can be placed upon that discretion, it must be exercised along recognised lines and not arbitrarily.
In the exercise of their jurisdiction under Article 226, the High Courts should not act as Courts of Appeal or revision to correct mere errors of law which do not occasion injustice in a broad and general sense.
It is a sound exercise of discretion to bear in mind the policy of the legislature to have disputes about special rights, as in election cases, decided as speedily as may be.
The High Courts should not therefore entertain petitions for prerogative writs lightly in this class of case.
The appellant filed an election petition under section 100 of the Representation of the People Act.
He appeared on the first and 'Subsequent hearing at Kotah.
The proceedings were then adjourned for certain hearings at Udaipur.
The appellant did not appear on the first three hearings at that place so the tribunal proceeded ex parte.
His counsel appeared on the fourth hearing but was not allowed to take any further part in the proceedings because no good cause was shown for the earlier non appearance and so the tribunal refused to set aside its "ex parte order".
Held, (1) Under section 90(2) of the Representation of the People Act the procedure for the trial of election petitions is to be, as near as may be, the same as in the trial of suits under the Civil Procedure Code; (2) under the Civil Procedure Code there is no such thing as an ex parte order for non appearance" which precludes further appearance at an adjourned hearing until the Order is set aside.
If a party appears at an adjourned hearing the court has a discretion (which must be exercised judicially) either to allow him to appear oil such terms as it thinks fit, or to disallow further appearance; but (3) if he is allowed to appear then, unless good cause is shown under Order 9, rule 7 for the earlier non appearance the proceedings must continue from the stage at which the later appearance is entered and the party so appearing cannot be relegated to the position he would have occupied if he had appeared at the earlier hearing or hearings; also, (4) in exercising its discretion the court must see that justice is done to all concerned, including the witnesses Rule 6 (1) (a) of Order 9 of the Civil Procedure Code is confined to the first hearing of the suit and does not apply, per se to subsequent hearings.
0. 9, r. 7 gives a party a right to be relegated to the position he would have occupied if he had appeared at the earlier hearing or hearings if he shows good cause.
It does not per se prevent further appearance when no good cause is shown.
O. 17, r. 2 applies at the adjourned hearing and there, the Court is given a wide discretion to make such order as it thinks fit.
3 A code of procedure is a body of law designed to facilitate justice and further its ends, and should not be treated as an enactment providing for punishments and penalties.
The laws of procedure are grounded on the principle of natural justice which requires that men should not be condemned unheard, that decisions should not be reached behind their backs, that proceedings that affect their lives and property should not continue in their absence and that they should not be precluded from participating in them.
Subject to clearly defined exceptions the laws of procedure should be construed wherever reasonably possible, in the light of that principle.
The court is invested with the widest possible discretion to see that justice is done to all concerned.
No hard and fast rule can be laid down; and the court in the exercise of its judicial discretion will have, in a given case, to determine what consequences are to follow from non appearance.
An order awarding costs, or an adjournment, or the consideration of the written statement and the framing of the issues on the spot, can in some cases meet the ends of justice.
In other cases, more drastic action may be called for.
By "ends of justice" is meant not only justice to the parties but also to witnesses and others who may be inconvenienced.
The convenience of the witnesses, which deserves the greatest consideration, is ordinarily lost sight of in this class of case.
Justice strongly.
demands that this unfortunate section of the general public com pelled to discharge public duties, usually at loss and inconvenience to themselves should not be ignored in the over all picture of what will best serve the ends of justice; and it may well be a sound exercise of discretion in a particular case to refuse an adjournment and permit the plaintiff to examine the witnesses present and not allow the defendant to cross examine them.
But broadly speaking, after all the various factors have been taken into consideration and carefully weighed, the endeavour should be to avoid snap decisions and to afford the parties a real opportunity of fighting out their cases fairly squarely.
The Court must in every case exercise the discretion given to it.
Its hands are not tied by a so called "ex parts order", and, if it thinks they are tied by rule 7 of Order 9 of the Code, then it is not exercising the discretion which the law says it should, and in a given case interference may be called for.
Held, that the Election Tribunal did not exercise the discretion given to it by law because of a misapprehension that it had none.
It was directed to do so now and to proceed with the further hearing of the case in accordance with law.
Hari Vishnu vs Ahmed Ishaque ([1955] 1 S.C.R. 1104), Darga Shankar Mehta vs Thakur Raghuraj Singh ([1955] 1 S.C.R. 267), and Raj Krushna Bose vs Binod Kanungo ([1954] S.C.R. 913, 918), applied.
Hariram vs Pribhdas (A.I.R. 1945 Sind 98, 102), distinguished.
Sewaram vs Misrimal (A.I.R. , 14), overruled.
Venkatasubbiah vs Lakshminarasimham (A.I.R. , approved Balakrishna Udayar vs Vasudeva Ayyar (I.L.R. , 4 T. M. Barret vs African Products Ltd. (A.I.R. 1928 P.C. 261, 262) and Sahibzada Zeinitlabdin Khan vs Sahibzada Ahmed Baza Khan (5 I.A. 233, 236), applied.
Case remitted to, the Tribunal:
