The appellant was appointed as Store Keeper cum Accountant in one of the branches of the Madhya Pradesh Khadi and Village Industries Board, a body corporate constituted under the M.P. Khadi and Village Industries Act, 1959.
His services were terminated by an Order dated 23.9.1964 after giving one month 's notice.
The termination Was challenged before the Labour Court as amounting to retrenchment because it hat been passed without complying with provisions of the M.P. Industrial Relations Act, 1960, the charge sheet that was given to him on 27.4.1964 was based on false and baseless grounds and no enquiry was held prior to removal.
The appellant claimed reinstatement with full wages.
The Respondent Board contested the application contending that the Board was not an industry and that neither the M.P. Industrial Relations Act, 1960 nor the applied to it.
The Labour Court held that the termination of the services of the appellant amounted to retrenchment, set aside the Order of termination and directed reinstatement with half salary from the date of the Order till reinstatement.
The Board preferred a revision.
The Industrial Court affirm ed the order of the Labour Court and dismissed the revision petition.
642 The Board filed a petition under article 225 and 227.
The High Court allowed the writ petition, quashed the order of the Industrial Court and remitted the case to it to decide the facts afresh.
The Industrial Court after taking fresh evidence, again held in favour of the appellant, reaffirming its previous decision to reinstate the appellant.
The Board again moved the High Court, which set aside the orders of the Industrial Court and the Labour Court on the ground that they acted without jurisdiction.
The appellant appealed to this Court by certificate which was resisted by the Board on two grounds: (i) that it is not an industry within the meaning of the Act and (ii) that it does not employ more than 100 persons.
Allowing the appeal of the appellant employee, ^ HELD: 1.
The order passed by the High Court is set aside and that of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court are restored.
[651 B C] 2.
The M.P. Industrial Relations Act, 1960 is a separate Act in the State of Madhya Pradesh to regulate the relations of employees in certain matters and makes provisions for settlement of Industrial disputes.
Any concern, to become an industry, has to satisfy the definitions of "industry" and "undertaking" as contained in sections 2(19) and 2(33) thereof.
Such concerns have to satisfy yet another condition to attract the provisions of the said Act which relates to the number of the employees the concern employs.
Notification No. 9952 XVI dated 31st December, 1960 issued under sub 8.
(3) of 8. 1 of the Act, makes the provisions of the Act applicable only to an undertaking in the industries specified in the Schedule wherein the number of the employees on any date during Twelve months preceeding or on the date of the notification or any day thereafter was or is more than one hundred.
In the instant case, the evidence on record admits of no doubt that the Board employed more than 100 persons.
[645 A H; 646 A 4; 647 C] 3.
One of the functions of the Board under 8.
14 of the M.P. Khadi and Village Industries Act 1959 is "to support, encourage, assist and carry on Khadi and Village Industries and in the matters incidental to such trade or business".
The evidence shows that the Board supplies raw wool to Co operative Societies, so 643 that the Societies can engage themselves in useful work.
The Society after weaving raw wool, convert them into spun blankets and supply them to the Board.
The blankets so spun are not the properties of the Societies.
They have to be given back to the Board.
The blankets so supplied from various centres to the Board, have necessarily to be sold in the open market.
This act of sale would clearly come within the definition of the word 'trade ' or 'business ' as contemplated in Section 2(19) of the Act.
m e conclusion is, therefore, irresistible that the Board engages itself in the business of selling blankets.
It has, therefore, to be held that the Board is an 'industry ' within the meaning of the Act.
[650 B D; 651 A B]
