The appellant made an application on the 15th November, 1978 under chapter VII of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for the acquisition of the lands earlier purchased by Respondent No. 1 herein.
The Government issued on the 29th October, 1980 a notification for acquisition of the said land under section 4 of the Act which was published in the Government Gazette dated 30th October, 1980.
Respondent No. 1 objected to the said notification.
Subsequently the Government bled an enquiry under section SA of the Act and, after submitting a report in March 1981, on or about 10th April 1981, the Deputy Collector issued notice to Respondent No. I that enquiry under rule 4 of the Land Acquisition (Companies) Rules 1963 would be held on the 15th April, 1981 to which the latter filed his objections on merit by his letter dated 4th May, 1981.
On 26th October, 1983, agreement was executed between the government and the acquiring company.
A notification under section 6 that the land in question was needed for the purpose of development of tourism, was published in the Government Gazette dated 27th October 1983.
Respondent No. 1, thereupon, filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the said notifications under sections 4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act.
The High Court of Bombay (Goa Bench) quashed the said notifications on the first ground alone namely, the notifications were bad for prior non compliance with Rule 4 of the Land Acquisition (Companies) Rules 1963, and noted that it was not necessary to deal with other grounds of challenge.
Hence the appeal by special leave 938 Allowing the appeal and remitting the case back, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
ON a correct interpretation of the scheme of the Land Acquisition Act, it is not necessary that enquiry under rule 4 of the Land Acquisition (Companies) Rules, 1963 must in all cases precede issuance of the notification under section 4 of the Act.
In an appropriate cash if it is possible, enquiry under rule 4(1) may be held before the issuance of the notification under section 4.
But it is not a mandatory requirement that it must precede the issuance of the notification under the Act.
[949B C] RAJA Ram Jaiswal vs Collector, Allahabad & Another, (1980) 2 ILR Allahabad 269; conclusion approved.
Babu Barkya Thakur vs State of Bombay (now Maharashtra), ; at 1206, followed.
Abdul Husein Tayabali & Ors.
vs State of Gujrat l Ors.
, [1968] I SCR 597.
explained and distinguished.
A consepectus of the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act as well as Land Acquisition (Companies) Rules 1963 indicate that there are two purposes of acquisition of land one being for the public purpose and other for the purpose of a company, In case of acquisition for company, the appropriate Government has to satisfy itself that such acquisition is needed and would be useful also for public need.
[943E F] 2.2 Land Acquisition proceedings begin with the publication of the preliminary notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
When the acquisition is for a company the Purpose has to be investigated under section SA (by hearing objections and disposing them) or under section 40 necessarily after the notification under section 4 of the Act.
Under section 6 if the Government is satisfied after considering the report, if any, made under section 5A that any particular land was needed for public purposes or for a company a declaration shall be made to that effect subject to certain conditions stipulated therein.
Sub rule 4 of Rule 4 of the Land Acquisition (Companies) Rules 1963 provides that no declaration shall be made by the Appropriate Government under section 6 of the Act unless (i) the appropriate government had consulted the committee and had considered the report submitted under the said rule and the report if any, submitted under section SA of the Act and (ii) further any agreement under section 41 of the Act executed by the Company.
To complete the acquisition proceedings notification under section 6 of the Act is required.
Section 6 of the Act enjoins that the government has to be satisfied that the land is needed for public purpose or for a company and after declaration is made the acquisition is complete after the award is made and possession of the land is taken when the land vests under section 16 in the government free from encumbrances.
Section 4 939 does not require as such this satisfaction of the government.
The government might initiate acquisition proceedings "if it appears" to the government that land is needed either for public purpose or for a company.
That might appear to the government by enquiry aliunde or on a petition or application made by any company.
Whether the need is proper or genuine that can be found by the government subsequently after notice under section 4 of the Act.
An enquiry under rule 4 might be made before issuance of the notification under section 4 of the Act but it is not a sine qua non for the issuance of the notification under section 4 to have an enquiry under rule 4 of the Rules.
The scheme and the language of the Act and the Rules do not indicate that.
Therefore, section 4 as such does not require government to be satisfied, it is sufficient if it appears to the government that land is needed either for public purpose or for a complain.
It may so appear to the Government either by independent inquiry or from reports and information received by the government or even from an application by the company concerned.
[943H; 944A F] 2.3 It is undoubtedly true that a notification under section 4 can be issued after enquiry under rule 4.
But under the scheme of the Act, the converse is not correct, i.e., the enquiry under rule 4 must always precede notification under section 4 of the Act, though enquiry under rule 4(1) must precede action under section 6 of the Act.
Further certain matters which are required to be done under rule 4 cannot be done before because the officer or the person authorised by him would have no authority, unless notification under section 4 is issued.
[945G H; 946A] Rule 4(4) does not prohibit or forbid issuance of notification under section 4 of the Act unless rule 4(1) has been compiled with.
If it is now insisted that there should be no issuance of notification under section 4 of the Act before enquiry under rule 4 then this sub rule has to be re written by stating that no notification under section 4 and no declaration under section 6 issued or made as the case may be unless the requirements mentioned in clauses (i) and (ii) of sub rule (4) of rule 4 have been complied with.
On the contrary, it will be contrary to the scheme and purpose of the acquisition proceedings because the compensation for the acquisition has to be fixed under section 23 of the Act keeping the market rate as or the date of F the issuance of the notification under section 4 in view.
If it be that the enquiry as contemplated by rule 4 should also precede issuance of notice under section 4 of the Act then that may upset the fixation of the market value and escalation of price with the passage of time between publication of the notification under sections 4 and 6 would make acquisition difficult.
[945A.D] 3.
In a matter of this nature where several Contentions factual and legal are urged and when there is scope of an appeal from the decisions Of the Court, it is desirable as was observed by the Privy Council long time ago to avoid delay and protraction of litigation that the court should, when dealing with any matter dispose of all the points and not merely rest its decision on one single point.
[950A B] 940
