For the assessment year (1945 46) the assessable income of the appellant bank was computed by the Income tax Officer by splitting up its income into two heads " interest on securities " and " business income ", and deducting the business loss from interest on securities.
In the previous year the assessment showed a loss which was computed by setting off the " business loss against " interest on securities The appellant claimed that in the computation of its profits for the assessment year in question it was entitled to set off the carried over loss of the previous year under section 24(2) Of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
The Income tax Officer rejected the claim on the ground that the loss was under the head " business " and so could not be set off against income from securities under section 24(2) of the Act.
Both the Income tax Appellate Tribunal and the High Court, on reference, held that in view of sections 6, 8 and 10 of the Act " interest on securities " could not be treated as business income and therefore the appellant could not claim a set off under section 24(2).
On appeal to the Supreme Court it was contended for the appellant that (1) sections 8 and 10 should be so read that where the securities in the hands of an assessee are trading assets, section 8 would be excluded, being restricted to capital investments only, and the matter would fall under the head " business " within section 10, and (2) in any case, even if the income from securities fell under section 8, the appellant would be entitled to a set off under section
24(2) because it carried on only one business, namely banking, and the holding of securities by it was part of the said business.
Held, that the scheme of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, is that the various heads of income, profits and gains enumerated in section 6 are mutually exclusive, each head being specific to cover the item arising from a particular source and, consequently, " interest on securities " which is specifically made chargeable to tax under section 8 as a distinct head, falls under that section and cannot be brought under section 10, whether the securities are held as trading assets or capital asset," 80 Commissioner of Income Tax vs Chunnilal B. Mehta, Salisbury House Estate Ltd. vs Fry, (1930) 15 T. C. 266, Commercial Properties Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bengal, and H. C. Kothari vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, , relied on.
The question whether the holding of securities by the appellant formed part of the same business within section 24(2), could not be decided in the absence of a finding that the securities in question were a part of the trading assets held by the appellant in the course of its business as a banker, and the case was remitted to the High Court for a fresh decision on the reference after getting from the Tribunal a fuller statement of facts.
