The petitioners, who were Railway employees, were either dismissed or removed from service without holding any en quiry for striking work, paralysing railway services, as sualting and intimidating loyal workers and superior offi cers, etc.
The writ petitions flied in the High Courts challenging the orders of dismissal or removal stood trans ferred to this Court, heard along with other writ petitions and civil appeals and by judgment dated 11th July, 1985 dismissed.
The, petitioners sought review of the said judgment alleging that during the course of arguments, parties had proceeded on the assumption that the Court would decide only the seven questions framed by the then Hon 'ble the Chief Justice, and the individual petitions on merits would he dealt with either by the Division Benches of this Court or by the respective High Courts, that the parties addressed their arguments and submissions only on those general ques tions, that written submissions were made only in transfer case No. 55 of 1982 amongst all the railway matters, that none of the petitioners had been given any opportunity to argue their cases on merits, that the judgment under review dismissed all the transferred cases and thus all these petitions stand decided on merits also, that this has caused serious prejudice to their cases and, therefore, in the interest of justice, another opportunity should he given to argue the petitions on merits.
Dismissing the Review Petitions, HELD: Per P.N. Bhagwati, C.J., V.D. Tulzapurkar, R.S. Pathak and D.P. Madon, JJ.
899 The Review Petitions are dismissed as there is no sub stance in the grounds urged.
Per M.P. Thakkar, J. dissenting.
There is good ground to entertain the Review Peti tions and issue notice to the other side for hearing.
[904E] 2.
There is substance in the grounds because no notices have been issued on the Review Petitions and the averments have not been controverted by the other side.
In the majori ty judgment also it has not been stated that the averments are factually untrue.
[901D E] 3.
That the matter of Narpat Singh was not argued on its individual merits is correct.
Unless the factual averments made in Para 9 of the Review Petition are shown to be un true, these may be considered adequate to vitiate the im pugned order on the ground that it manifests non application of mind and is built on 'no evidence '.
[902C] 4.
In the majority judgment the proposition.
of law has been enunciated that the pleasure under Article 310(1) can be exercised even by an authority specified in the Act or rules made under the proviso to Article 309.
[902D E] 5.
The power under Article 310(1) is exercisable even by the President or Governor, not on his personal satisfaction, but with the aid and on the advice of the Council of Minis ters.
Can the same power be exercised by a Divisional Me chanical Engineer or any other lower functionary acting on his own, there being no question of his acting with the aid or advice of the Council of Ministers? Can the D.M.E. who does not even act in the name of the President, surrogate for the President? It is certainly an important Constitu tional issue which requires to be examined, but has not been examined from this perspective though the point was debated.
[903B D] 6.
Will it not tantamount to speaking in two voices to hold that principles of Natural Justice need not be complied with even in regard to the quantum of punishment to be inflicted on a workman, even though the law declared so far demands that even a black marketeer cannot be black listed without observing the principles of Natural Justice? Is a workman who 'sweats ' for the Nation not entitled to the same treatment as a black marketeer, who 'bleeds ' the Nation? [903D E] 900 7.
The workers certainly have a right to struggle and strive for economic justice in a country the Constitution of which in the Preamble, proclaims it to be a "Sovereign SOCIALIST Secular Democratic Republic".
Going on strike in the course of such a struggle cannot be characterized as holding the country to ransom and be frowned upon.
Nor can they be condemned as seekers of private gain for endeavour ing to remove their economic distress and plight to bring about a just society.
And it cannot be said on that account that it is not "reasonably practicable" to hold the enquiry in the case of any workman if there is a country wide gener al strike by workers.
[904B 904D] 8.
Article 311(2)(b) was surely not designed by the Founding Fathers in order to enable 'breaking ' of a strike called in support of workers ' demands for socio economic justice.
The issue therefore deserves to be examined in the light of this perspective.
[904D]
