The appellant is a share broker and a member of the Delhi Stock Exchange an exchange recognised by the Central Government under the Securities Contract Regulations) Act, 1956.
The respondent, a non member had dealings in shares and securities with the appellant as principal to principal between 14th July to 27th September, 1960, in respect whereof Contract Notes (ex.
P. 1 to P. 31) in the prescribed form where issued by the appellant and were signed by the respondent.
Each one of the Contracts contained an arbitration clause couched in very wide terms requiring the parties thereto to refer all their disputes or claims to arbitration as provided in the Rules, Regulations and Bye laws of the Exchange.
Under these transactions a sum of Rs. 5923 became due and payable by the respondent to the appellant but since the respondent raised a dispute denying the claim, the said dispute was referred to the arbitration of two arbitrators Mr. Prem Chand and Mr. P.S. Khambete (both members of the Exchange) the former being the nominee of the appellant and the latter being the appointee of the Exchange on the respondent 's failure to nominate his arbitrator when called upon to do so.
The arbitrators held their proceedings in which the respondent participated though he inter alia raised a contention that he was not a party to the reference and would not be bound by the Award that might be made on the basis of such unilateral reference.
The Arbitrators made their Award on 18th April, 1961, allowing the claim of the appellant with costs against the respondent.
In response to the notice of filing the Award in the Court, the respondent filed objections to the Award on several grounds such as denial of the existence of the agreement of reference, that he was not a member of the Exchange, that the Contract Notes had not been signed by him, that the arbitrators had mis conducted themselves and the proceedings, that the Award had been improperly procured etc.
Negativing all the objections, the Sub Judge Delhi recorded the findings that the Contract Notes bore the signatures of the respondent and as such under the arbitration clause contained in each one of them read with the relevant Bye laws there was a valid Agreement for Reference to arbitration made the Award a rule of the Court and passed a decree in favour of the appellant on 7.9.1962.
568 In the first appeal preferred to the High Court, a learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court entertained a doubt as to whether the respondent could be said to be a party to the actual Reference to arbitration even though each of the Contract Notes containing the arbitration clause was signed by the respondent, since the respondent had not joined in nominating his arbitrator despite service of notice asking him to do so, and whether on that account the Reference could be said to be unilateral, referred the same to a larger Bench on 5.1.1971.
The Full Bench answered the question in favour of the respondent, relying on certain observations made by the Supreme Court in Seth Thawardas Pherumal vs Union of India reported in (1955) 2 SCR P. 48 and took the view that notwithstanding the fact that respondent had signed the Contract Notes and had thereby become consenting party to the arbitration agreement tho actual reference to arbitration of the two arbitrators required the assent of both the parties and since to such reference the respondent had not given his consent it was a unilateral reference to arbitration and as such the resultant Award would not be binding on the respondent.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.1 The question whether fresh assent of both the parties for the actual reference is necessary or not must depend upon whether arbitration agreement is a bare agreement or it is an arbitration agreement as defined in section 2(a) of the Act.
If it is the latter, then, clearly the actual reference to arbitration would be consensual and not unilateral and no fresh assent of the parties would be necessary nor will resort to section 20 be necessary.
Instead the party desirous of going to arbitration can resort to remedies available to him under Chapter II of the ; and in a case like the instant one he can, as the appellant, did, proceed under the relevant Bye laws.
[582 C E] 1.2 It is true that the defines the two expressions "arbitration agreement" and "reference" separately.
Section 2(a) defines an "arbitration agreement" to mean "a written agreement to submit present or future differences to arbitration, whether an arbitrator is named therein or not '` while section 2(e) defines a "reference" to mean "a reference to arbitration".
The latter expression obviously refers to an actual reference made jointly by the parties after disputes have arisen between them referring the said disputes for adjudication to a named arbitrator or arbitrators, while the former expression is wider as it combines within itself two concepts, (a) a bare agreement between the parties that disputes arising between them should be decided or resolved through arbitration and (b) an actual reference of a particular dispute or disputes for adjudication to a named arbitrator or arbitrators.
If that be so, it stands to reason that only when the arbitration agreement is of the former type, namely, a bare agreement a separate reference to arbitration with fresh assent of both the parties will be necessary and in the absence of such concensual reference resort to section 20 of the will be essential but where the arbitration agreement conforms to the definition given in section 2(a), the party desiring arbitration can straightaway approach the arbitrator or arbitrators and resort to section 20 of is unnecessary because 569 consent to such actual reference to arbitration shall be deemed to be there as the second concept is included in the agreement signed by the parties, and the aspect that differences or disputes actually arose subsequently would be inconsequential because the arbitration agreement as defined in section 2(a) covers not merely present but future differences also In other words, in such a case there will be no question of there being any unilateral reference.
In every case the question will have to be considered as to whether the arbitration agreement is a bare agreement of the type indicated earlier or an arbitration agreement as defined in section 2(a) of the Act.
[574 D A; 575 A C] 2.1 On a plain reading of the arbitration clause contained in the Contract Notes read with relevant Bye laws it is abundantly clear that the arbitration agreement herein is not a bare arbitration agreement but is clearly an arbitration agreement as defined in section 2(a) of the of 1940.
In other words, the assent of the parties to actual reference is already there in the agreement; in addition there is a statutory reference.
Therefore, the reference being consensual (and also statutory) the resultant award would be valid and binding on the parties to the transactions.
This case was not a case of unilateral reference.
Resort to section 20 of the on the part of the appellant before approaching the arbitrators for adjudication was unnecessary and the Award was and is binding on the respondent.
[577 H; 578 A C] 2.2 The arbitration clause contained in the Contract Notes read with relevant Bye laws make two or three things very clear.
In the first place the arbitration clause is couched in a very wide language inasmuch as it makes arbitrable not merely the claims or disputes arising out of the transactions specified in the Contract Note but also "all claims differences and disputes in respect of any dealings, transactions and contracts of a date prior or subsequent to the date of this Contract (including any question whether such dealings, transactions or contracts have been entered into or not)".
Secondly the arbitration clause incorporates a provision that all such claims, differences and disputes shall be submitted to and decided by arbitration" in Delhi as provided in the Rules, Regulations and Bye laws of the Exchange; this is a pointer to consensual submission in the clause.
Thirdly, Bye laws 247(a) which governs these transactions in terms constitutes the actual reference to arbitration and under Bye laws 248(a) and 249(1) the reference is to two arbitrators who would be the nominees of each one of the parties to the disputes and provision is made empowering the Board of Directors or President to appoint arbitrator in case a party fails to nominate his own; in other words once a contract is made subject to Rules, Regulations and Bye laws (framed under the rule making power) there comes into existence a statutory submission or reference to arbitration.
[577 D H] 3.1 The true scope and effect of the observations of the Court in Seth Thawardas Pherumal 's case must be read in the proper perspective and not in a truncated manner or divorced from the context of specific issue which arose for determination before the Court in that case.
It will be clear that these were neither intended to apply generally to all references nor to lay down the wide proposition that there can be no reference to arbitration except through the 570 Court under section 20 unless both parties join in it.
The observations were made in the context of the specific issue that arose before this Court and were not and are not intended to apply generally to all references.
The statement that in the absence of either, agreement by both sides about the terms of reference, or an order of the Court under section 20(4) compelling a reference the arbitrator is not vested with the necessary exclusive jurisdiction ' makes it clear that the observations were confined to the references of specific questions of law.
Ordinarily the Court has jurisdiction to set aside an award if an illegality or an error of law appears on the face of it and it is only when a specific question of law has been referred to the arbitrator for adjudication that his decision thereon falls within his exclusive jurisdiction and cannot be interfered with by the Court howsoever erroneous it might be.
The true effect of these observations is that even in the case of an arbitration agreement which squarely falls within the definition of that expression as given in section 2 and which is not a bare arbitration agreement there would be included in it a consensual actual reference by the parties of all their disputes including questions of law that may arise later but the arbitrator 's award on such questions of law would not be within his exclusive jurisdiction since specific question or questions of law cannot be said to have been referred to him as required by the law of arbitration but though the reference would be valid the award and his decisions on questions of law is erroneous on the face of it would be liable to be set aside by the Court.
This is for from laying down the wide proposition that there can be no reference to arbitration except through the Court under section 20 unless both the parties join afresh in the actual reference.
[579 A C; 581 F H; 582 A C] Seth Thawardas Pherumal vs Union of India [1955] 2 SCR P. 48 discussed and explained.
