Pursuant to a registered deed of exchange dated July 16, 1951 executed between the parties, the appellant withdrew a suit for specific performance of an alleged contract against the State Government under which the Government were to resume his plot No. C/91 in 'C ' Scheme allotted to him by Improvement Trust, Jaipur for a sum of Rs 5000 in 1951 and give in exchange another plot in the same scheme on the same terms.
Under the terms of the deed, the State Government agreed to give in exchange plot No. O/17 in 'C ' Scheme to the appellant on resumption of his plot bearing no C/91.
In terms thereof, the appellant handed over possession of his plot No. C/91 to the State Government but the State Government on their part did not give possession of the exchanged plot to him.
Thereupon, the appellant brought a suit for possession of the exchanged plot and for mesne profits thereof.
It was revealed in answer to the interrogatories served by the appellant that the exchanged plot had already been transferred by the State Government to Thakur Hari Singh of Achrol under the orders of the Home Minister, Government of India dated January 8,1945 and that plot No. C/91 which belonged to the appellant was then in possession of the Raj Pramukh Maharaja of Jaipur.
The appellant accordingly impleaded Thakur Harisingh of Achrol as a party to the suit and sought permission from the Central Government under section 86 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to join Maharaja Mansinghji of Jaipur as a party to the suit.
The objection raised by Thakur Harisingh of Achrol as to the pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court was sustained and the Civil Judge, Jaipur City returned the plaint for presentation to the proper Court.
It transpired during the pendency of the aforesaid suit that the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India had addressed a letter dated January 3, 1956 to the then Chief Minister of Rajasthan conveying that it was felt that the appellant had a case and should be given the exchanged plot and if that was not feasible he should be restored back in possession of plot No. C/91.
In response to the same, the Chief Minister addressed a letter dated February 3, 1956 to the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs conveying the anxiety of the State Government to settle the claim of the appellant and intimated that the appellant had agreed to the appointment of the Town Planning Officer, Jaipur as the assess or who had been asked to assess the 645 value of the land and submit his report, with a request that the Government of India should defer its decision in fairness to the State Government for a couple of months as it was felt that it might be possible to settle the claim without any unreasonable delay.
The Town Planning Officer by his report (Exh. 5) dated February 21, 1956 put the valuation of the disputed land in 1951 admeasuring 5,000 square yards at Rs. 7 per square yard at 35,000 and to this he added Rs. 826.50p as the cost of construction of a boundary wall i.e. Rs. 35,826 50p.
in all.
[651 G H, 652 A] The State Government declined to pay the compensation.
The appellant instituted the present suit for recovery of Rs. 47,741.50p.
as damages i.e. Rs. 35,826.50p.
to wards the value of disputed land and Rs. 11,915 as compensation.
The Civil Judge held that on the admission of the plaintiff as P W. 6 and his witnesses Secretary, Urban Improvement Board.
P.W. 3 and the Deputy Minister it was clear that the Town Planning Officer was appointed merely to assess the value of the disputed land and that it was never agreed that whatever appraisement or valuation that he may make would be binding on both the parties, nor did the Deputy Minister make any commitment that such assessment would be binding on the State Government and that therefore the appraisement or valuation could not be treated as an 'admission of liability ' under section 20 of the Evidence Act, 1872 on the part of the State Government.
It was further held that the correct value on the basis of the notification issued by the Urban Improvement Board clearly showed that the part rate of the Municipal Committee was not applicable to the disputed land which was situated outside the walled city.
The suit was decreed in part for Rs. 17,000 with damages by way of interest at 6%.
On appeal, the High Court held, that the plaintiff had to prove that the State Government had agreed to be bound by the assessment made by the Town Planning Officer, before s.20 of the Act, 1872 could be attracted and that there was no evidence that the State Government had ever agreed to be bound by the said assessment and that reliance cannot be placed upon the letter dated February 3, 1956 of the Chief Minister, as the Chief Minister was not examined as a witness.
It upheld the finding of the Trial Court that the appraisement or valuation made by the Town Planning Officer was not binding on the State Government, and that the disputed land was of an inferior type and affirmed the judgment and decree of the Trial Court.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Admissions may operate as estoppel and they do so where parties had agreed to abide by them.
The word 'information ' occurring in section 20 of the Evidence Act, 1872 is not to be understood in the sense that the parties desired to know something which none of them had knowledge of.
Where there is a dispute as regards a certain question and the Court in need of information regarding the truth on that point, any statement which the referee may make is nevertheless information ' within the purview of section 20.
section 20 is the second exception to the General rule laid down in section 18.
It deals with one class of 646 vicarious admissions, that is, admissions of persons other than the party.
Where a party refers to a third person for some information or an opinion on a matter in dispute, the statements made by the third person are receivable as admissions against the person referring.
The reason is that when a party refers to another person for a statement of his views, the party approves of his utterance in anticipation and adopts that as his own.
The principle is the same as that of reference to arbitration.
The reference may be by express words or by conduct, but in any case there must be a clear admission to refer and such admissions are generally conclusive.
[651 A B; G H; 652 A] 2.
The High Court was not right in excluding from its consideration the Chief Minister 's letter dated February 3, 1956 on the ground of want of proof.
The document by itself does not substantiate the plaintiff 's claim that the parties had by mutual consent agreed to appoint the Town Planning Officer to ascertain the value of the disputed plot as an appraiser or valuer.
[653 H; 654A] 3.
The High Court was justified in upholding the judgment of the Subordinate Judge that the report of the Town Planning Officer making an appraisement or valuation at Rs. 35,826.50p could not be treated as an admission under section 20 of the Evidence Act, on the basis of which the plaintiffs ' claim for damages had to be decreed.
[654 B C] 4.
This Court as well as the High Court and the Subordinate Court had ample power to restitute the plaintiff by granting him compensation for the value of the property of which he had been deprived in the years 1951.
Taking all factors into consideration it is just and proper to award the appellant a sum of Rs. 25,000 as compensation towards the value of the exchanged plot.
The plaintiff having been deprived of the property he was entitled, a reasonable rate of interest on the amount is necessary.
The Court has ample power under proviso to section I of the Interest Act 1839 to award interest on equitable grounds.
The reasonable rate of interest would be 6% per annum on the compensation amount of Rs. 25,000 from August 13, 1951, the date of dispossession till August 31, 1959, the date of judgment of the Subordinate Judge and thereafter at 9% per annum thereon till realization.
[654 D; 655 C; 656 BC] Satinder Singh vs Amrao Singh ; ; referred to.
