A conspiracy to commit criminal breach of trust in respect of the funds of a company by utilising the same to purchase the controlling block of shares of the company itself for the benefit of the appellants was alleged to have been entered into between December 1, 1948, and January 31, 1949.
It was the prosecution case that the modus operandi was to screen the utilisation of these funds by showing them as having been advanced for legitimate purposes and invested on proper security but in fact utilising the same for payment to the appellants.
One of the main issues was whether the loans by way of advance of the funds of the company on January 20, I949, were genuine transactions or bogus or makebelieve, and the question was whether the evidence relating to the further transactions entered into outside the period of the conspiracy in 1949 and I950 with a view to the screening of the original transactions, was admissible in law.
Held: (1) In relation to the main purpose of the prosecution viz., proof of the bogus character of the transactions of January, I949, the transactions of I949 and I95o entered into outside the period of conspiracy must, having regard to the ramifications, be taken to be integrally connected and relevant to make out their bogus character, though such evidence may necessitate reference to and narration of the acts of the conspirators beyond the period of conspiracy.
(2) The conduct of each individual co conspirator including his acts, writings and statements irrespective of the time to which it relates can be relied on by the prosecution to show the criminality of the intention of the individual accused with reference to his proved participation in the alleged conspiracy to rebut a probable defence that the participation, though proved, was innocent.
Such evidence is admissible under section 14 Of the Indian Evidence Act.
Makin vs The Attorney General for New South Wales, L. R. ; , relied on.
162 Per Jagannadhadas J.
Under section 10 of the Indian Evidence Act the evidence of acts, statements or writings of a co conspirator either under trial or not on trial but outside the period of conspiracy would not be admissible against the other conspirators in proof of the specific issue of the existence of the conspiracy on the authority of Mirza Akbar vs The King Emperor, (1940) L.R. 67 I.A. 336.
