A firm (JTC) obtained the sole selling agency for the products of a manufacturer for two years with a right of renewal.
A few months later, under a deed of assignment, the firm assigned the benefits of the agreement to the assessee company under which the assessee carried on the business as sole selling agents for the products of the manufacturer.
Under the deed of assignment the assessee company should take over not the whole of the business of the firm but only the benefit of the contract with the manufacturers in consideration whereof the assessee was to pay to the firm as and by way of royalty, an amount equal to 75% of their profits and commission, remuneration and other moneys received from the manufacturers.
The assessee had the option to renew the agreement.
In its income tax return the assessee claimed under section 10 (1) (sv) of the Act deduction of a sum of Rs. 7.93 lacs, which under the deed of assignment lt was required to pay to the firm, but the authorities below rejected the claim.
On appeal the Appellate Tribunal held that although no ascertained sum was mentioned for acquiring the right or the enduring benefit, the amount was spent by the assessee for acquiring an asset of enduring benefit, and therefore, the expenditure was capital expenditure.
On reference although the High Court held that the asset acquired by the assessee was of an enduring nature, purporting to follow the decision of this Court in Travancore Sugars Chemicals Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala lt held that the annual payment by the assessee of 75% of its profits was not in the nature of capital expenditure.
It was contended on, behalf of the Revenue that if the amount had been spent for obtaining a capital asset the assessee would not be entitled to claim it as a deduction.
518 On behalf of the assessee it was contended that once the assessee had paid 75% of its profits to the firm, the amount was no more in its hands as income and since 8.
10(1) envisage the levy of tax on real income in the assessee 's hands this was / t income within the meaning of S.10(1) and was not taxable.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: On the finding of the High Court that the expenditure related to acquisition of a capital asset, it was not admissible as a deduction under section 10(2) (xv) of the Indian Income Tax Act 1922.
[528 G].
It is well settled that if an expenditure is made for acquiring or bringing into existence of an asset for the enduring benefit of the business, it is properly attributable to capital and is of the nature of capital expenditure.
The aim and object of the expenditure would determine, whether it is capital expenditure or revenue expenditure.
The source or the manner of the payment would be of no consequence.
Where a company had acquired an asset in consideration of recurring payment of certain sum per year which was a right to carry on its business unfettered by any competition from outsiders within the area it was held to be in the nature of a capital asset and the payment was not deductible under section 10(2) (xv) of the Act.
[524 A,C,G] Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax = [1955] S.C.B. 1972 applied.
In Travancore Sugars and Chemicals Ltd. which the High Court purported to follow there was a substantial aud definite amount of outright cash payment over and above which an indefinite annual payment had been stipulated.
The tests laid down in this case were not intended to be of general application but were given to bring into bold relief the special aspects of the case.
The Court itself has pointed this out.
Therefore, the High Court erred in importing this reasoning as a test of general application to be applied to the facts of the prevent case.
[528 D,E] In the instant case, the High Court has categorically found that a capital asset had been acquired under the agreement.
The assessee was a new company and had no other business.
Under the contract lt acquired the right to carry on the business on a long ter basis subject to renewal of the agreement.
Therefore, 519 the first of the broad tests l it down in Assam Bengal cases that A the expenditure was made for initial outlay applied and on the finding that a capital asset had been acquired, the expenditure is not liable as a deduction.
[528 F G] 2.
There is no merit in the assessee 's submission.
If the amount had been spent for obtaining a capital asset, the assessee would not be entitled to claim it as a deduction under section 10(1) (xv).
[531 C]
