Section 3(1)(a) of the U.P. Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) Act, 1961 provides for imposition of tax on the purchase of sugarcane by the owners of sugar factories.
Section 14(1) of the Act empowers the State Government to grant remission in whole or in part of the tax payable in the public interest, with a view to (a) encourage or regulate the supply of sugarcane to, or its purchase by the factories, or (b) encourage the establishment of new factories, or (c) assist factories established after the crushing season 1957 58 and purchasing sugarcane yielding low sugar recovery.
The Central Government by a notification dated September 29, 1973 issued under cl. (3) of the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966, fixed the minimum price of sugarcane for factories situated in eastern U.P. at Rs. 8.38 per quintal.
To meet the growers demand for a higher price the Government of U.P. refixed the sugarcane price at Rs.12.25 per quintal for the sugar mills situated in the east zone.
The sugar factories not being in a position to pay the higher price approached the State Government who by two notifications dated January 25, 1975 issued under s.14(1)(a) of the Act granted remission in purchase tax to the extent of Re. 0.51 per quintal to twenty sugar factories in the area for the assessment year 1973 74.
The appellants and some other factories having been denied any remission in purchase tax, challenged the notifications by filing petitions under article 226 of the Constitution which were dismissed by the High Court.
943 In these appeals by special leave, it was contended for the appellants that the State Government in refusing to extend the remission to the appellants had discriminated against them by singling them out for treating differently as the encouragement and regulation contemplated by cl.(a) of s.14(1) of the Act was necessary to all the factories in the eastern zone and not to a fortunate few, and that the impugned notifications suffered from the vice of article 14 of the Constitution in as much as the Government had discriminated between the factories falling in the same group as those which had a recovery of 8.5 or less had been granted remission, while the appellants who were also in similar position had been left out.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Article 14 of the Constitution forbids class legislation but permits reasonable classification.
It, however, must fulfil the twin requirements: (1) it must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group, and (2) that the intelligible differentia must have a relationship to the object sought to be achieved by the statute.
[950 C D] 2.
Section 14(1) of the Act confers a discretionary power on the State Government.
It has been left entirely to the State to decide whether any particular factory should be granted remission or not, guided by the purpose set out in the relevant clause.
Neither in cl.
(a) nor in any other clause of section 14(1) there is anything to indicate that the State Government must grant remission to all sugar factories for encouraging or regulating the supply of sugarcane.
[948 E F] 3.
The three clauses of sub section
(1) of s.14 of the Act have different object and purpose.
The purpose of granting the power of remission under cl.
(a) is encouragement and regulation of the supply of sugarcane, the object of cl.(b) is to encourage the establishment of new factories, and that of cl.(c) is to assist factories established after the crushing season 1957 58 and purchasing sugarcane yielding low recovery factory situated in one area or falling in one category may be in need of remission, while those which were not either 944 situated in that area or did not fall in that category may not need it.
Though the power conferred by cl.(a) is to be exercised for the purpose of encouraging and regulating the supply of sugarcane, in exercising this power the State Government may legitimately take the view that this purpose necessitates the grant of remission only to the sugar factories purchasing sugarcane yielding low recovery.
[948 C E] 4.
The word 'encourage ' in cl.(a) of s.14(1) suggests that the State Government is required to exercise the power where it feels that the sugar factory requires the help for the purpose of making purchases of sugarcane.
The word 'regulate ' contemplates that the said power can be exercised with a view to take measures to promote the sale of sugarcane.
If the power conferred by cl.(a) of s.14(1) has been exercised for the purpose of granting remission to only those sugar factories which purchase sugarcane of low recovery, there is nothing wrong in so doing.
[949 D E] 5.
In the instant case by granting the remission only to sugar factories purchasing sugarcane of low recovery, the State Government has not violated article 14 of the Constitution.
Nor was there any contravention of the provisions of cl.(a) of s.14(1).
Such a question would have arisen if the grant of remission were founded on a ground extraneous to the provisions of section 14(1).
[949 A B] 6.
The immediate factor affecting the economy is the recovery of sugar from sugarcane and the sugar content in the cane produced goes a long way to determine the cost of sugar.
Thus, the sugar factories which were purchasing sugarcane yielding low recovery are distinguishable as a class separately from those which did not fall in it and there was a reasonable basis to classify those left out of that group.
[950 F G] Anant Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of Gujarat & Ors., , referred to.
