The respondent assessee claimed deductions in his assessments relating to the assessment years 1962 63 to 1964 65 in respect of payments of interest on loans taken from Kalinga Foundation Trust and others and certain dividend transactions relating to the shares of Kalinga Tubes, Ltd. The Income Tax officer issued a letter to the assessee requesting him, inter alia, to produce evidence and prove (i) that the cash credits appearing in his account in the name of Kalinga Foundation Trust were genuine; and (ii) that 39,000 shares of Kalinga Tubes Ltd. standing in the names of shareholders were not really his own investment.
After examining the assessee 's evidence and on the basis of documentary evidence and government records and on the basis of local enquiries made, the Income Tax officer came to the conclusion that no trust in the name of Kalinga Foundation Trust really existed and even if it existed, it had no funds of its own and that the name "Kalinga Foundation Trust" was used by the assessee as a camouflage to put through his unaccounted money.
Accordingly, all cash credits appearing in the books of accounts of the assessee himself or in the books of other concerns or persons or remittances of actual payments in the name of Trust were treated by the Income Tax officer as moneys coming out of the undisclosed sources of the assessee and accordingly assessed the same as his income from undisclosed sources.
All interest and dividend received in the name of the Trust were included by the Income Tax officer in the assessment of the assessee as his own income.
The Income Tax officer was also of the opinion that the moneys advanced in the name of the Trust to several persons in connection with the acquisition of 39,000 shares of Kalinga Tubes Ltd. which were 27 issued in 1358 actually belonged to the assessee.
Accordingly, the dividend of the said shares was treated as the income of the assessee and the expenses incurred in that connection were allowed as deduction.
The persons m whose names the 39,000 shares of Kalinga Tubes Ltd. stood, were treated by the Income tax officer as benamidars of the assessee.
Against the orders of assessment, appeals were filed by the assessee before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner who set aside the assessments for the years under consideration and remanded the matters back, to Income tax officer to frame issues and give due opportunity to the assessee to cross examine the witnesses in the light of the observations made m the order.
Again, against the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the appeals were filed.
It was argued before the Tribunal on behalf of the appellant assessee; (i) that on the basis of the facts emerging on an examination of assessee 's evidence and facts found on the basis of documentary evidence, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner should have confirmed the assessments; (ii) that local inquiries and oral testimony had been used by the Income tax officer to support the conclusions already arrived at on an examination of assessee 's own evidence and corroborated by documentary evidence and therefore the Appellate Assistant Commissioner should not have set aside the assessment on the ground that the persons who were examined by the Income tax officer should have been allowed to be cross examined by the assessee; (iii) that the gist of the enquiries had been communicated to the assessee to enable him to meet the case against him and it was for the assessee to produce before the Income tax officer the persons who had collected the funds for the Kalinga Foundation Trust as the Income tax officer was not bound by the technical rules of evidence; (iv) that it had collected evidence to prove that these shares were purchased by the assessee benami in the names of the shareholders named; (v) that the assessee had created a private registered Trust in 1949 out of his own properties having the same name as Kalinga Foundation Trust and that a reference to Kalinga Foundation Trust m some of the documents produced by the assessee was to this private trust and not to any public trust of the same name alleged to have been created at a public function.
After considering the material, the Tribunal held (a) that the Kalinga Foundation Trust came into existence in 1947 and continued after its registration in 1353 under the same name and style and the fund of the Trust was built up by collection of donation from the public at large; (b) that seven persons who were designed by the Income tax officer as benamidars of the assessee for the purchase of the 28 shares of M/s Kalinga Tubes Ltd, were not benamidars and the money required for the purchase of these shares had been raised by themselves; (c) that the investments made by the Trust in the assessee 's group of industries or with the assessee were from its own resources and funds and such investments were guided by business expediency and prudence; (d) that the Trust was comprised of persons of public repute and the control and management of the trust styled as "Kalinga Foundation Trust" were under the effective control of the Board of Trustees comprised of persons of public reputation and (e) that the income from interest, dividend, or any other usufruct arising out of the investments made by the Trust in the various concerns and the investments of the Trust which were included in the assessments of the assessee in the years under reference should be excluded as appertaining to a separate and distinct entity and therefore directed the Income tax officer to exclude these amounts from the assessments of the assessee in all these three years.
The revenue did not accept the findings of the Tribunal as correct.
Several questions of law were sought for from the Tribunal to be referred out of the decision of the Tribunal under section 256(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The Tribunal refused to refer these questions.
An application was made under section 256(2) of the Act asking for reference on those questions from the High Court.
The High Court also rejected the application and refused to call for a statement of case on those questions.
Hence these appeals by sepcial leave.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court, in the facts and circumstances of the case, was in error in not directing a reference under section 256(2) of the Act.
Therefore, the judgment and order of the High Court, are set aside and the Tribunal is directed to send a statement of case for the three years involved within six months of the date of receipt of this order on the questions mentioned in this judgment.
[44 C D] 2.
The Supreme Court in several decisions has laid down the following principles with regard to the scope of the jurisdiction of the High Court in directing reference on question of law where the decision rests primarily on appreciation of facts: (i) When the point for determination was a pure question of law, such as construction of a statute or document of title, the decision of the Tribunal was open to reference to the Court.
(ii) When the point for determination was a mixed question of law 29 and fact, while the finding of the Tribunal on the facts found was final, its decision as to the legal effect of those findings was a question of law which could be reviewed by the Court.
(iii) A finding on a question of fact was open to attack under reference under the relevant Act as erroneous in law when there was no evidence to support it or if it was perverse.
(iv) When the findings was one of facts, the fact that it is itself an inference from other basic facts will not alter its character as one of fact.
[36 F H; 37A] Sree Meenakshi Mills Limited vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, , Gouri Prasad Bagaria and others vs Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal, , I.C.I. (India) Private Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal 111, , Commissioner of Income tax (Central), Calcutta vs Daulat Ram Rawatmull, , Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa vs S.R. Jain, , relied upon.
The question as to whether the donations alleged were given by the assessee were the moneys raised by the Trust as donations from various people or not should be considered in its proper perspective but does not seem to have been done.
This is the most material portion and in not appreciating the material portion and discussing the evidence in respect of the same, there was non consideration of a relevant factor on a factual aspect and on this the question is whether the Tribunal 's decision was perverse in the sense that no man instructed properly at law could have acted as the Tribunal did, and secondly whether there was ignoring of all the materials and relevant facts in considering this aspect.
There was also evidence on record as to who had collected it to a certain extent, but no evidence on the other aspect.
Ignoring of that fact is a vital fact which influences the decision and a conclusion and must be judged in its proper perspective.
Therefore, the questions which arise on this aspect are questions of law, and the High Court should have directed the statement of a reference.
[41C G] 4.
Regarding the ownership of 39,000 shares in Kalinga Tubes Ltd. issued in 1958, this involved determination of two issues: (a) whether the ostensible holders of these 39,000 shares were real owners or benamidars and if they were benamidars, who were the real holders.
The Income tax officer was of the view, on facts suggested, that the 30 seven persons were benamidars of the assessee, whether they are so or not and what is the effect of the said fact is another question.
But these facts were not properly considered by the Tribunal to come to the conclusion as to whether, 39,000 shares of Kalinga Tubes Ltd. belonged to the assessee and not to the shareholders named.
[42 D E; 43 E F]
