The appellant was arrested under section 3 Of the (lV Of 1950) as amended by the amending Act Of 1951.
The grounds of his detention were communicated to him as required by section 7 Of the Act and his case was thereafter put up before the Advisory Board constituted under section 8 of the Act.
The Board reported that there was sufficient reason for his detention and thereupon the Cen tral Government acting under s.11 (1) of the Act confirmed the order of detention and directed that such detention should continue for a period of twelve months from the date of detention.
The appellant challenged the validity of this order by an application to the Punjab High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for a writ of habeas corpus and contended that sub section
(1) of section 11 of the Act was constitu tionally invalid as it contravened the provision of article 22(4)(a) of the Constitution.
The High Court found against him.
The same point was canvassed in appeal to this Court and it was contended that the expression 'such detention ' occurring in sub cl.
(a) of cl.
(4) of article 22 referred to detention for a period longer than three months mentioned in cl.
(4) Of the Article and section 11(1) of the Act, in so far as it permitted detention for more than three months without a specific report from the Advisory Board that there was sufficient cause for detention for more than three months, was ultra vires.
It was contended on behalf of the Union of India that the expression ,such detention ' referred to 'preventive detention ' occurring in the first line of cl.
(4) of article 22 and what an Advisory Board contemplated by sub cl.
(a) of that clause was intended to do was only to give its opinion as to whether there was sufficient cause for the detention itself and not as to the period of deten tion.
Held (per Bhagwati, jafer Imam, section K. Das and J. L. Kapur Jj.
Sarkar J. dissenting).
The contention advanced on behalf of the respondent was correct and the appeal must fail.
The expression 'such detention ' in article 22(4)(a) of the Constitution refers to preventive detention and not to any period for which such detention should continue and section 11(1) of the does not contravene the provision of article 22(4)(a) of the Constitution, 461 The true scope and effect of cl.
(4) of article 22 must be judged in the light of the entire scheme envisaged by article 22 and so understood, it becomes clear that the Constitution could not have intended that while the determination of the necessity of preventive detention should be left to the Executive, the determination of the period for which such detention should continue should be left to the Advisory Board.
In the very nature of things any decision as to the period of such detention can be taken only by the detaining authority upon which has been placed the responsibility for the detention.
The reference to the Advisory Board is intended to be a safeguard against any possible misuse of its power by the Executive and affords a machinery for the review of its decision on the basis of the representation made by the detenu, the grounds of detention or the report of any Officer who may have passed the order.
It is not a limitation on the Executive 's discretion as to the discharge of its duties connected with preventive detention.
A. K. Gopalan vs The State of Madyas, ; , referred to.
An examination of the scheme of the Act shows that its provisions are in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Constitution.
While the Act authorises detention for more than three months, it does provide for a reference of the order of detention to the Advisory Board and it is only after the Advisory Board has made its report that the Gov ernment can fix the period of detention under section 11(1) of the Act.
Makhan Singh Tarsikka vs State of Punjab, ; and Dattatreya Moreshway Pangaykar vs State of Bombay, ; , referred to.
Held further, that where the appropriate authority refuses to disclose any facts or particulars as to dates, persons and place, on the ground that such disclosure would be against public interest, under cl.
(6) of article 22, the person in detention cannot be heard to say, apart from the question of mala fides, that the grounds did not disclose the necessary facts or particulars or that in the absence of such facts or particulars he was not in a position to make an effective representation.
In the present case the grounds gave him a sufficient opportunity to make an effec tive representation.
Lawrence Joachim Joseph D 'Souza vs The State of Bombay, ; and State of Bombay vs Atma Ram Sridhay Vaidya, ; , relied on.
The test of the mala fides of the Executive in passing an order of preventive detention is whether the Executive in making such order was actuated by any ulterior purposes other than those mentioned In the order of detention.
462 Per Sarkar, J.
The expression 'such detention in article 22(4)(a) of the Constitution means detention for a period longer than three months and cannot mean detention simplic iter.
The object of article 22(4) is to impose a limitation on the power which the Parliament and the State Legislatures have, under article 246 of the Constitution, to enact laws for preventive detention by making such detention, where it is to be extended beyond three months, dependent on the opinion of an Advisory Board.
There is nothing in the language of article 22(4) to show that the safeguard the Constitution intended to provide by the opinion of the Advisory Board is available in other cases of detention.
A. K. Gopalan vs The State of Madras, ; referred to.
It cannot be said that since the Act provides for the ob taining of the opinion of the Advisory Board as to the sufficiency of the cause for detention, that opinion, in view of article 22(4)(a), necessarily is as to the sufficiency of the cause for detention for more than three months.
Where the statute does not contain the provision that the Advisory Board must report that in its opinion there is a sufficient cause for detention for more than three months, as required by article 22(4)(a) of the Constitution, the lacuna cannot be deemed to be cured by implication.
A statute which authorises detention for a period longer than three months without making a provision that the opinion of the Advisory Board must be obtained that there is sufficient cause for detention for a period longer than three months is to that extent invalid.
Makhan Singh Tarsikka vs The State of Punjab, (1952) S.C.R. 368 and Dattalreya Moreshwar Pangarkay vs
The State of Bom bay; , , considered.
