Section 16 G(2)(c) of the U.P. Intermediate Education Act, 1921 and regulations 55 to 62 in Chapter III of the Regulations framed thereunder provided for the transfer of service of Head of Institutions, teachers and other employees from one recognised institution to another.
The State Government promulgated the U.P. Secondary Education Services Commission and Selection Boards ordinance on July 10, 1981 with a view to establish a Secondary Education Services Commission and Secondary Education Selection Boards for selection of teachers in institutions recognised under the Education Act.
The ordinance was subsequently replaced by an Act in 1382 with retrospective effect.
Section 16(1)(a) of that Services Commission Act, 1982 provides that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Intermediate Education Act, 1921 or the Regulations made thereunder, every appointment of a teacher, sepcified in the Schedule thereto shall, on or after July 10, 1981, be made by the management only on the recommendation of the Commission.
However, before the Services Commission and the Selection Boards could be constituted the State Government had to make a number of Removal of Difficulties orders pursuant to the powers conferred under the aforesaid ordinance thereafter under the Services Commission Act.
The respondent in Civil Appeal No. 2072 of 1985 was directed by 2 the District Inspector of Schools to be appointed as an ad hoc Principal of an Intermediate College under the Removal of Difficulties order issued under the Services Commission Act.
The Committee of Management of the College which intended to fill the vacancy by transfer of a Principal from some other Intermediate college under the Education Act filed a writ petition in the High Court against that order of the District Inspector of Schools.
During the pendency of that petition, in an interim order the Court recognised that the respondent was working as an ad hoc Principal of that institution.
About this time the appellant, a Principal of another Intermediate College, sought his release from that college and the Committee of Management through a resolution dated December 3, 1982 accepted him as Principal of their college on transfer.
The District Inspector of Schools accorded approval to this transfer on February 19, 1983.
The respondent thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court against the appointment of the appellant by transfer under the Education Act.
The High Court allowed the writ petition of the respondent on April 9, 1985 by a majority following the Full Bench decision in Raghunandan Prasad Bhatnagar vs Administrator, Gandhi Vidyalaya lntermediate College, Khekra, (Civil Misc.
Writ Petition No. 10301 of 1983), wherein it had re examined the correctness of the views expressed by the Division Bench in Ratan Pal Singh vs Deputy Director of Education, (1983 U.P. Local Bodies & Educational Cases 34) and the Committee of Management, National Intermediate College Adali Indara, District Azamgarh vs The District Inspector of Schools, Azamgarh, (1983 U.P. Local Bodies & Educational Cases 198), holding that it was not permissible for the Committee of Management of an Intermediate College to fill the post of Principal of the College by transfer of a Principal from another Intermediate College after the commencement of the Services Commission Act.
The appellant appealed to this Court.
Civil Appeal Nos.
41)91 92 of 1985 were filed by the District Inspector of Schools in support of the claim of the appellant.
Civil Appeal Nos.
2628 and 2696 of 1985 and Special Leave Petition No. 9542 of 1385 arise out of substantially similar facts.
It was contended for the appellants (1) that s.16(1)(a) of the Services Commission Act, which provides for the appointment of a Principal by the management only on the recommendation of the Commission, did not in any way curtail the provisions regarding transfer of 3 a Principal from one college to another set forth in section 16 G(2)(c) of the A Education Act, (ii) that the right to apply for transfer from one institution to another under section 16 G(2)(c) of the Education Act was a condition of service of an employee which neither expressly nor by necessary implication could be said to have been abrogated by the Services Commission Act, and (iii) that the power of transfer under section 16 G(2)(c) should not be identified with the power of appointment.
It was further contended that making of amendments to the Regulations relating to transfer of service under the Education Act by the State Government even after the coming into force of the Services Commission Act indicates that section 16 G(2)(c) of the Education Act continues to be operative.
On the question: Whether in view of the enactment of the U.P. Secondary Education Services Commission and Selection Boards Act, 1382, the provisions of section 16 G(2)(c) of the U.P. Intermediate Education Act, 1321 and the Regulations made thereunder in respect of the transfer of a Principal from one Intermediate College to another continues to be operative and effective.
Dismissing the appeals and the special leave petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.(i) Upon the constitution of a Commission under the U.P. Secondary Education Services Commission and Selection Boards Act, 1982 it is no longer possible for a vacancy in the post of Principal, Headmaster or teacher of the categories mentioned in the Schedule to that Act to be filled by the process of transfer under section 16 G(2)(c) of the U.P. Intermediate Education Act, 1921 and its Regulations.
[16 B C] Raghunandan Prasad Bhatnagar vs Administrator, Gandhi Vidyalaya Intermediate College, Khekra, Civil Misc.
Writ Petition No. 10301 of 1983, approved.
Ratan Pal Singh vs Deputy Director of Education, (1983) U.P. Local Bodies and Educational Cases 34 and the Committee of Management, National Intermediate College Adali Indara District Azamgarh vs The District Inspector of Schools Azamgarh, (1983) U.P. Local Bodies and Educational Cases 198, overruled.
(ii) The context in which section 16 G(2)(c) of the Education Act and its Regulations operated, the authority conferred for that purpose and 4 the conditions subject to which it could be exercised stood completely superseded by the corresponding provisions of the Services Commission Act, its Rules and Regulations.
No duality in the source of power is contemplated.
The control over all appointments is exercised by a single source of power, namely, the Commission under the Services Commission Act.
[ 14 C D] (iii) The accuracy of the observation of the majority in Raghunandan Prasad Bhatnagar 's case that section 16 G(2)(c) of the Education Act should be limited to cases of mutual transfer of services between teachers serving in different institutions cannot be accepted having regard to the view taken that section 16 G(2)(c) cannot be pressed into service in regard to vacancies intended to be filled on the recommendation of the Commission under the Services Commission Act.
[16 F G] 2.
The scheme set forth in the Service Commission Act enacts a complete code in the matter of selection of teachers.
Section 10(I) requires the management to notify the vacancy to the Commission.
Section 16(1)(a) mandates that the appointment of a teacher specified in the Schedule to the Act shall be made only on the recommendation of the Commission notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Intermediate Education Act, 1921 or the regulations made thereunder.
Section 16(2) declares that every appointment made in contravention of section 16(1) shall be void.
Section 22 provides for punishment for contravention of the provisions of the Act.
Section 32 permits the provisions of the Education Act and its Regulations to continue in force in so far only as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Services Commission Act, its Rules and its Regulations.
[14E, 13B, 14D E, 13G H] 3.(i) The provision to apply for transfer under section 16 G(2)(c) of the Education Act could not be said to be a condition of service.
The scheme under that Act envisages the appointment of a Principal in relation to a specific college.
There is no State level service to which Principals can be appointed.
When a Principal is appointed in respect of a particular college and is thereafter transferred as a Principal of another college a new appointment comes into existence.
His appointment then is in relation to that college alone and to no other.
Different colleges may be owned by different bodies or organisations, so that each Principal serves a different employer.
Therefore, on filling the office of a Principal of a college a new contract of employment with a particular employer comes into existence.
[12 E G] 3.(ii) The power of transfer is encompassed within the power of 5 appointment in as much as in its essential nature the transfer of a teacher from one institution to another implies the cessation of his appointment in the former institution and his appointment to the latter.
Although the process of transfer may be governed by considerations different from those for the appointment of a person ab initio as Principal and move through a different machinery, the nature of the transaction remains the same, namely, that of appointment, and that is so whether the appointment be through promotion from the teaching staff of the same institution or by transfer from another institution.
[14 G H, 13A] 4.
The amendments made to the Regulations framed under the Education Act relating to the transfer of service even after the coming into force of the Services Commission Act cannot alter the true construction of the scope of the enactments under consideration.
If section 16G(2)(c) of the Education Act itself had been amended an inference would have been possible that the State Legislature when amending that provision never intended that the provisions of the Services Commission Act should supersede section 16 G(2)(c) of the Education Act.
[15G H, 16A B] In the instant case, the appointment of the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 2072 of 1985 as Principal by transfer having been made after July 10, 1981, was governed by the provisions of s.16(1)(a) of the Services Commission Act and was thus void.
It is, therefore, not open to him to challenge the continuation of the respondent in that office.
