The appellant carries on the business of manufacturing and selling glass mirrors.
Before March 1, 1979 glass mirrors were treated as exempt from duty as they were manufactured from duty paid glass.
This exemption was cancelled from March 1, 1979 and in Tariff Item 23A(4) the words 'other glass and glass ware ' were substituted for the words 'other glass ware '.
On January 28,1980, the Excise Authorities issued a notice calling upon the appellant to take out an L 4 Licence on the ground that glass mirrors were classifiable as 'other glass ' within the meaning of Tariff Entry No. 23A(4) of the First Schedule to the , as a product dutiable from March 1, 1979.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court and simultaneously preferred an appeal before the Collector (Appeals).
The High Court disposed of the writ petition with the observation that the appellant should pursue its appeal before the Collector (Appeals).
The appeal was allowed by the Collector (Appeals) holding that Tariff Item No. 68 applied to glass mirrors.
On appeal by the Revenue, the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal reversed the decision of the Collector (Appeals)and held that Tariff Item No. 23A(4) was attracted, and that the glass mirrors should be classified as 'glass ware '.
In the transferred cases, the manufacturers of motor vehicles place orders with the petitioner for the manufacture of screens for fitting in motor vehicles, commonly known as wind screens, rear 127 screens, door screens, and these were to be manufactured according to the specific shapes and measurements indicated in the orders for the different vehicles.
The Superintendent of Central Excise called upon the petitioner to pay excise duty on the basis that these screens fell under Tariff Item No. 23A(4) relating to 'glass and glass ware '.
The petitioner filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging the view taken by the Excise Authorities.
On the questions: "Whether glass mirrors fall under Tariff Item No. 23A(4) or Tariff Item No. 68 and whether glass screens fitted in motor vehicles as wind screen, rear screens and window screens fall under Tariff Item No. 23A(4) or Tariff Item No. 34A or Tariff Item No. 68 of the First Schedule to the ", allowing the Appeal and the Writ Petitions in the transferred cases, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) Glass mirrors cannot be classified as 'other glass and glass ware ' set forth in Tariff Item No. 23A(4), and must therefore fall under the residuary Tariff Item No. 68.
[132F G] (2) The original glass sheet undergoes a complete transformation when it emerges as a glass mirror.
What was a piece of glass simpliciter has now become a commercial product with a reflecting surface.
Into the process of transformation have gone successive stages of processing.
The evolved product is completely different from the original glass sheet.
What was once a glass piece in its basic character has no longer remained so.
It has been reduced to a mere medium.
That is clear if regard is had to the fundamental function and qualities of a glass mirror.
The power to reflect an image is a power derived not from the glass piece but principally from the silvering and other processes applied to the glass medium.
If any part of the coating is scratched and removed, that particular area of the glass mirror will cease to be glass mirror.
That simple test demonstrates the major importance attributable to the chemical deposit and coating which constitute a material component of a glass mirror.
It is not mandatory that a mirror employed for the purpose of reflecting an image should have a glass base.
Copper mirrors have been known from the dawn of history.
Now acrylic sheets are sometimes used instead of glass for manufacturing mirrors.
Therefore, a glass mirror cannot be regarded as a glass.
For the same reason, it cannot be classified as a 'glass ware ', for 'glass ware ' 128 means merchandise made of glass and understood in its primary sense as a glass article.
A glass bowl, a glass vase, a glass tumbler, a glass table top and so on are all articles in which the primary component is glass.
They are nothing more and nothing less.
Any treatment of an ornamental nature applied to such articles does not derogate from their fundamental character as glass articles.
It is quite the contrary in the case of a glass mirror.
[132H; 133A F] (3) It is a matter of common experience that the identity of an article is associated with its primary function.
It is only logical that it should be so.
When a consumer buys it, it is because it performs a specific function for him.
There is a mental association in the mind of the consumer between the article and the need it supplies in his life.
It is the functional character of the article which identifies it in his mind.
In the case of a glass mirror, the consumer recalls primarily the reflective function of the article more than anything else.
It is a mirror, an article which reflects images.
It is referred to as a glass mirror only because the word glass is descriptive of the mirror in that glass has been used as a medium for manufacturing the mirror.
The basic or fundamental character of the article lies in its being a mirror.
[134C E] State of Uttar Pradesh vs M/s. Kores (India) Ltd. ; , Porritts and Spencers (Asia) Ltd. vs State of Haryana [1978] (42) S.T.C. 433, Commissioner of Sales Tax U.P. vs Macneill & Barry Ltd. Kanpur, ; , Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of Rajasthan & Ors.
[1980] (3) S.C.R.1109, Geep Flashlight Industries Ltd. vs Union of India and Others [1985] (22) E.L.T.3, Indian Aluminium Cables Ltd. vs Union of India and Others.
; and Indo International Industries vs Commissioner of Sales Tax.
Uttar Pradesh, ; relied upon.
State of Orissa vs Gestetner Duplicators (P) Ltd. [1974] (33) S.T.C. 333 and State of Orissa vs Janta Medical Stores [1976] (37) S.T.C. 33 approved.
Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. vs Banaras Bead Manufacturing Co. [1970] (25) S.T.C. 100 distinguished.
(4) Classification of glass mirrors as 'glass and glass ware ' in Chapter 70 of the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature, does not advance the case of the Revenue, because the First Schedule to the Central Excises 129 and Salt Act was not modelled on the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature.
There is nothing to show that the Tariff Items were classified in the Schedule on the basis of the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature.
It was when the was enacted that the First Schedule to that Act was framed in accordance with the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature.
The glass mirrors were still not specifically mentioned under the .
They are now being brought in as such by the Customs Tariff Bill 1985.
[135E H] (5) Classification of glass mirrors by the Indian Standards Institution as "glass and glass ware" in its glossary of terms furnishes a piece of evidence only as to the manner in which the product has been treated for the purpose of the specifications laid down by the Indian Standard Institution.
[136A B] (6) The screens used in motor vehicles cannot be described as "glass or glass wares" under Tariff Item No. 23A(4).
No one dealing in or using the screens would consider them as "glass or glass ware".
They can only be considered as motor vehicle parts.
Even if it is assumed that they could fall under Tariff Item No. 23A(4) relating to "glass and glass ware" also, in as much as Tariff Item No. 34A is a special entry and Tariff Item No. 23A(4) is a general entry, the special must exclude the general and therefore also it is Tariff Item No. 34A which prevails and is attracted.
[138F H] (7) After the amendment of Tariff Item No. 34A by the Finance Act 1979 the scope of that Tariff Item is restricted to the 15 commodities specified therein.
That being so the screens manufactured by the petitioner merit classification in the residuary Tariff Item No. 68.
[138H; 139A B]
