A public limited company, working at a loss, having come to know of the proposal of the Department to reopen its income tax assessments for the previous years, disposed of its assets to the respondent firm, with which it had a partnership business, and employed the proceeds in paying off the debts due to various creditors, with the result that nothing was left for paying off the tax arrears of the company.
A suit under section 53 of the was instituted by the Union of India appellant for a declaration that the sale deed in favour of the respondent firm was invalid, inoperative and not binding on the appellant and other creditors of the transferor company and alleging fraudulent intent to defeat legitimate claims, which was decreed by the trial court.
The High Court, however, allowed the appeal holding that the appellant had failed to satisfy the provisions of section 53 inasmuch as the evidence showed that the company had utilised the proceeds arising upon the transfer of its assets in paying off all its other creditors, and that even if the company had done so in order to avoid payment of its income tax dues no relief could be granted to the appellant.
In this appeal by special leave it was urged for the appellant that the transfer was effected in favour of a person who was not a creditor, that the assets had been undervalued and that there was evidence to show that the benefit of the sale proceeds was enjoyed by the directors 176 of the company, who were also partners of the respondent firm.
Dismissing the appeal, the court, ^ HELD: It is open to a debtor to prefer one or more creditors over the others in the payment of his debts, and so long as he retains no benefit in the property the mere circumstance that some creditors stand paid while others remain unpaid, does not attract the provision of section 53 of the .
[180A B] Musahar Sahu and Another vs Hakim Lal and another, L.R. 43 Indian Appeals 104, In re Moroney, , 62, Middleton vs Pollock, , 108 and MA PWA MAY and another vs S.R.M.M.A. Chettyar Firm, 56 Indian Appeals 379, referred to.
In the instant case, there was no finding by the High Court in support of the contention that some of the debts discharged were owed to persons who were also directors of the company or that the consideration which passed for the sale of the assets was inadequate and that the assets had been undervalued.
This Court will not permit such questions of fact to be raised unless there is material evidence which has been ignored by the High Court or the finding reached by the Court is perverse.
[180B C] It has been found by the High Court that the sale was effected for the purpose of discharging genuine debts payable by the company and that the sale proceeds were really employed for paying off the creditors of the company.
Once it was also found that the consideration was not inadequate, it was immaterial that the transfer was effected in favour of a person who was not a creditor.
[180D E]
