The petitioners, who were displaced persons from Pakistan owning land therein, were also co sharers in a joint khata owned by some evacuees in a suburban village in East Punjab.
On their displacement they were in the first instance temporarily allotted agricultural land in that village.
Subsequently, as a result of the readjustment of allotments of the suburban land amongst the various groups who had quasi permanent allotments therein, which had to be carried out according to certain rules and instructions, the allotments of the petitioners were cancelled.
The case of the petitioners was that the allotment to them was on a quasi.
permanent basis and that, therefore, they had acquired certain rights in the land which constituted property, and they contended that the order cancelling the allotment was in violation of their fundamental rights to property under articles 19(1)(f), 31(1) and 31(2) of the Constitution of India.
Though the petitioners were allottees of agricultural land on the basis of a quasi permanent allotment it was admitted that they were not able to get a sanad under the rules for the lands originally allotted to them, when only they could obtain permanent property in the land.
It was not disputed that the cancellation of the allotment was under the purported exercise of powers under the provisions of the , and the rules framed thereunder taken with some executive instructions.
Held, that the interest of a quasi permanent allottee does not constitute 'property ' within the meaning of articles 19(1)(f), 31(1) or 31(2) of the Constitution of India, and accordingly the orders cancelling the allotments could not amount to violation of fundamental rights under those Articles.
The basic features of the interest of a quasi permanent allottee are that the ultimate ownership of the land is still recognised to be that of the evacuee and the allotment itself is liable to resumption or cancellation with reference to the exigencies of the administration of evacuee law.
The interest so recognised is, in its essential concept, provisional though with a view to stabilisation and ultimate permanence.
An interest in land owned by another in such a situation cannot be fitted into any concept of property in itself, 103 802 Julius vs Lord Bishop of Oxford, , distin guished.
Property in order that it may fall within the scope of article 9(1)(f) must be capable of being the subject matter of "acquisition and disposal".
But the interest of a quasi permanent allottee arises by statutory grant to a person of a specified class and is not capable of being acquired by an ordinary citizen in any of the normal modes.
Nor is it capable of being disposed of by the allottee himself by way of sale, mortgage, gift or will.
Consequently, article 19(1)(f) cannot apply to the case.
In order that article 31(1) may apply it is not enough that there is deprivation, but such deprivation must be without the authority of law.
In the present case the quasi permanent allotments of the petitioners were cancelled in enforcement of a right of resumption or cancellation which is an incident of such property, and hence the Article has not been infringed.
The interest of a quasi permanent allottee cannot be brought within the scope of article 3i(2) as it stood prior to the amendment.
The words "taking possession" or "acquisition" there are inappropriate in respect of the rights which constitute quasi permanent tenure.
In view of the word "deemed" occurring in article 31(2A) it appears likely that the amendment to article 31(2) was intended to be retrospective, but even then the amended Article taken with article 31(2A) is equally inapplicable as it contemplates acquisition or requisitioning (and taking possession) as a result of transfer of the ownership or of the right to possession.
Suraj Parkash Kapur vs The State of Punjab, (1957) LIX P.L.R. 103, in so far as it purported to decide that the interest in the land allotted to a quasi permanent allottee constitutes "property" which attracts the protection of fundamental rights under the Constitution, is disapproved.
Though a quasi permanant allotment does not carry with it a fundamental right to property under the Constitution, the rights of the allottee as recognised in the statutory rules are important and constitute the essential basis of a satisfactory rehabilitation and settlement of displaced land holders.
Until such time as the land holders obtain sanads to the lands, these rights are entitled to zealous protection of the constituted authorities according to administrative rules and instructions binding on them and of the courts by appropriate proceedings where there is usurpation of jurisdiction or abuse of exercise of statutory powers.
