The appellant was a clerk in the Excise Department of the State of Bihar.
In a disciplinary proceeding instituted against him, the Inquiring Officer found that six out of seventeen charges framed against him had been established and submitted his report accordingly on 9.11.1960.
The Excise Commissioner accepted the report of the Inquiring Officer and issued a show cause notice dated 8.9.1961 to the appellant as to why he should not be removed from service.
The appellant submitted his reply to the said notice on 1.11.1961.
After the submission of the Report by the Inquiring Officer, the civil surgeon of the area issued a certificate to the effect that the appellant was an invalid and he could not discharge his duties properly in the state of his health.
On 31.1.1962, an order was passed by the Excise Commissioner directing the retirement of the appellant on invalid pension under Rule 116 of the Bihar Pension Rules with effect from 19.7.1961.
On 5.10.1963 the Government of Bihar passed an order revoking the order of retirement under Rule 73(f) of the Bihar Service Code and thereafter the Excise Commissioner passed an order on 1.11.1963 dismissing the appellant from service.
The appellant challenged the said order of revocation of the order of retirement and the order of dismissal passed later on in the Patna High Court.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition but granted a certificate of fitness to appeal.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 In the absence of a provision which entitled the State 231 Government to revoke an order of retirement on medical grounds which had become effective and final, the order dated 5.10.1963 passed by the State Government revoking the order of retirement is without the authority of law.
The order of dismissal passed thereafter is also a nullity.
[234E F] 1.2.
The expression "compulsory retirement" found in Rule 73(f) of the Bihar Service Code refers to retirement of a Government servant on his attaining the age of superannuation.
The appellant 's case is not one of retirement from service on his attaining the age of superannuation.
No order asking the appellant to continue in service before he had attained the age of superannuation for the purpose of concluding a departmental inquiry instituted against him had also been passed by the competent authority.
On the other hand the appellant had been permitted to retire from service on invalid pension on medical grounds even before he had attained the age of superannuation.
Rule 73(f) of the Bihar Service Code is clearly inapplicable to the case of the appellant.
Further at the time the order of retirement on medical grounds was passed the Excise Commissioner had also before him the medical certificate of the Civil Surgeon.
At that stage two courses were open to the Excise Commissioner.
He could have either dimissed the appellant if he felt that the charges had been established or he could have ordered his retirement on invalid pension under rule 116 of the Bihar Pension Rules.
The Excise Commissioner, however, passed an order directing the retirement of the appellant on January 31, 1962 with effect from July 19, 1961.
Thus the appellant ceased to be a Government employee.
Any order of dismissal passed thereafter would be unsustainable unless it was permissible under law to the State Government to revoke the order of retirement and to reinstate him in his former status as Government servant before the order of dismissal was passed.
[234B E; 233F G]
