Section 84 (now redesignated as section 80J) of the Income tax Act, 1961 as it stood at the relevant time, provided that income tax would not be payable by an assessee on so much of the profits and gains derived from an industrial undertaking to which the section applied as did not exceed six per cent per annum on the capital employed in such undertaking computed in the prescribed manner.
Several conditions laid down therein had to be satisfied before the grant of relief could be considered.
Section 154 empowers the Income tax Officer to rectify any mistake apparent from the record and for that purpose to amend an assessment order.
The appellant who did not make a claim for rebate under section 84 either during the assessment proceedings or at the appeal stage subsequently made an application to the Income tax Officer under section 154 praying for rectification of the assessment order by grant of relief under section 84, which was rejected.
The revision sought before the Commissioner also failed.
The writ petition filed before the High Court having been dismissed, the appeal by special leave was preferred.
It was contended: (1) that an obligation was imposed on the Income tax officer by the statute to grant relief which could not be refused merely because the appellant had omitted to claim the same, and (2) that the record of the super profits tax assessment containing the material, which lay before the 224 Income tax Officer, must be regarded as an integral part of the record of the income tax assessment for granting relief under section 84.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: Rectification could only be justified on the ground of a mistake apparent from the record.
If the record did not contain any material, it could not be said that the Income tax Officer had committed a mistake in omitting to grant relief under section 84.
[227C D] Although the jurisdiction under section 154 to rectify any mistake apparent from the record is wider than that provided under r. 1 of Order XLVII of the Code of Civil Procedure to rectify an error apparent on the face of the record, nonetheless there must be material to support the claim to relief under section 84, and unless such material can be referred to, no grievance can be made if the Income tax Officer refuses to rectify the assessment and refuses relief under section 84.[227D F] There is a close relationship between the Super Profits Tax Act and the Income Tax Act, and any change in the assessment made under the latter has its consequential impact on the assessment made under the former.
The converse is equally true, especially in view of section 20(2) of the Super Profits Tax Act which provides that all the information contained in any statement or return made or furnished under the provisions of that Act or obtained or collected for the purpose of that Act may be used for the purpose of the Income Tax Act.
Therefore, if the record of the super profits tax assessment contains material pertaining to the claim under section 84 of the Income tax Act, such material can be considered by the Income tax Officer for the purpose of granting relief under section 84 in the income tax assessment.[228D G] In the instant case, the appellant has failed to show that all the material required for satisfying the conditions requisite for the grant of relief under section 84 existed on the super profits tax record at the time when the income tax assessment was completed.
Therefore, it cannot be said that in omitting to grant relief under section 84 when making the assessment order, the Income tax Officer committed a mistake apparent from the record.[229C D] Subhash Chandra Sarvesh Kumar vs Commissioner of Income tax and Another, and Income tax Officer, Alwaye vs Asok Textiles Ltd., , referred to. 225
