For the assessment years 1961 62 and 1962 63, the respondent assessee had debited an amount of Rs.5,40,000 and an amount of Rs.2,76,000 to its profit and loss account of the relevant previous years respectively.
The amounts were debited on the ground that they represented the assessee 's liability of the relevant years for the additional cane price payable to cane growers under the Sugarcane Price Control Order, 1955 and were shown in the balance sheet under the head "Current liabilities and provisions".
However, in the subsequent accounting year ending September 1963, the assessee had credited its profits by the said amounts by reversing the entries, and had not made any such provision in the subsequent years.
In assessment proceedings under the for the assessment year 1963 64, the Income tax Officer did not include both the aforesaid amounts in the capital computation of the assessee.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner affirmed the view taken by the Income tax Officer.
But, on second appeal, the Appellate Tribunal held that the amount represented a "reserved" and should have been included in the capital computation of the assessee.
The High Court also agreed with the Tribunal.
Dismissing the appeal by the Revenue, ^ HELD: 1.
The Rules made under the provide for computing the capital of a company for the purpose of super 215 profits tax.
A perusal of Rule 1 of the Second Schedule will show that for the purposes of that rule the capital of a company includes the reserve created under some of the provisions of the Indian Income tax Act and its other reserves in so far as the amount credited to such other reserves has not been allowed in computing its profits for the purposes of the Income tax Act.
[217D E] 2.
In determining whether an item is a "provision" or a "reserve" the true nature and character of the sum so retained or appropriated must be determined and its mere description by the assessee in its Balance Sheet is not conclusive of its true nature.
A provision is a charge against the profits, being made against anticipated losses and contingencies.
A "reserve", on the contrary, is an appropriation of profits, the assets by which it is represented being retained to form part of the capital employed in the business.
Unlike a "provision" which is a present charge against the profits, the assessee continues to enjoy a proprietor 's interest in the "reserve" [218C E] In the instant case, the evidence clearly disclosed that there was no liability at all on the assessee requiring it to set apart a sum as a charge against its profits and there was never any intention to make payments to the cane growers nor was payment ever made but, on the contrary, the assessee reversed the entries in a subsequent year in its books.
It is apparent that the amount cannot be described as a "provision".
It can only be described as a "reserve".
It was part of the capital which fell for computation under Rule 1 of the Second Schedule.
[218E F] Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, A.P., ; and Metal Box Co. of India Ltd. vs Their Workmen, relied upon.
