On 23rd August, 1970, when the respondent was travelling by car, alleged to be belonging to his brother, from Ambala to Batala, the Customs officer intercepted him near the Beas river and forcibly taken along with the driver, Gurunam Singh to the Customs House at Amritsar.
The respondent along with the driver was searched and the customs authorities took into possession Rs.33,500 in Indian currency, 10 gold sovereigns and the car in which he travelled.
The Customs authorities, thereupon initiated departmental proceedings under section 110(II) of the and extended the period of issuing of the show cause notice under section 124 of the .
These proceedings were quashed by an order of the Learned Single Judge of the High Court of Punjab on 24th April, 1372 following an earlier decision of that Court.
After the said judgment, the respondent approached the customs authorities for the return of the money and the car on 11.5.1972.
The gold sovereigns were not demanded because ac cording to the respondent these did not belong to him.
He had been directed to come on the following day to get back the currency notes and the car.
On the next day, however the Income Tax officer served the warrant of authorisation dated 10th May, 1972 issued under section 132 of the Income Tax Act, read with Rule 112(II) of the Rules on the respondent as well as on the customs department with the result the cash was taken possession of by the Income Tax authorities.
Thereafter 295 the respondent filed another writ petition under Article 226 and 227 of A the Constitution.
The customs authorities also filed an appeal against the decision of the Single Judge dated 24th April, 1972.
The writ petition and the appeal were heard together by a Division Bench of the Punjab High Court.
Dismissing the appeal and allowing the writ petition the High Court held that where the amount was seized by the customs authorities and the seizure was held illegal by the Court customs authorities were bound to return the money to the person entitled to it under the relevant provisions of section 110 of the ; that the Income Tax authorities could not seize such an amount from the customs authorities under section 132 of the Income Tax Act and authorisation of search and seizure was illegal if issued in the name of the person who did not have possession of the Article in respect of which it was issued.
Hence this appeal by the revenue by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 on a construction of section 132 of Income Tax Act, 1961 and the context, in which the words "search", "possession", and "seizure" have been used in the said section and the rules indicate that there cannot be any order in respect of goods or moneys or papers which are in the custody of another department under legal authority where the location of the property was known to the Government one government department could not search another department and seize them.
[301E F] 1.2 Sub Section (3) of section 132 of the Act uses the expression "who is in immediate possession or control thereof".
"Possession" is a word of ambiguous meaning and its legal senses do not always coincide with the popular sense.
Possession again may not always be synonymous with manual detention or physical retention of the goods or moneys.
When the physical custody of the moneys and goods were with the customs authorities, and that too by a legal sanction and authority to have that custody, it cannot be said that possession as used in section 132 of the Act was still with the respondent Tarsem Kumar.
[30 1F H] 1.3 Reading the expressions "retention" and "custody" in some of the sub sections of section 132 in the context these have been used, it cannot be said, that where an authority or a person has retention and custody with the legal sanction behind it, it was not the intention of the legislature to say that he was not in possession as contemplated in section 132 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
[302A B] 296 The Commissioner of Income Tax vs Ramesh Chander & Ors.
, PunJab; Tarsem Kumar & Anr.
vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh & Delhi & ors.
, ; Laxmipat Chororia vs K.K. Ganguli Motilal and ors.
vs Preventive Intelligence officer, Central Excise and Customs, Agra & Ors., Allahabad, distinguished and partly overruled.
Noor Mohd. Rahimatulla Gillani vs The Commissioner of Income tax Vidrabha and Marathwada, Nagpurand Anr., [1976] Taxation Law Reports, 688, Bombay; Pannalal vs Income Tax officer, Ward.
Chhindwara and ors.
, 93 ITR p. 480 Madhya Pradesh; Gulab and Company and Anr.
vs Superintendent of Central Excise (Preventive) Trichy, and ors.
, Madras; Assainar and Anr.
vs Income tax officer, Calicut and ors.
, Kerala, overruled.
1.4 It is true that in the instant case, the title was not transferred to the Customs authorities by seizure under the .
But in the context, in which the expressions "possession" and "seizure" have been used, it cannot be considered to mean that the possession was where the legal title was, physical possession was with the Customs authorities, title was with the respondent herein.
In this context, the physical possession having regard to the language used is relevant and material.
Physical possession was with the Customs authorities when the seizure authorisation was passed.
Therefore, where the exact location of the property was known and there was no need to seize the money, the Income tax department could direct handing over the money to the Income tax authorities or take steps for such direction through appropriate authorities and not by resort to section 132 of the Income Tax Act.
This is so because if the location was certain then there was nothing to search or look for.
[304G H; 305A B]
