Sona Devi, mother of respondents nos.
3, 4 and 5, inherited certain Zamindari property from her father.
By a registered deed of sale she sold it to the predecessor in interest of the appellants and one Abhey Ram.
At that time she had no son, but subsequently, respondents nos.
3 to 5 were born to her and at the time of her death all of them were minors.
Respondents Nos. 3 to 5 filed a suit against the appellants and others for a declaration that their mother had only a life interest in the zamindari property sold by her, and that the transfer not having been supported by any legal necessity, was not binding upon them.
They also prayed for recovery of possession of the property and for mesne profits.
The suit was decreed by the Munsif.
During the pendency of the appeals filed by both the parties, the village in which the disputed land is situate, was notified for consolidation operations and, therefore, in view of section 5 of the Consolidation Act, all further proceedings of the appeals were stayed.
In the consolidation proceedings, the names of the appellants were recorded in the revenue papers as Bhumidar in respect of the disputed land.
The respondents filed objections under section 12 of the Consolidation Act, raising questions of title regarding the disputed land.
The Consolidation officer referred the matter under sub section
I of section 12 to the statutory Arbitrator, who made an Award in favour of the Respondents and 488 recorded the findings that Sona Devi had only a life interest in the disputed land, that the sale deed executed by her was neither for legal necessity nor for the benefit of the estate of her deceased father, that the transfer of the disputed land by the sale deed was not binding on the respondents Nos. 3 to 5 and that they were entitled to reocover possession of the disputed land.
Two petitions of objections to the Award, filed by the appellants, were dismissed by the Civil Judge.
The Additional District Judge in second appeal took the view that as the sons of Abhey Ram, who was also one of the transferees under the said sale deed.
were not made parties in the proceedings, the reference to the Arbitrator was illegal and the Award made by him was invalid, and that the Arbitrator was guilty of legal misconduct inasmuch as he had committed an error of law apparent on the face of the Award, allowed the appeals, and set aside the order of Civil Judge and also the Award of the Arbitrator.
A Single Judge of the High Court allowed the Revision Petitions of the respondents, set aside the order of the Additional District Judge and restored that of the Civil Judge and also the Award of the Arbitrator.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The object of sub section
(2) of section 52 of the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act 1953 is that when an order has been passed by a Court under the provisions of the Constitution or in cases or proceedings pending under the Consolidation Act, the right or interest involved under such order or in the pending cases or proceedings under the Consolidation Act, should not be again subjected to the consideration in the consolidation proceedings started by virtue of a notification under section 4 A of the Consolidation Act.
[495E F] 2.
Section 4 A will apply only where the consolidation operations remained closed for a period of 10 years from the date of the notification under section 52(1).
But, in view of section 52(2), consolidation operations shall be deemed to have not been closed in respect of two cases mentioned therein.
So, section 4A will have no application to these two cases.
Consequently, the provision of section 4 as also the provision of section 5 will not apply to these two cases.
[495D E] 3.
The proceedings out of which the instant appeals arise are l l proceedings under the Consolidation Act and, therefore, section 5(2)(a) will 489 have no application to these proceedings.
In any event, in view of section 52(2), the notification issued under s.4 A and the subsequent notification under section 4(2) and the consequence thereof as provided under section 5(2) of the Consolidation Act, will have no application to or affect the proceedings giving rise to the instant appeals.
[496A B] 4.
The High Court was right in holding that the Additional District Judge should not have entertained the objection to the maintainability of the reference to the Arbitrator raised for the first time before him and that the proper stage for raising such an objection was when the reference was made under section 12 of the Consolidation Act.
[496E F] 5.
Since the sale deed in question has been held by the Arbitrator as invalid inasmuch as it was not supported by any legal necessity, the appellants had not acquired any interest in the disputed land under the sale deed and, as such, they had no intermediary interest in the disputed land on the date immediately preceding the date of vesting under the Zamindari Abolition Act.
The appellants not being intermediaries or persons of any category as mentioned in section 18, they are not entitled to 1) retain the disputed land and their possession is not protected by the provision of section 18.
[497C D] 6.
Section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh (Supplementary) Act, 1952 does not confer any right on a person whose possession of land during the year 1359 Fasli was illegal.
It is not the intention of the Legislature to protect the possession of a trespasser under section 3(1).
The explanation to section 3(1) gives sufficient indication that a person not having any lawful right in the land.
cannot claim to be in cultivatory possession of such land.
[499A B] Ram Krishna vs Bhagwan Baksh Singh, and Badri and another vs Juthan Singh and others, ( , relied upon.
In the instant case, in view of the findings of the Arbitrator, the appellants did not acquire any interest in the disputed land by virtue of the sale deed in question, and it cannot be said that they have acquired title to the disputed land by adverse possession.
After the death of Sona Devi, the possession of the disputed land by the appellants became illegal and adverse to the respondents Nos. 3 to 5.
But before such possession could ripen into title after the lapse of twelve years, the respondents Nos. 3 to S instituted a suit within six years of such possession in the Court of Munsif for the recovery of possession of the disputed land from the appellants, which was decreed.
Both the appellants 490 and the respondent Nos. 3 to 5 filed appeals, but in view of section 5 of the Consolidation Act, all further proceedings of the said appeals were stayed.
Thereafter, the consolidation proceedings were started giving rise to the present appeals.
Thus, the appellants have not acquired any title to the disputed land by adverse possession.
[498E H]
