P adopted A in 1914 but on account of the acute differences which arose between them later, he made a second adoption of the first appellant in 1926 on the footing that such an adoption was permitted by special custom in Nattukottai Chetti families.
In the partition suit filed by A for himself and on behalf of his minor son, the first respondent, the validity of the second adoption was challenged, but the matter was compromised by a Rajinama under which P was directed to pay the plaintiffs therein Rs. 75,000 each separately in lieu of their right to partition.
Under the terms of para 3 of the Rajinama and the hundi executed by P in favour of the first respondent, the amount was to be paid to the order of three persons, viz., the father and mother of the first respondent and C, and the amount itself was to be invested in the name of the first respondent in Chetti firms to the order of P and C who were to be in management.
In 1929 P executed a will whereby he made arrangements for certain religious gifts and charities and gave the residue of the property to his wife for her life and thereafter to his second adopted son, the first appellant.
On attaining majority in 1943 the first respondent filed two suits.
The first was on the footing that the amount of Rs. 75,000 which was given to him under the Rajinama was constituted a trust for his benefit during his minority under the trusteeship of P and C, that the money was wrongfully appropriated by C, contrary to the terms of the Rajinama, and that P as a co trustee with C was equally responsible for C 's breach of trust and that the first respondent was entitled to have the amount paid out of the estate of P in the hands of the appellants.
The second suit was for the recovery of the entire properties of P on the ground that the second adoption was invalid and that the will executed by P was ineffective.
It was found that the adoption of the first appellant was invalid and that the customary adoption set up by P was made for temporal rather than spiritual purposes, and the question was whether, notwithstanding his description as adopted son in, the will in several places, the intention was that he was to take the property as Persona designata.
As regards the terms of para 3 of the 215 Rajinama the language used was ambiguous, whether the power of investment was vested in both P and C, but looking at the subsequent conduct of the parties it was found that it was C who was authorised to collect the amount of the hundi and to arrange for the investment of the same on the responsibility of the father and mother of the first respondent.
Held:(1) The question whether a disposition to a person is intended as a Persona designata or by reason of his filling particular legal status which turns out to be invalid, depends on the facts of the case and the terms of the particular document containing the disposition, and in the instant case, in view of the exclusion of the validly adopted son and his heirs from succession and the conduct of the parties for over 14 years in allowing the first appellant to retain the property, taking an overall picture of the various provisions of the will, it was clear that the first appellant was intended by the testator to take the property as persona designata and that the will was therefore effective to convey title to him.
Nidhoomoni Debya vs Saroda Pershad Mookerjee, (1876) L.R. 3 I.A. 253 and Fanindra Deb Raikat vs Rajeswar Das, (1884) L.R. 12 I.A. 72, referred to.
(2)Trusteeship is a position which is to be imputed to a person on clear and conclusive evidence of transfer of ownership and of the liability attached to such ownership on account of confidence reposed, and on such liability having been accepted by the alleged trustee, and in the present case there was no proof that P became a trustee for the minor 's fund and incurred liability for C 's breach of trust.
