The appellants three children belong to a sect called Jehovah 's Witnesses who worship only Jehovah the Creator and none other.
They refused to sing the National Anthem: 'Jana Gana Mana ' because, according to them, it is against the tenets of their religious faith not the words or the thoughts of the National Anthem but the singing of it.
They desisted from actual singing only because of their aforesaid honest belief and conviction but they used to stand up in respectful silence daily, during the morning assembly when the National Anthem was sung.
A Commission was appointed to enquire and report, and it reported that the children were "law abiding" and that they showed no disrespect to the National Anthem.
However, under the instructions of Deputy Inspector of Schools, the Head Mistress expelled the appellants from school from July 26, 1985.
A representation by the father of the children to the Education Authorities requesting that the children may be permitted to attend the 519 school pending orders from the Government having failed, the appellants filed a Writ Petition in the High Court seeking an order restraining the authorities from preventing them from attending the school.
A single Judge and then a Division Bench rejected the prayer of the appellants.
Allowing the appeal by Special Leave, to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1.
The Fundamental Rights of the appellants under article 19(1)(a) and 25(1) have been infringed and they are entitled to be protected.
The expulsion of the three children from the school for the reason that because of their conscientiously held religious faith, they do not join the singing of the National Anthem in the morning assembly though they do stand respectfully when the National Anthem is sung, is a violation of the fundamental right to freedom of conscience and freely to profess, practice and propagate religion.
Therefore, the judgment of the High Court is set aside and the respondent authorities are directed to re admit the children into the school, to permit them to pursue their studies without hindrance and to facilitate the pursuit of their studies by giving them the necessary facilities.
[538D E; 539 C D] 1.2 There is no provision of law which obliges anyone to sing the National Anthem nor is it disrespectful to the National Anthem if a person who stands up respectfully when the National Anthem is sung does not join the singing.
Proper respect is shown to the National Anthem by standing up when the National Anthem is sung.
It will not be right to say that disrespect is shown by not joining in the singing.
Standing up respectfully when the National Anthem is sung but not singing oneself clearly does not either prevent the singing of the National Anthem or cause disturbance to an assembly engaged in such singing so as to constitute the offence mentioned in section 3 of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act.
[527B G] 2.1 Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution guarantees to all citizens freedom of speech and expression, but Article 19(2) provides that nothing in Article 19(1)(a) shall prevent a State from making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the said right. article 25(1) guarantees to all persons freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion, subject to order, morality and health and to the other provisions of Part III of the Constitution.
article 51 A(a) of the Constitution enjoins a dub on every citizen of India "to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem".
[526G H; 527C] 520 2.2 While on the one hand, article 25(1) itself expressly subjects the right guaranteed by it to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions of Part III, on the other hand, the State is also given the liberty to make a law to regulate or restrict any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice and to provide for social welfare and reform, even if such regulation, restriction or provision affects the right guaranteed by article 25(1).
Therefore, whenever the Fundamental Right to freedom of conscience and to profess, practise and propagate religion is invoked, the act complained of as offending the Fundamental Right must be examined to discover whether such act is to protect public order, morality and health, whether it is to give effect to the other provisions of Part III of the Constitution or whether it is authorised by a law made to regulate or restrict any economic, financial political or secular activity which may be associated with religious practise or to provide for social welfare and reform.
[531G H; 532A B] 2.3 Any law which may be made under clauses 2 to 6 of article 19 to regulate the exercise of the right to the freedoms guaranteed by article 19(1)(a) to (e) and (g) must be 'a law ' having statutory force and not a mere executive or departmental instructions.
[529E F] The two circulars on which the Department, in the instant case, has placed reliance have no statutory basis and are mere departmental instructions.
They cannot, therefore, form the foundation of any action aimed at denying to citizens Fundamental Right under article 19(1)(a).
Further it is not possible to hold that the two circulars were issued 'in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relation with foreign states, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence ' and if not so issued, they cannot again be invoked to deny a citizen 's Fundamental Right under article 19(1)(a).
If the two circulars are to be so interpreted as to compel each and every pupil to join in the singing of the National Anthem despite his genuine, conscientious religious objection, then such compulsion would clearly contravene the rights guaranteed by article 19(1)(a) and article 25(1).
[530C E; 529C] Kharak Singh vs State of U.P., ; and Kameshwar Prasad vs The State of Bihar, [1962] Supp.
SCR 369 relied upon.
The Kerala Education Act contains no provision of relevance and the appellants in the present case have never been found guilty of 521 misconduct such as that described in Chapter IX, Rule 6 of the Kerala Education Rules.
On the other hand, the report of the Commission, is to the effect that the children have always been well behaved, law abiding and respectful.
[528 B C] 4.
The question is not whether a particular religious belief or practice appeals to our reason or sentiment but whether the belief is genuinely and conscientiously held as part of the profession or practice of religion.
Personal views and reactions are irrelevant.
If the belief is genuinely and conscientiously held it attracts the protection of article 25 but subject, of course, to the inhibitions contained therein.
[533F G] In the instant case, what the petitioners truly and conscientiously believe is not in doubt.
They do not hold their beliefs idly and their conduct is not the outcome of any perversity.
The petitioners have not asserted those beliefs for the first time or out of any unpatriotic sentiment Jehovah 's Witnesses, as they call themselves, appear to have always expressed and stood up for such beliefs all the world over.
[523C D] Adelaide Company of Jehovah 's Witnesses vs The Commonwealth, ; ; Minersville School District vs Gebitis, 84 Law Ed.
US 1376; West Virginia State Board of Education vs Barnette, ; ; Donald vs The Board of Education for the City Hamilton, 1945 Ontario Reports 518, Sheldon vs Fannin, 221 Federal Suppl.
766; The Commissioner Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt, ; ; Rati Lal Panachand Gandhi vs The State of Bombay & Ors., [1954] SCR 1055; SP Mittal etc.
vs Union of India Commissioner, Calcutta, AIR 1984 SC 51 referred to.
