The appellant was working as an Additional District and Sessions Judge in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The State Government moved the High Court in the year 1967 for his premature retirement.
On July 8, 1968 the Administrative Judge agreed with the proposal to retire the appellant after giving him three months notice.
The Governor passed the order of retirement on August 24, 1968.
Three days thereafter, on August 27, 1968 the Administrative Committee of the High Court gave its approval to the opinion of the Administrative Judge earlier communicated to the State Government.
Thereafter, on August 30, 1968 the additional Registrar transmitted the order of retirement to the appellant.
The order was purported to be made under para (i) of the first proviso to cl.
(a) of Fundamental Rule 56.
Aggrieved by the said order the appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court alleging: (i) that the retirement bad been ordered without the recommendation of the High Court as required by Article 235 of the Constitution; (ii) that Fundamental Rule 56, under which the order had been issued was violative of Articles 14 and 16, and (iii) that the premature retirement was in violation of Article 311(2).
As the question relating to the vires of Fundamental Rule 56 was 429 pending before the High Court in two other writ petitions, the three A matters were referred to a Full Bench.
which held that paragraph (i) of the proviso to cl.
(a) of Fundamental Rule 56 was violative of Articles 14 and 16.
Immediately thereafter the Governor issued an ordinance amending Fundamental Rule 56 and validating actions already taken Ihereunder.
The appellant thereupon sought amendment of his writ petition questioning the validity of the ordinance and the U.P. Act No. 5 of 1970 which replaced the ordinance.
Dismissing the writ petition the High Court took the view that whenever the Governor proposed to make an order of premature retirement in respect of a District Judge or a Subordinate Judicial officer he was only expected to consult the High Court on the question and that this consultation with the High Court was permissible even after the Governor had passed the order of compulsory retirement.
It equated the recommendation that should be made by the High Court under Article 235 before a judicial officer can be prematurely retired to the consultation contemplated under Article 320(3) (c) in respect of disciplinary matters affecting civil services and held that such consultation with the High Court was not mandatory and that failure to do so did not afford a cause of action in a court of law.
On the question: whether the order of compulsory retirement passed against the appellant satisfies the requirements of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: l.
The impugned order of premature retirement passed by the Governor on the opinion of the Administrative Judge without having before him the recommendation of the Administrative Committee or of the Full Court was void and ineffective.
The High Court was in error in not construing the applicability and scope of Article 235 of the Constitution while deciding the case.
2.1 Without the recommendation of the High Court it is not open to the Governor to issue an order retiring prematurely Judges of District Courts and the subordinate courts.
2.2 While it may be open to the Government to bring to the notice H 430 of the High Court all materials having a bearing on the conduct of a District Judge or a subordinate judicial officer, which may be in its possession, the Government cannot take the initiative to retire prematurely a District Judge or a subordinate judicial officer.
Such initiative should rest with the High Court.
2.3 It is for the High Court, on the basis of assessment of performance and all other aspects germane to the matter to come to the conclusion whether any particular judicial officer under its control is to be prematurely retired and once the High Court comes to the conclusion that there should be such retirement, the Court recommends to the Governor to do so.
The conclusion is to be of the High Court since the control vests therein.
In the instant case, the Government had sought the opinion of the High Court regarding the question whether the appellant could be pre maturely retired.
Under the rules obtaining in the Allahabad High Court the Administrative Committee could act for and on behalf of the Court but the Administrative Judge could not.
Before giving his opinion in support of the view expressed by the Government the Administrative Judge should have either circulated the letter received from the Government amongst the members of the Administrative Committee or placed it before them at a meeting.
He did not adapt either of the two courses but on his own forwarded his opinion to the Government stating that the appellant could be prematurely retired.
It was only after the Governor had passed the order on the basis of such recommendation that the matter was placed before the Administrative Committee.
Therefore, the Administrative Judge agreeing with the Government proposal was of no consequence and did not amount to satisfaction of the requirement of Article 235 of the Constitution.
The deviation in this case is not a mere irregularity which can be cured by the ex post facto approval given by the Administrative Committee to the action of the Governor after the order of premature retirement had been passed.
The error committed in this case amounts to an incurable defect amounting to an illegality.
State of Uttar Pradesh vs Batuk Deo Patil Tripathi & Anr., ; State of Haryana vs Inder Prakash Anand H.C.S. & Ors., [1976] (Supp) S.C.R. 603; High Court of Andhra Pradesh & ors.
vs V. V.S. Krishnamurthy and Ors., referred to.
431 State of U.P. vs Manbodhan Lal Srivastava, ; , distinguished.
