The appellant 's special leave petition against the award of the Labour Court dated March 11, 1983 granting relief to its employee respondent No. 3, was dismissed by a non speaking order.
In the said proceedings, respondent No. 3 had also been represented by a counsel.
Thereafter, the appellant approached the High Court by preferring a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution seeking to quash the aforesaid award of the Labour Court.
The High Court admitted the writ petition and granted interim stay of enforcement of the award.
The third respondent unsuccessfully challenged the aforesaid interim order by a special leave petition.
Subsequently when the main writ petition came up for final hearing before the Division Bench of the High Court, the third respondent again raised a preliminary objection as to the maintainability of the writ petition.
The High Court upheld the preliminary objection and dismissed the writ petition holding (i) that the dismissal in limine by the Supreme Court of the special leave petition filed by the appellant against the award by the non speaking order precluded the appellant from challenging the said award before the High Court; (ii) that the doctrine of election was applicable to the case and the appellant having chosen the remedy of approaching the y superior court and failed in that attempt, he could not thereafter resort to the alternative remedy of approaching the High Court for relief under Article 226 of the Constitution; and (iii) that the writ jurisdiction 554 of the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution being essentially discretionary in nature, it will be a sound exercise of the court 's discretion to refuse relief in such a situation.
Allowing the appeal and remanding the case to the High Court for disposal on merits, ^ HELD: 1.(i) The view taken by the High Court was not right and that the High Court should have gone into the merits of the writ petition without dismissing it on the preliminary ground.
The dismissal by Supreme Court of the special leave petition of the appellant by a non speaking order did not operate as a bar against the appellant in the matter of challenging the impugned award of the Labour Court by resort to proceedings before the High Court under article 226 of the constitution.
[560D E] 1.(ii) The effect of the non speaking order of dismissal of a special leave petition without anything more indicating the grounds or reasons of its dismissal must, by necessary implication, be taken to be that the Supreme Court had decided only that it was not a fit case where special leave should be granted.
Questions which can be said to have been decided by this Court expressly, implicitly or even constructively while dismissing the special leave petition cannot, of course, be re opened in a subsequent writ proceeding before the High Court.
But neither on the principle of res judicata nor on any principle of public policy analogous thereto, would the order of this court dismissing the special leave petition operate to bar the trial of identical issues in a separate proceeding namely, the writ proceeding before the High Court merely on the basis of an uncertain assumption that the issues must have been decided by this Court at least by implication.
It is not correct or safe to extend the principle of res judicata or constructive res judicata to such an extent so as to found it on mere guesswork.
[558C G] Workmen of Cochin Port Trust vs Board of Trustees of the Cochin Port Trust and Another, ; and Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Company Ltd. vs Workmen and Anr, ; , relied upon Wilson vs Colchester Justices, (1985) Vol.
2 All England Law Reports at page 97, referred to. 2.
It is not the policy of the Supreme Court to entertain special 555 leave petitions and grant leave under article 136 of the Constitution save in those cases where some substantial question of law of general or public importance is involved and there is manifest injustice resulting from the impugned order or judgment.
Moreover, having regard to the very heavy backlog of work in the Supreme Court and the necessity to restrict the intake of fresh cases by strictly following the criteria aforementioned, it has very often been the practice of the Supreme Court not to grant special leave except where the party cannot claim effective relief by approaching the concerned High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
In such cases also special leave petitions are quite often dismissed only by passing a non speaking order and it would work extreme hardship and injustice if the High Court were to close its doors to the petitioner and refuse him relief under article 226 of the Constitution on the sole ground of dismissal of special leave petition.
[559A E] Workmen of Cochin Port Trust vs Board of Trustees of the Cochin Port Trust and Another, ; and Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Company Ltd. vs Workmen and Anr, ; , followed.
The doctrine of election referred to by the High Court has no application at all to the present situation.
[560F] Shankar Ramchandra Abhyankar vs Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat, ; , distinguished.
The grant of leave under article 226 of the Constitution is undoubtedly in the discretion of the High Court but the exercise of that discretionary Jurisdiction is to be guided by established legal principles.
It will not be a sound exercise of that discretion to refuse to consider a writ petition on its merits solely on the ground that a special leave petition filled by the petitioner in the Supreme Court had been dismissed by a non speaking order.
[561A B]
