The appellant was brought on record, as the legal representative of the deceased tenant during the pendency of an eviction petition.
He filed an additional written statement contending that the premises in question being non residential and commercial premises, the legal heir of a tenant could not be treated as a tenant as defined under section 2(h) of the Haryana Urban (Control of Rent & Eviction) Act and therefore, the possession of such legal heir of a tenant would be that of a trespasser and, the Rent Controller had no jurisdiction to proceed with the case as he was not competent to pass a decree for possession against a trespasser.
Overruling the said contention, the Rent Controller allowed the petition for eviction on the ground that the tenant had sublet the premises in favour of respondent No. 2 without the written consent of the landlord.
The appellant 's appeal and the revision before the Appellate Authority and the High Court respectively failed.
Dismissing the appeal by the appellant, ^ HELD: 1.
The plea of the appellant that he was holding the property as a trespasser is not tenable because the possession of the tenant being permissive, the possession of the appellant who had succeeded to the estate of the tenant as his heir could not be that of a trespasser in the circumstances of the case.
He could not, therefore, resist the passing of the decree for eviction on proof of the ground in section 13(ii) (a) of the Act.
[525G H; 526A] 623 2.
Order XXII Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 provides that where one of two or more defendants dies and the right to sue does not survive against the surviving defendant or defendants alone, or a sole defendant or sole surviving defendant dies and the right to sue survives, the court, on an application made in that behalf, shall cause the legal representative of the deceased defendant to be made a party and shall proceed with the suit.
Sub rule (2) of rule 4 of Order XXII authorises the legal representative of a deceased defendant or respondent to file an additional written statement or statement of objections raising all pleas which the deceased tenant had or could have raised except those which were personal to the deceased defendant or respondent.
[625D G] In the instant case, since the action related to property, the right to sue did survive and the Rent Controller was right in bringing the legal representative, of the deceased tenant, on record.
The appellant could not have therefore, in the capacity of the legal representative of the deceased respondent who was admittedly a tenant, raised the plea that he was in possession of the building as a trespasser and the petition for eviction was not maintainable.
[625G H] 3.
It is possible for the court in an appropriate case to implead the heirs of the deceased defendant in their personal capacity also in addition to bringing them on record as legal representatives of the deceased defendant avoiding thereby a separate suit for a decision on the independent title.
But, in the instant case, the appellant cannot claim the aforesaid benefit for two reasons.
First the appellant had not been brought on record as respondent in the eviction petition in his personal capacity but had been brought on record only as the legal representative of the tenant.
Secondly, even if a prayer had been made to bring the appellant on record in his personal capacity, the Rent Controller could not have allowed the application and permitted him to raise the plea of independent title because such a plea would oust the jurisdiction of the Rent Controller to try the case itself.
[626E F] Jagdish Chander Chatterjee & Ors.
vs Sri Kishan & Anr., ; , referred to.
