The appellants, owners of a hosiery factory, imported 27 knitting machines in 1972 under the import licence held by them.
According to the Customs authorities the machinery was not new as the licence permitted to import, but was old reconditioned, and that the price shown was much lower than the actual value.
After hearing the appellants, the Collector of Customs found that the appellants had committed breach of section l l l(d) and also of section l ll(m) of the and for both the counts he imposed the penalty, which was maintained by the Board.
On revision the Central Government reduced the penalty from Rs. 1,47,000 to Rs. 1,00,000 which had been imposed for breach of section 111 (m).
A writ petition filed by the appellants was dismissed by the High Court.
In the appeal to this Court, on behalf of the appellants it was contended that a penal provision has to be construed strictly and in absence of specific words requiring 'value ' to be mentioned, it could not be inferred that any difference in value could be made the basis of penalty.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that although the term 'value ' was not in section 1 l l(m) before the 1973 amendment but that will make no difference as even without the term 'value ' a mis description could be interpreted to be a mis description on the basis of value stated and ultimately the goods found to be of a higher value.
By the amendment the Legislature had only tried to explain or clarify the position.
698 Allowing the Appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The impugned orders are set aside and the penalty imposed on the appellants under section Ill(m) read with section 111(d) of the is quashed.
[704A B] 2.
Before the amendment in 1973, section 111(m) did not contemplate any difference in material particulars in respect of value but it referred matters other than the value.
[703B C] 3.
Unamended section 111(m) indicated that wherever goods actually imported are different in material particulars than the goods which were shown in the bill of entry or a declaration as contemplated in section 46 then it will be a breach of section 11 l(m).
The difference in particulars could be in respect of anything but value, as this sub clause clearly shows that the difference in value could not be made the basis of breach of this sub clause before the amendment of 1973, when the term 'value ' has been introduced into this sub clause.
[70 1 B C ] 4.
In order to interpret a particular provision and to infer the intention of the Legislature, the objects and Reasons stated in the Bill, when it is presented to the Legislature, could be used.
[703B ] 5.
The amendment inserting the term 'value ' in section 111(m) cannot be said to be explanatory.
[703Fl Union of India & ors.
vs M/s. Rai Bahadur Shree Ram Durga Prasad (P) Ltd. & ors.
; , , relied upon.
