Section 384 of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act 1976 states that the procedure provided in the Code of Civil Procedure in regard to suits shall be followed, as far as it can be made applicable, in the disposal of applications, appeals or references that may be made to the District Judge under the Act or any bye law made thereunder.
A dispute between the Railways and the Municipal Corporation resulted in revocation of the sanction for construction of certain shops situated on the road along side the railway line in the city of Amritsar.
Subsequently, the Municipal Commissioner passed an order directing demolition of these shops.
The appellant, who is an allottee of one of these shops on licence from the Railways, being aggrieved by that order preferred an appeal before the District Judge under section 269(2) of the Act.
In that appeal, the District Judge rejected an application submitted by the appellant for recording of evidence.
The appellant filed a writ petition against that order before the High Court which took the view that if the District Judge so feels the application for recording of evidence could be considered under Order 41, Rule.27 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
In the appeal by Special Leave to this Court on the question: 618 Whether in an appeal filed under section 269(2) of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act 1976, the procedure of a civil suit as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure will have to be followed in view of the language of section 384 of the 1976 Act.
Dismissing the Appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The language used in section 384 of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act 1976 only indicates that the procedure as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure in regard to a suit will have to be followed in proceedings under that Act when the matter goes to the District Judge either by way of an application, reference or appeal.
The use of the phrase "as far as it can be made applicable" in that section goes to show that it is not expected in any one of the proceedings contemplated therein that is, applications, appeals and references to follow the procedure of a suit technically and strictly in accordance with the provisions contained in the Code of Civil Procedure.
It is only for the purposes of guidance that the procedure of a suit as Provided in the Code of Civil Procedure can be considered.
[621A B; C D] In an appropriate case whenever the District Judge feels satisfied he may give an opportunity to the parties to lead evidence under Order 41, Rule 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as it will be open to him to apply the procedure as far as it can be made applicable in the facts and circumstances of each case.
[621E F] It, therefore, could not be said that in an appeal under section 269 sub cl.(2) before a District Judge the procedure of a suit as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure will be necessary.
[621B C]
