The question for decision in this appeal by the Commissioner of Income tax was whether a sum of Rs. 51,978 shown by the assessee in his return as income from his forest land was agricultural income within the meaning of section 2(1) Of the Indian Incometax Act and was as such exempt from taxation under section 4(3)(viii) of the Act.
The forest was of spontaneous growth, 150 years old, and consisted of sal and piyasal trees.
It was in parts denuded of trees from time to time by destructive elements and the assessee had to plant fresh trees in those parts.
Considerable amount of human labour and skill had to be applied year after year for maintaining the 'forest, protecting the offshoots from the stumps of the trees that had been cut and sold and in reviving its denuded parts by fresh plantation.
The staff employed by the assessee performed such operations as pruning, weeding, felling, clearing, cutting of channels, guarding the trees and sowing seeds by digging the soil in the denuded areas.
The Income tax Officer rejected the assessee 's claim of exemption and added a sum of Rs. 34,430 to the assessable income, allowing a sum of Rs. 17,548 as expenditure.
The Assistant Commissioner of Income tax confirmed the assessment.
The Appellate Tribunal held that the sowing of seeds were few and far between and the income, derived as it was from jungle products, was not agricultural income within the meaning of the Act.
The High Court took a contrary view, held that tillage of the soil was not essential, and the income was agricultural income as human labour and skill had been expended on the land itself and answered the question in favour of the assessee.
No attempt was, however, made by the Income tax Authorities to ascertain the income actually derived from the trees planted by the assessee, nor were any materials placed on the record from which its exact amount could be ascertained, but having regard to the magnitude of the expenditure shown by the assessee as against the total income this Court held that a substantial portion of it must have been derived from the trees planted by the assessee.
Held, that the income actually derived from the trees planted by the assessee was agricultural income within the meaning of 2(1) of the Indian Income tax Act and no attempt having been 102 made to ascertain its exact amount and a fresh enquiry being undesirable after such a long lapse of time, the appeal must be dismissed.
The term 'agriculture 'in section 2(1)(b)(i) of the Indian Income tax Act connotes the entire and integrated activity of an agriculturist performed on the land in order to raise its produce and consists of such basic and essential operations, requiring human skill and labour on the land itself, as the tilling of the soil, sowing of the seeds, planting and similar operations on the land and such other subsequent operations, performed after the produce sprouts from the land, as weeding, digging of the soil around the growth, removal of undesirable under growths, tending, pruning, cutting, harvesting and marketing.
But these subsequent operations, if unconnected with the basic operations, cannot by themselves constitute agriculture.
It is only when the land is subjected to such integrated activity, that :It can be said to be used for ,agricultural purpose ' and its income called agricultural income within the meaning of the Act.
Case law discussed.
Whatever is produced by such agriculture must be an agricul tural product and the ambit of the term 'agriculture ' cannot be confined merely to the production of grain and food for men and cattle but must extend to all products of the land that have some utility either for consumption or trade and commerce.
Fruit and vegetable plantations, groves, pastures, articles of luxury such as betel, coffee, tea, spices, tobacco etc.
or commercial crops like cotton, flax, jute, hemp, indigo etc.
as also forest products such as timber, sal and Piyasal trees, Casuarina plantations, tendu leaves, horranuts etc., can come within its ambit.
Murugesa Chetti vs Chinnathambi Goundan, Mad. 421 and Raja of Venkatagiri vs Ayyappa Reddy, Mad. 738, disapproved.
Such an extended meaning of the term 'agriculture ' and its processes and products can be tenable only where there is cultivation, which means the basic operations, and can never be dissociated from them.
There is, therefore, no warrant for its further extension so as to include activities which are in some way connected with or dependent on land, such as breeding and rearing of livestock, dairy farming, butter and cheese making and poultry farming.
Moolji Sicka & Co., In re,(1925) 10 T.C.341 and Commissioner of Income Tax vs K. E. Sundara Mudaliar, (1950) 18 I.T.R. 259, disapproved.
Although human labour and skill are required both in the performance of the basic as well as the subseqent operations, it is only in the case of the basic operations alone that such skill and labour can be said to have been spent on the land itself, and this distinction becomes important where they are disjointed and do 103 not form an integrated activity, as in the case of products of land that are of spontaneous growth where human skill and labour are spent merely in fostering the growth, preservation and regeneration of such products.
Judicial opinion is unanimous that products which grow wild on the land or are of spontaneous growth and do not involve any human skill or labour on the land, and all that the assessee has to perform in respect of them is only to collect them for consumption and marketing, are not products of agriculture and the income derived from them is not agricultural income within the meaning Of section 2(1) Of the Act.
When, however, the assessee performs subsequent operations on these products of land, the nature of those operations will have to be determined in the light of the principles enunciated above.
Held further, that there is no basis for the argument that the demarcation of agriculture and forestry as separate heads of legislation in Entries 14 and 19 of List 11 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution has the effect of making them mutually exclusive.
Income from forestry coming within the definition of agricultural income ' contained in section 2(1) of the Indian Income tax Act will be agricultural income under Entry 46 and thus fall within the purview of that Act.
