The upward revision of Electricity Tariff made by the appellant Board in 1980, 1982 and 1984 was challenged in the High Court by the respondents on the ground that the Electricity Board acted outside its statutory authority by formulating a price structure intended to yield sufficient revenue to offset not merely the expenditure properly chargeable to the revenue account for the year as contemplated by section 59 of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948, but also expenditure not so properly chargeable and that had section 59 been strictly followed and had items of expenditure not chargeable to the revenue account for the year been excluded, the revised tariff would have resulted in the generation of a surplus far beyond the contemplation of section 59 of the Act.
The Full Bench of the High Court struck down the tariff revisions holding that in the absence of specification by the Government, a Board was not entitled to generate a surplus at all and it had acted entirely outside its authority in generating a surplus to be adjusted against items of expenditure not authorised to be met from revenue receipts.
The notifications prescribing, revised tariffs were, therefore, struck down.
In appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant it was contended, that the 1978 Amendment of the Electricity Supply Act 1948 did not effectively improve matters as many State Governments did not specify the quantum of surplus.
Parliament had, therefore, to intervene once again and that was in 1983 to fix the statutory minimum surplus, which was made clear by the 1983 Amendment which stipulated a minimum of 3 per cent surplus in the absence of specification by the 629 State Government which had the liberty to specify a higher percentage than three.
It was further contended, by submitting statements, that in the years 1978 79 to 1981 82, which were extraordinary years, but for the boom in the sale of energy to neighbouring States, there would have been a serious deficit in every one of these years and that it is clear that the Electricity Board has not been earning huge profits and generating large surpluses as suggested by the consumers, and consequently the upward revision of the electricity tariff was justified.
On behalf of respondent consumers it was contended: (1) that the Electricity Board was barred from conducting its operations on commercial lines so as to earn a profit; (2) that in the absence of specifications by the State Government the position would be as it was before the 1978 Amendment, i.e. the Board was to carry on its affairs and adjust the tariffs in such a manner as not to incur a loss; (3) that while interest which accrued to be revenue expenditure, arrears of interest which accrued during the previous years and had not been paid could not be so considered; (4) that the 1980 Committee took into consideration the anticipated augmentation of the generating capacity from the proposed new power stations whereas these projects were not commissioned till 1984 and thus the cost structure arrived at by the Committee was vitiated: (5) that the Committee did not take into account the financial position of the Board as brought out by the year 1978 79 which showed that the Board had no need for enhancing the rates; (6) that the 1980 Committee having taken as the basis the 1982 projected cost, so as to maintain price stability for a period of five years, it was not proper to revise the tariff again in 1982; and (7) that it was not open to the Board to give favoured treatment to Low Tension Domestic and Agricultural Consumers at the cost of the rest of the consumers.
Allowing the appeals of the Electricity Board, ^ HELD: 1.
The judgments of the High Court are set aside and the validity of the notifications revising the tariffs upheld.
The Board will reconsider the revised tariff introduced in 1980 in regard to Low Tension Industrial and Low Tension Commercial Consumers only, with liberty to fix separate rates, if necessary for the years 1980 and 1981.
[659D E] 2.
A State Electricity Board created under the Electricity Supply Act is an instrumentality of the State subject to the same constitutional and public law limitations as are applicable to the Government including the principle of law which inhibits arbitrary action by the Government.
It is a public utility monopoly undertaking.
Service and not profit 630 should inform its actions and it must manage its affairs on sound economic principles.
No public service undertaking can afford to ignore business principles which are as essential to public service undertakings as to Commercial ventures.
If the Board borrows sums either from the Government or from other sources or by the issue of debentures and bonds, the Board must of necessity make provision year after year for the payment of interest on the loans taken by it and for the repayment of the capital amounts of the loans.
If the Board is unable to pay interest in any year for want of sufficient revenue receipts, the Board must make provision for payment of such arrear of interest in succeeding years.
The Board is not expected to run on a bare year to year survival basis.
[644B G] Rohtas Industries vs Bihar State Electricity Board, ; and Bromely vs Greater London Council, ; , followed.
Section 18(a) prescribes that it is the duty of the Board to arrange for the supply of electricity that may be required within the State and for the transmission and distribution of the same, in the most efficient and economical manner and section 49(2) (b) requires the Board to have regard, in fixing uniform tariffs, the coordinated development of the supply and distribution of electricity within the State in the most efficient and economical manner, both with particular reference to those areas which are not for the time being served or adequately supplied with electricity.
The principles of efficiency and economy are, therefore, not foresaken but resolutely emphasised.
[645B D] 4.
Pure profit motive, unjustifiable even in the case of a private trading concern, can never be the sole guiding factor in the case of public enterprise.
If profit is made not for profit 's sake but for the purpose of fulfilling, better and more extensively, the obligation of the services expected of it, it cannot be said that the public enterprise acted beyond its authority.
[648G H: 649A] 5.
The total operational cost would include the interest on the capital outlay out of the national exchequer and that there was no justification to run a public utility monopoly service undertaking merely as a commercial venture with a view to make profits.
[649D E] 6.
A reading of section 59 (as amended in 1978) plainly indicates that it is the mandate of Parliament that the Board should adjust its tariffs so that after meeting the various expenses properly required to be met a 631 surplus is left.
The original negative approach of functioning so as not to suffer a loss is replaced by the positive approach of requiring a surplus to be created.
The quantum of minimum surplus is to be specified by the State Government.
Since many State Governments did not specify the quantum of surplus, section 59 was again amended in 1983, which stipulates a minimum of 3 per cent surplus in the absence of specification by the State Government which has the liberty to specify a higher percentage than three.
[646E G] Rohtas Industries vs Bihar State Electricity Board, ; followed, Kerala State Electricity Board vs Indian Aluminium Co., [1976] I SCR 552, Bihar State Electricity Board vs Workmen, ; and Dr.
P. Nalla Thamby Thera vs Union of India & Ors., [1984] I SCR 709, referred to.
The failure of the Government to specify the surplus which may be generated by the Board cannot prevent the Board from generating a surplus after meeting the expenses required to be met.
The Board may not allow its character as a public utility undertaking to be changed into that of a profit motivated private trading or manufacturing house.
Neither the tariffs nor the resulting surplus may reach such heights as to lead to the inevitable conclusion that the Board has shed its public utility character.
When that happens the Court may strike down the revision of tariffs as plainly arbitrary.
But not until then.
Not, merely because a surplus has been generated, a surplus which can by no means be said to be extravagant.
The Court will then refrain from touching the tariffs.
[650G H;651A] Madras and Southern Maharatta Railway Company Ltd. vs Bezwada Municipality and Madras and Southern Maharatta Railway Company Limited vs The Municipal Council Bezwada, ILR 1941 Madras 897, followed.
8. 'Price fixation ' is neither the forte nor the function of the Court.
The occasional excursions into this field were made at the request and by the agreement of the parties.
[651B] Rohtas Industries vs Bihar State Electricity Board, ; and Prag Ice and Oil Mills vs Union of India, ; followed.
Reading section 59 alongwith sections 49, 67, 67A etc.
it is noticed that 632 the Electricity Supply Act, 1948, requires the Electricity Board to follow a particular method of accounting and it is on the basis of that method of accounting that the Board is required to generate a surplus.
Broadly, section 59 requires that a surplus should be left from the total revenues, in any year of account, after meeting all expenses properly chargeable to revenues.
Apart from subventions which may be received from the State Government, which depend entirely on the bounty of the Government, the only revenue available to the Board are the charges leviable by it from consumers.
[653B D] 10.
Section 59 (1) specifies 'operating maintenance and management expenses ', 'taxes (if any) on income and profits ', 'depreciation and interest payable on all debenture, bonds and loans ', as in cluded in 'expenses properly chargeable to revenues '.
Section 59 (2) stipulates that in specifying the surplus, the Government shall have due regard to the availability of amounts accrued by way of depreciation and the liability for loan amortization.
It also stipulates that a reasonable sum to contribute towards the cost of capital works and a reasonable sum by way of return on the capital provided by the State Government should be left in the surplus.
This sub section, therefore, makes it clear that the Board is to provide for (1) loan amortization; (2) contribution towards the cost of capital works; and (3) return on the capital.
Section 67 prescribes the priority to be observed by the Board in the matter of discharging the liabilities enumerated therein out of its revenues.
First the operating maintenance and management expenses have to be met, next provision has to be made for payment of taxes on Income and Profits and thereafter various items of expenditure are mentioned in order of priority.
If any amount is left after the discharge of the liabilities enumerated in section 67, the balance shall be utilised for the other purposes specified in section 59 in such manner as the Board may decide.
[653E H; 654A B] 11.
Payment of interest is expressly mentioned among the liabilities to be discharged, as also repayment of principal of loans becoming due for payment in the year.
Clause (vi) of sub section
(1) of section 67 makes it clear that repayment of principal of any loan guaranteed by the State Government will include loans which became due for payment in the year as well as loans which became due for payment in any previous year and had remained unpaid.
[654B C] 12.
Under the scheme of the Act principal amount falling due in any year has to be met from the revenue receipts of the year.
No payment towards principal could be made or accepted, if interest of previ 633 ous years continued to be outstanding.
The very provision for repayment of capital necessarily implies payment of all interest accrued upto the date of repayment of the capital.
If arrears of interest cannot be paid from revenue receipts, such arrears cannot be paid from the capital receipts.
What may be paid out of capital receipts and the circumstances under which the payment may be made are expressly provided in section 67 (2) which says that if for any reasons beyond the control of the Board the revenue receipts in any year are not adequate to meet the operating, maintenance and management expenses, taxes on income and profits, and the liabilities referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) of section 67 (1), then the shortfall shall be paid out of its capital receipts with the sanction of the State Government.
There is no doubt that arrears of interest are, under the scheme of accounting contemplated by the Act, required to be paid out of revenue receipts of the Board and are expenses properly chargeable to revenues within the meaning of that expression in section 59 of the Act.
[654D G] 13.
The Legislature has clarified the aforesaid position by the Amending Act 16 of 1983 which came into force from April 1, 1985.
A separate section, section 67A has been introduced alongwith a consequential amendment of section 67 providing that interest of loans advanced under section 64 or deemed to have been advanced under section 60, which is charged to revenues in any year may be paid out of revenue receipts of a year only after all other expenses referred to in section 59 (1) are met and further providing that so much of interest as is not paid in any year by reason of the priority mentioned in section 67 A shall be deemed to be a deferred liability to be discharged in accordance with provision of section 67A in the subsequent year or years.
These provisions show beyond doubt that payment of arrears of interest is an expense properly chargeable to the revenues under the scheme of the Act.
[654G H; 655A B] 14.
Statements containing details of interest payable in each year of accounting, the arrears of interest due and payable, the total revenue receipts and some other relevant particulars, in the present case show that the Electricity Board has not been earning huge profits and generating large surpluses as suggested by the consumers.
Once it is established there is hardly any revenue surplus left after meeting the expenses required to be met by section 59, the complaint of the consumers that there was no justification for the tariff increase because of large surpluses earned by the Board, loses all force.
[655G; 656H; 657A] 15.
As regards the rates of tariff for the relevant years, in the case of Extra High Tension and High Tension Industrial Consumers, the 634 change effected by the 1980 revision was minimal but on the higher side in 1982.
In the case of Low Tension Industrial and Commercial Consumers, the change effected in 1980 was very steep but tended to come down in 1982.
[657D E] 16.
On the whole, it cannot possibly be said that the rates have been so fixed by the Electricity Board as to throw a heavy burden on any section of the consumers without regard to their ability to pay without regard to the nature of the supply and purpose for which the supply is required.
1980 81 and 1981 82 were the years when accounts of the Electricity Board recorded a net surplus after meeting all expenses including interest charges.
It is, therefore, desirable that the Board may reconsider the 1980 tariff for Low Tension Commercial and Low Tension Industrial Consumers.
[658A B] 17.
A large part of expenditure involved in the setting up of the new projects had to be met in the several years preceding the actual commissioning of the projects.
Therefore, it is not correct to say that the cost structure arrived at by the Tariff Committee was in any way affected by the non commissioning of the new projects between 1980 and 1982.
[658C D] 18.
The rise in revenue receipts in the year 1978 79 due to the unprecedented sale of energy to neighbouring States, a special situation which was the result of peculiar circumstances, which prevailed that year and continued to prevail for a few years thereafter, cannot be taken as a permanent phenomenon to every year.
[658E F] 19.
The actual cost of producing energy in 1981 82 and 1982 83 had risen much above the projected 1982 costs and therefore the 1982 Committee had no option but to again consider further revision of the tariff.
It is not within the province of this Court to examine the price structure in minute detail if it is established that the revision of tariff is not arbitrary and is not the result of the application of any wrong principle.
[658G H] 20.
Section 49 (3) expressly reserves the power of the Board, if it considers it necessary or expedient, to fix different tariff for the supply of electricity to any person having regard to the geographical position of any area, the nature of the supply and purpose for which supply is required and other relevant factors.
[659B C] 635 D.C.M. vs Rajasthan State Electricity Board, [1986] 2 SCC 431, referred to.
Different tariffs for High and Low Tension Consumers and for different classes of consumers, such as, Industrial, Commercial, Agricultural and Domestic have been prescribed and the differention appears to be reasonable and far from arbitrary and based on intelligent and intelligible criteria.
[659C]
