'A ', a company, the managing agents of two Indian companies entered into a sub partnership with one 'B ' in 1907 and shared equally the emoluments from the managing agency. 'B ' died in 1316 leaving a Will bequeathing all his property to his wife 'C '. 'C ' executed two deeds of assignment in 1927 assigning her share of the emoluments under the sub partnership in favour of her son 'D ', who began to receive the half share of the emoluments from the managing agency. 'D ' executed a Will in 1935 appointing his wife and a solicitor as executors and trustees upon trust of his real and personal estate. 'D ' who was domiciled in England died in 1943.
The High Court in England granted probate of the Will in June, 1943.
Letters of Administration were obtained in India in August, 1944.
The widow of 'D ' was a non resident and not a citizen of India.
The Will inter alia empowered the two trustees to sell, call in and convert into money such parts of the estate as may not consist of money, at such time and in such manner as they thought fit, postponing such sale and conversion for such period as they thought proper.
They were enjoined after meeting the funeral and testamentary expenses, and debts and legacies to invest the residue of the ready monies arising from such calling in and conversion of the estate, with the consent of the assessee during her life and afterwards at the discretion of the trustees, in the investments authorised under the Will and to transpose with investments into others, and to stand possessed of the residue of such monies and all investments and the income thereof upon trust subject to the further powers and provisions declared under the Will.
It was provided that the trustees would pay the income of the residuary trust fund to the assessee during her life.
After the death of the assessee the trustees would stand possessed of the residuary trust fund in trust for 675 the benefit of the testator 's children in accordance with the further provisions of the Will.
The corpus of the trust consisted of certain shares in an Indian company and the income from the managing agency of the Indian companies.
The question that arose was whether the widow of 'D ' was liable to wealth tax on her interest in the Indian assets in the hands of the trustees.
The Wealth Tax officer assessed her to tax for the assessment years; 1957 58 to 1962 63.
The appeals filed against the assessments were dismissed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, who held that the assessee possessed rights and interest in the shares and the managing agency which were tangible moveable properties located in India and, therefore, subject to wealth tax under the Act.
In appeals before the Appellate Tribunal it was contended by the assessee that the assets held by her were situated outside India and being a non resident she was not taxable thereon.
Alternatively it was urged that she was entitled to exemption under sub cl.
(iv) of cl.
(e) of s.2 of the Wealth Tax Act.
The Tribunal held that the assessee who has a life interest in the testamentary trust estate comprising inter alia of the shares in an Indian Company and commission from the managing agency of an Indian Company can be said to have an interest in such shares and commission and that such interest is property located in India so as to be taxable under the Wealth Tax Act.
It further held that the life interest of the assesee in the testamentary trust estate is not an annuity which is exempt under section 2(e)(iv) of the Wealth Tax Act.
The matter was referred to the High Court at the instance of the assessee.
It took the view that the right which the assessee acquired h under the trust was a right to have the trust administered in accordance with the provisions of the Will.
While the legal ownership of the trust properties including the shares and the managing agency, vested in the trustees and remained so vested, the beneficial interest of the assessee did not extend to any right in any of the trust properties in specie and did not confer upon her any right of ownership over any property.
(, Having regard to the nature and character of the right considered with the nature and extent of the powers conferred on the trustees to deal with the estate before the assessee could be said to have any right to the residual income, and the fact that the appropriate forum for the administration of the trust estate and for enforcement of the rights of the beneficiary under the Will were the appropriate courts in England, I I 676 the High Court held that the assets of the assessee must be regarded as foreign assets and, therefore, not located in India.
The Revenue obtained a certificate under section 23 of the Act and preferred appeals to this Court On the question whether during the year ending on the valuation date the assessee 's life interest in the testamentary estate of her husband consisting of the Indian shares and the commission from the managing agency of the Indian companies could be said to constitute an asset located outside India, and whether the assessee was entitled to the benefit of cl.
(i) of section 6 of the Wealth Tax Act.
Dismissing the Appeals, ^ HELD: The asset in question of the assessee was a right in the nature of a chose in action enforceable in an appropriate Court in England and, therefore, must be regarded as a foreign asset, an asset not located in India.
The assessee was, therefore, entitled to the benefit of cl.
(i) of section 6 of the Wealth Tax Act.
[686C] On the relevant valuation dates the estate of the testator had not been completely and finally administered and the trustees had not proceeded to the point where it could be said that there was a clear and ascertained residue from which the income payable to the assessee as a beneficiary under the Will could be known, and whether the assessee was entitled to income arising from the Indian shares and the managing agency of the lndian Companies.
All that the assessee was then entitled to was the right to have the trust administered.
[685G H; 686A] Having regard to the several considerations patent in this case that the settlement was an English settlement created by an Englishman who was resident in England, that it was an English Will proved in England, and the trustees were residents in England and moreover that the assessee, the beneficiary, was an English woman, who was also residing in England, the High Court rightly held that the right of assessee was in the nature of chose in action enforceable in England.
[686B C] Attorney General vs Johnson, ; In re Smyth, [1898] 1 Ch. 89; Sudeley (Lord) vs Attorney General, [1897] Appeal Cases 11; Philipson Stow and others vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1961] Appeal Cases 727; Skinner and others vs Attorney General, ; In re Smith, Decd.
Executor Trustee and Agency 677 Company of South Australia Ld.
vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, A [1951] I Ch 360; Commissioner of Stamp Duties (Queensland) vs Hugh Duncan Livingston, [1965] Appeal Cases 694; Dr. Barnardo 's Homes vs Special Income Tax Commissioners, [1921] 2 Appeal Cases 1; A. & F. Harvey Ltd. as Agents to Executors of the Estate of late Andrew Harvey vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, , referred to.
