The age of superannuation of the clerical staff employed under the Respondent No. 1 is 60 years while in the case of the management staff the terminal point is 58 years.
The officers of the management staff in their petitions under Article 32 alleged that the disparity in the age of retirement between two groups of employees gives rise to discriminatory treatment.
They also claim that in keeping with the current trend in the commercial field such age should be fixed at 60.
Dismissing the petitions, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Classification on the basis of reasonable differentia is a well known basis.
Clerical staff and officers of the management staff belong to separate classifications.
Therefore, the petitioners, in the fact of the case, are not entitled to seek support from Article 14 for their claim.
[741 F] 2.
The claim of the clerical staff arose in an industrial dispute.
The scope of such adjudication is wide and broad based.
The Tribunal has expansive jurisdiction to exercise when a reference is made to it.
This Court in appeal against the Award was exercising the same jurisdiction in that case.
It would not be appropriate for this Court to exercise that Jurisdiction in dealing with an application under Article 32 of the Constitution.
The officers of the management staff are not workmen.
[741 G H] 3.
The petitioners have not brought before the Court all the mate 740 rial relevant to the making of a claim as made from which support could be had.
On the other hand, the Respondent No. 1 in its affidavit in opposition has placed various aspects to justify fixation and continuation of the present age of retirement.
[742 E F] 4.
In keeping with the trend of the times, a claim of the type as laid in the instant applications may have to be examined.
However, that adjudication will be required to be made on more cogent and appropriate material than now.
If this Court is moved, it has then to be considered whether an application under Article 32 is the proper remedy for it.
However, the petitioners are not entitled to their claim in these applications.
[742 F G] Som Prakash Rekhi vs Union of India & Anr., ; , followed.
Workmen of the Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (Refining Division) Bombay vs Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. and another; , , M/s. British Paints (India) Ltd. vs Its Workmen, ; and G.M. Talang and others vs Shaw Wallace and Co. & Anr., , referred to.
