The petitioner a Laboratory Attendant in an Arts College under the Department of Collegiate Education was deputed to the City Improvement Trust, for a period of two years.
He was relieved of his duties with effect from 30.10.61, by the Department of Collegiate Education.
His deputation period was extended for a further period of one year from 1.11.63 and for a further period of two years with effect from 1.11.64.
In the last order extending the period of deputation it was made clear that no further extension beyond 31.10.66 would be allowed.
While the petitioner was on deputation he was promoted as Upper Division Clerk in the City Improvement Trust.
He made a representation on 3.9.66 requesting the State Government to allow him to continue in the City Improvement Trust, terminating his lien in the Collegiate Education Department.
No orders were passed by the Directorate of Collegiate Education or by the Government on this representation.
While the petitioner was continuing on deputation in the City Improvement Trust, the Trust was merged with the State Housing Board, respondent No.3.
On 29.3.72 orders were passed under Rule 24 of the Kerala Service Rules terminating the lien of the petitioner in the Department of Collegiate Education.
1099 A Show cause notice was issued by the Directorate of Collegiate Education on 21.3.73 asking the petitioner to submit his explanation against the proposed removal of his lien in that department.
The petitioner submitted a representation stating that he was not at fault in not joining duty in the parent department, and that he was retained in foreign service anticipating Government 's orders, and that he was not interested in continuing on deputation, and that the period after 1.11.66 may be treated as an extension of the deputation period.
The explanation was not accepted and orders were passed terminating the lien of the petitioner.
The petitioner assailed the aforesaid order terminating his lien in a Writ Petition to this Court.
Allowing the Writ Petition, ^ HELD: 1.
The Order terminating the petitioner 's lien in the instant case is passed on the specious plea that his explanation is not satisfactory.
The order should have been more articulate in its content.
[1103C] 2.
Rule 19(a) of the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1960 mandates that an officer 's lien on a post shall not be terminated even with his consent if the consequence is to leave him without a lien or a suspended lien upon a permanent post.
Rule 24 speaks of removal from the service when an officer has been continuously absent from duty for five years, of special circumstances which will enable the department concerned to save an officer from its vice, and of the necessity to follow the procedure laid down in the Rules for removal of an officer from service.
[1102B C; F H] 3.
Without specific orders, the petitioner could not abandon the deputed foreign service and join the parent department.
There should be a clear finding of continuous absence from duty by the Department to attract Rule 24.
The department also has to satisfy the Court whether the special circumstances of this case would not rescue the petitioner from the rigour of Rule 24, and that the procedure laid down in the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960 is complied with.
[1103B C]
