When Baroda became Borough Municipality on 1st May 1950, the provisions of the Bombay Tenancy Act, 1939 were applicable to the lands situated within its municipal limits.
That Act was repealed by the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 which was made applicable to the Baroda Municipality with effect from August 1, 1956 by the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Amendment) Act, 1955 (Bombay Act No. XIII of 1956).
Section 88(1)(b) of the 1948 Act, as substituted by section 48 of the Act of 1956, provided that nothing in the Act shall apply to any area which the state Government may, by notification in the official gazette, specify as being reserved for non agricultural or industrial development.
Section 89(2)(b) further laid down that nothing in that Act or any repeal effected thereby, shall affect or be deemed to affect, any right, title, interest, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred before the commencement of this Act.
Section 89A recited that notwithstanding the repeal of the 1939 Act, the provisions of ss.3, 3A and 4 or that Act, as set out in Schedule I to the 1948 Act, shall always be deemed to be extended to and to be in force in those areas on the dates on which the 1948 Act was extended to and brought into force.
The Government by a notification dated May 21, 1958 issued under section 88(1)(b) of the 1948 Act reserved the lands within the municipal limits of the city of Baroda for non agricultural and industrial development.
Appellant 's husband defendant, took possession of certain lands situated in the city of Baroda, from the respondent trustee of a temple for a period of three years from 1956 to 1958 at an annual rent of 794 Rs.2225 by executing a Kabuliyat dated June 2, 1956, which was not registered.
As he fell into arrears of rent for the said years, the respondent plaintiff filed a suit for its recovery.
The defence was that the suit was not maintainable in a civil court inasmuch as even though the Tenancy Act ceased to apply on the issue of the notification under section 88(1)(b) in respect of lands within the municipal limits of the city of Baroda, yet the rights of the tenant in respect of the suit land, which had accrued before the said notification, subsisted.
The trial court held that the Tenancy Act was applicable to the case and since the Mamlatdar had already determined the reasonable rent in respect of the lands in question, the civil court was not competent to determine the same once again.
The appeal preferred was dismissed by the District Judge.
On further appeal, the High Court held that in view of the notification issued under section 88(1)(b) of the said Act the provisions of the Tenancy Act will not apply retrospectively and directed the trial court to redetermine the issue.
On receipt of the findings of the trial court, the High Court allowed the second appeal, setting aside the judgment and decree passed by the courts below.
In the Appeal by special Leave to this Court it was contended for the appellant that in view of the provisions of section 89(2)(b) the right of the defendant to pay rent as determined by the Mamlatdar under sections 8 and 9 of the 1948 Act was not affected by the retrospective effect given to the provisions of section 88 of the Act.
Dismissing the Appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The specific provision in section 89(2)(b) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 to the effect that nothing in the Act or any repeal affected thereby shall, save as expressly provided therein, affect or be deemed to affect any right, title, interest, ob ligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred before the commencement of the Act, read with the specific provision of section 88(1)(b) that on issue of a notification specifying areas reserved for non agricultural or industrial development the provisions of the Act shall not apply to the lands so notified, make it apparent that the Act will not be applicable to the lands notified.
[799 B; D E] The issuance of the notification dated 21st May, 1958 under section 88(1)(b) of the Tenancy Act, 1948 specifying the lands within the municipal limits of Baroda city reserved for non agricultural and industrial development in the instant case made the provisions of the 795 Act inapplicable retrospectively, subject to the exception provided in sub section
(2) of section 88, and with it all rights, title, obligation etc.
accrued or acquired under the said Act ceased to exist.
The provisions of section 89(2)(b) are, therefore, not applicable to protect such right, title or interest, except as provided in section 89A owing to express provision made in section 88 of the Act.
[801 C E] Protected tenants are only those tenants specified in sections 3, 3A and 4 of the 1939 Act and no new protected tenant could come into existence under the 1948 Act.
[801 B C] In the instant case, therefore, the civil court was legally competent to determine the reasonable rent payable by the defendent tenant.
The determination by Mamlatdar under sections 8 and 9 of the Tenancy Act 1948 automatically becomes ineffective and non est by virtue of section 88(1)(b) of the said Act and the notification made there under.
[801E F] Mohanlal Chunilal Kothari vs Tribhovan Haribhai Tamboli, ; and Sidram Narsappa Kamble vs Sholapur Borough Municipality and Anr, ; , referred to.
Sakharam @, Bapusaheb Narayan Sanas and Anr.
vs Manikchand Motichand Shah and Anr., ; , distinguished.
