Section 11 of the Punjab Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 conferred jurisdiction on the Collector to decide cases of persons claiming right, title or interest in any land vested or deemed to have been vested in a Panchayat, or claiming that any land has not so vested in a Panchayat and against such order an appeal was provided to the Commissioner.
Under section 12 every order of the Collector or Commissioner was final and such order could not be called in question in any Court by way of appeal or revision or in any original suit, application or execution proceedings.
Section 13 of the Act provided that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any property or any right to or interest in any property is or is not shamlat deh vested or deemed to have been vested in a Panchayat under the Act.
The petitioners instituted a civil suit under O. 1, r. 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure for a declaration that they were the owners in possession of the suit land, that the Gram Panchayat had no sort of right in the suit land, that the suit land had been wrongly shown as belonging to the Panchayat by entries made in the revenue records which were not binding on the plaintiffs, and for an injunction restraining the Panchayat from interfering with their possession.
The respondent Panchayat contended in its written statement that the civil court had no jurisdiction to try the suit by virtue of the provisions of section 13 of the Act.
The trial court, however held that since the question involved in the suit was 832 simply one of title to the suit land and it was not necessary to decide whether the suit land was shamlat deh or not and whether the land had validly vested in the Panchayat or not being shamlat deh, it had jurisdiction to try the suit.
Allowing the revision petition of the Panchayat the High Court held that the suit was not maintainable before the Civil Court since the issues involved in it were not triable by such court by virtue of section 11 read with section 13 of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: The High Court was right in holding that the suit was not maintainable before the civil court.
The plaintiffs who claimed to be the owners of the suit land had avoided to seek a declaration that the suit land was not shamlat deh.
They cannot by drawing their plaint cleverly be not claiming a declaration that the land in question was not shamlat deh confer jurisdiction on the civil court when by virtue of the Act the jurisdiction of civil court to try such suits had been taken away.
The suit had been filed against the Panchayat and the Panchayat had raised the plea that the suit land was a part of the shamlat deh and that the plaintiffs had no right or title to it.
The civil court cannot make a declaration in favour of the plaintiffs without deciding the question whether the property in question was shamlat deh or not and whether it belonged to the Panchayat or not.
That question has to be decided by the Collector only under section 11 of the Act and not by the civil court.
[835H; 836A C; 836G] Bhagu & Ors.
vs Ram Sarup & Ors., , distinguished.
