The plot in question, being an evacuee property was included in the compensation pool under section 14 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation Compensation) Act, 1954 and put to auction sale on August 24, 1959.
The highest bid of the appellant was provision ally accepted and he deposited l/5th of the amount, but failed to deposit the balance amount.
The Managing officer, therefore, cancelled the auction sale.
The Chief Settlement Commissioner set aside the order of the Managing officer and allowed time to the appellant to deposit the balance of purchase price by May 30, 1968, but the appellant again failed to deposit the amount within time.
Consequently the Settlement officer by his order dated October 2, 1968 cancelled the auction sale made in appellant 's favour and the property was put to auction sale on January 17, 1969.
Respondents Nos. 2 and 3 made the highest bid and deposited 20% of the amount.
The appellant appealed before the Assistant Settlement officer against the order dated October 2, 1968 cancelling the auction sale, which was rejected on April 2, 1969.
His revision petition was also dismissed on August 13, 1969.
However, in the petition under section 33 of the Act made before the Central Government, the order cancelling the auction sale held on August 24, 1959 was 947 set aside by the authority exercising the delegated powers of the Central Government and granted 15 days ' time to the appellant for depositing the balance of the purchase price with a condition that on failure to deposit the balance of the auction price the petition shall stand dismissed.
The appellant again failed to deposit the amount within time, but on a request made by him, the time was extended till February 28, 1970 and the appellant deposited the remaining auction price within the extended time.
A petition under Article 226 filed by the respondents Nos. 2 and 3 challenging the order dated February 6, 1970 setting aside the order cancelling the auction sale held on August 24, 1959 and order extending time till February 28, 1970 and also for a direction to the authorities to finalise the auction sale held in their favour on January 17, 1969 was dismissed by a Single Judge.
The Division Bench, however, allowed the Letters Patent Appeal, quashed the orders of delegated authority and directed the authorities to finalise the auction sale held in respondents ' favour and held: (1) that sale of urban agricultural property which formed part of the compensation pool could be held only in accordance with the Rules framed under the Act as contemplated by sections 8 and 40.
Since no rules had been framed for the disposal of the urban agricultural property, the Central Government could not lawfully provide for sale of the urban agricultural land by executive directions and consequently auction sale held on August 24, 1959 was illegal; (2) that the delegated authority exercising powers under section 33 had no jurisdiction to grant time to the appellant for making deposit or to further extend the time to enable him to deposit balance of auction price by February 28, 1970; and (3) that the delegated authority had passed orders in violation of natural justice as no notice was issued to the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 and no opportunity of hearing was afforded to them.
Allowing the appellant 's appeal partly and modifying the order of the High Court, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Sections X and 20 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation Compensation) Act 1954 provide for payment of compensation to displaced persons in any of the forms as specified including by sale to the displaced persons of any property from the compensation pool and setting off the purchase money against the compensation to them.
[956B C] 2.
Section 16 confers power on the Central Government to take 948 measures which it may consider necessary for the custody, management and disposal of compensation pool property.
The Central Government had, therefore, ample powers to take steps for disposal of pool property by auction sale and for that purpose it had authority to issue administrative directions.
[956C D] 3.
Section 40(2) (j) of the Act provides for framing of rules prescribing procedure for the transfer of property out of the compensation pool and the adjustment of the value of the property so transferred against the amount of compensation.
Neither section 8, 16, 20 nor section 40 lay down that payment of compensation by sale of the pool property to a displaced person shall not be done unless rules are framed.
These provisions confer power on the Central Government and the authorities constituted under the Act to pay compensation to displaced persons by sale, or allotment of pool property to them in accordance with rules, if any.
[956D E] 4.
Framing of rules regulating the mode or manner of disposal of urban agricultural property by sale to a displaced person is not a condition precedent for the exercise of power by the authorities concerned under sections 8, 16 and 20.
If the legislative intent was that until and unless rules were framed power conferred under the said sections could not be exercised, that intent could have been made clear by using the expression "except in accordance with the rules framed" a displaced person shall not be paid compensation by sale of pool property.
In the absence of any such provision the framing of rules, could not be a condition precedent for the exercise of power.
[956E G] 5.
Where a statute confers powers on an authority to do certain act or exercise power in respect of certain matters subject to rules, the exercise of such power does not depend on the existence of Rules unless the statute expressly provides for the same.
In other words, framing of rules is not a condition precedent to the exercise of the power expressly and unconditionally conferred by the statute.
[954H; 955A B] 6.
The expression "subject to Rules" only means in accordance with the rules, if any.
If rules are framed, the powers so conferred on authority could be exercised in accordance with those rules.
But if no rules are framed, there is no void and the authority is not precluded from exercising the Power conferred by the statute.
[955B C] Bishan Singh vs The Central Govt.
and others 1961(63) Punjab Law Reporter p. 75, over ruled.
949 T. Cajee vs U. Jormanik Siem and Anr.
, ; , B.N. Nagarajan and Ors.
vs State of Mysore and Ors.
, , Mysore State Road Transport Corporation vs Gopinath, ; , U.P. State Electricity Board vs City Board Mussoorie and Ors., ; , relied upon.
The Central Government had ample jurisdiction to issue administrative directions regulating the payment of compensation to the displaced persons by sale of the urban agricultural property.
The view taken by the High Court in Bishan Singh 's case is not sustainable.
The High Court was, therefore, in error in holding that the auction sale held in appellant 's favour on August 24, 1959 was illegal and void.
[956G H] 8.
So far as the challenge to the validity of the order of the delegated authority extending time to enable the appellant to deposit the auction sale money is concerned, the High Court had quashed the same although that order was not before it, as none of the parties filed the same.
Respondents who had challenged that order should have filed a copy thereof.
In the absence of the impugned order the High Court could not quash the same.
(9) Normally whenever an order of Government or some authority is impugned before the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, the copy of the order must be produced before it.
In the absence of the impugned order it could not be possible to ascertain the reasons which may have impelled the authority to pass the order.
It is, therefore, improper to quash the order which is not produced before the High Court in a proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution.
[957E F] (10) The power conferred upon the Central Government under section 33 of the Act is a residuary power in nature.
It confers wide powers on the Central Government to call for the record of any case and to pass any order which it may think fit in the circumstances of the case.
The only limitation on exercise of this power is that the Central Government shall not pass any order which may be inconsistent with any of the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder.
Therefore, the Central Government or the delegated authority has power to set aside any order of the subordinate authorities, or to issue directions which it may consider necessary on the facts, of the case subject to the aforesaid rider.
This power is intended to be used to do justice and to mitigate hardship to a party unbriddled by technicalities.
Therefore, the 950 delegated authority while exercising powers of the Central Government under section 33 had ample jurisdiction to grant time.
[957H; 958A C] 11.
Extension of time to enable the appellant to deposit the money did not amount to review of the earlier order dated 6.2.70 and the default cause therein was intended to ensure compliance of the order.
[958D] Mahanta Ram Das vs Ganga Das, ; , relied upon.
After cancellation of the auction sale held in appellant 's favour, the property in dispute was again put to auction sale and at that auction sale respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were the highest bidders.
Their bid was provisionally accepted and they had deposited one fifth of the auction sale amount.
[959D E] 13.
The highest bidder at an auction sale does not get any right or interest in the property till the auction sale is approved, confirmed and the sale deed is executed in his favour.
The respondents have been in possession of the property since long and furthermore on the basis of their highest bid made at the subsequent sale they had sufficient interest in the matter to contest the appellant 's petition made under section 33 of the Act.
The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that the respondents should have been afforded opportunity of hearing before any order on the appellant 's petition was passed.
Since no such opportunity was afforded, the High Court was justified in quashing the order.
The High Court 's order to that extent is upheld.
[960A D] Bombay Salt and Chemical vs Johnson and Ors., AIR 1958 SC 289, referred to.
The Central Government or the authority exercising its power under section 33 of the Act is directed to consider the appellant 's petition afresh in accordance with law after giving notice and affording opportunity of hearing to respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
[960D E]
