The Bihar Control of Crimes Act, 1981 was enacted to make special provisions for the control and suppression of anti social elements with a view to maintenance of public order.
Section 2(d) defines "Anti Social Element" and section 12 deals with power to make orders for detaining certain persons.
Upon the materials, the District Magistrate, hl his order of detention under section 12(2) has stated that he was satisfied that the petitioner was an anti social element and was habitually committing offences punishable under Chapters XVI and XVII of the Indian Penal Code and as such his movements and acts adversely affected the public order.
The incidents referred to in the grounds of detention showing criminal propensity of the petitioner had taken place one year prior to the date of passing of the detention order.
The petitioner unsuccessfully challenged his detention before the High Court.
Dismissing the writ petition as well as the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Preventive Detention for social protection of the community is a hard law but, it is a necessary evil in the modern society and must be pragmatically construed, so that it works.
That is how law serves the society but does not become an impotent agent.
Anti social elements creating havoc have to be taken care of by law.
Lawless multitude bring democracy and Constitution into disrepute.
Bad facts bring hard laws but these should be properly and legally applied.
It should be so construed that it does not endanger social defence or the defence of the community, at the same time does not infringe the liberties of the citizens .
A balance should always be struck.
[920B D] 914 2.
The executive authority is not the sole judge of what is required for national security or public order.
But, the court cannot substitute its decision if the executive authority or the appropriate authority acts on proper materials and reasonably and rationally comes to that conclusion even though a conclusion with which the court might not be in agreement.
It is not for the court to put itself in the position of the detaining authority and to satisfy itself that untested facts reveal a path of crime provided these facts are relevant.
[920E F] 3.
If, in the background of a case, and having regard to the definition of 'anti social element ' in section 2(d) of the Bihar Control of Crimes Act, 1981, an appropriate authority charged with the implementation of the Act, comes to the satisfaction that the detenu is one who is habitually committing or abetting the commission of offences, such a conclusion is neither irrational nor unreasonable.
[919C D] 4.
In the instant case, it cannot be said that the power of preventive detention has been used to clip the 'wings of the accused ' who was involved in a criminal prosecution.
The fact that the petitioner was in jail has been taken into consideration and all the relevant documents were in fact supplied to him.
Judged by all relevant standards the order of detention cannot be said to be either illegal or beyond the authority of law.
Therefore, there was no ground for interference with the order of l detention.
[920H; 921A G] 5.
While adequacy or sufficiency is no ground of a challenge, relevancy or proximity are grounds of challenge and proximity would be relevant in order to determine whether an order of detention was arrived at irrationally or unreasonably.
[919G H] Vijay Narain Singh vs State of Bihar & Ors., ; and The Barium Chemicals Ltd. and Anr.
vs The Company Law Board and others, [1366] (Supp.) SCR 311, followed.
Ichchu Devi Choraria vs Union of India & Ors., ; at 651, Ibrahim Ahmed Batti vs State of Gujarat and others; , at 558 and State of Punjab vs Jagdev Singh Talwandi, [1984] 2 SCR at 62 & 63 inapplicable.
