Rule 31(v) of the Indian Tourism Development Corporation (Conduct, Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1978 provides that the services of an employee, who had completed his probationary period and who has been confirmed or deemed to be confirmed, may be terminated by giving him 90 days ' notice or pay in lieu thereof.
The services of the appellant, who was an employee of the respondent Corporation holding the post of Manager of a Hotel at the material time were terminated by Memorandum No. P B(OP) 22 dated 18th September, 1984, in exercise of the powers under the said rule by giving him pay for three months in lieu of notice.
Aggrieved by the said order the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court assailing the constitutional validity of r. 31(v) of the said Rules, which was summarily dismissed.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The Indian Tourism Development Corporation is an 924 instrumentality of the State and, therefore, 'State ' within the parameters of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
[927D E] Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. & Anr.
vs Brojo Nath Ganguly & Anr., applied.
2.1 Rule 31(v) of the Indian Tourism Development Corporation (Conduct, Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1978, is unconstitutional and void, for such a rule which provides for termination of the services of the employees of the respondent Corporation simply by giving ninety days ' notice or by payment of salary for the notice period in lieu of such notice, cannot co exist with Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution of India.
The fundamental right embedded in these Articles is not a mere paper tiger nor is it so ethereal that it can be nullified or eschewed by a simple device of framing a rule which authorises termination of the services of an employee by merely giving a notice of termination.
[930D E;928F;929F] 2.2 The tenure of service of a citizen who takes up employment with the State cannot be made to depend on the pleasure or whim of the competent authority unguided by any principle or policy, nor his services allowed to be terminated on an irrational ground arbitrarily or capriciously.
The authorities cannot be invested with uncontrolled discriminatory power to practise on considerations not necessarily based on the welfare of the organisation but possibly based on personal likes and dislikes, personal preferences and prejudices.
Provincialism, casteism, nepotism, religious fanaticism, and several other obnoxious factors may in that case freely operate on the mind of the competent authority in deciding whom to retain and whom to get rid of.
And these dangers are not imaginary ones.
They are very much real in organisations where there is a confluence of employees streaming in from different States.
Such a rule as in the instant case, is capable of robbing an employee of the dignity, and making him a supine person whose destiny is at the mercy of the concerned authority.
The impugned rule, therefore, deserves to be quashed.
[928H; 929A B; D F] Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited & Anr.
vs Brojo Nath Ganguly & Anr., ; State Electricity Board vs D. B. Ghosh, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 1014, referred to.
3.1 The Court has full discretion in the matter of granting relief to suit the needs of the matter at hand.
If satisfied that ends of justice so demand, the Court can certainly direct that the employer shall have the 925 option not to reinstate, provided the employer pays reasonable compensation as indicated by it.
[932G] 3.2 In the sphere of employer employee relations in public sector undertakings, to which Article 12 of the Constitution of India is attracted, it cannot be posited that reinstatement must invariably follow as a consequence of holding that an order of termination of service of an employee is void.
Though in regard to workmen and employees, reinstatement would be a rule, and compensation in lieu thereof a rare exception, as regards the high level managerial cadre the matter deserves to be viewed from an altogether different perspective.
[932A C] 3.3 The public sector needs to be managed by capable and efficient personal with unimpeachable integrity and the requisite vision, who enjoy the fullest confidence of the policy makers.
It is but in public interest that such undertakings or their Board of Directors are not compelled and obliged to entrust their managements to personnel in whom, on reasonable grounds, they have no trust or faith and with whom they are in a bonafide manner unable to function harmoniously as a team.
These factors have to be taken into account by the Court at the time of passing the consequential order.
[932E G] In the instant case, it cannot be said that the apprehension voiced by the respondent Corporation as regards the negative consequences of reinstatement is unreasonable.
The relations between the parties appear to have been strained beyond the point of no return.
The Trade Union of the employees has lodged a strong protest and even held out a threat of strike, in the context of some acts of the appellants.
Such unrest among the workmen is likely to have a prejudicial effect on the working of the undertaking which would prima facie be detrimental to the larger National Interest.
In such a situation neither the undertaking nor the appellant can improve their image or performance.
It is, therefore, a fit case for granting compensation in lieu of reinstatement.
[933A C] 4.
In the private sector the managerial cadre of employees is altogether excluded from the purview of the Industrial Disputes Act and similar labour legislations.
It can cut the dead wood and can get rid of a managerial cadre employee in case he is considered to be wanting in performance or in integrity.
Not so in the public sector under a rule similar to r. 31(v).
Public sector undertakings may under the circumstances be exposed to irreversible damage at the hands of an employee belonging to a high managerial cadre on account of the faulty policy 926 decisions or on account of lack of efficiency or probity of such an employee.
The very existence of the undertaking may be endangered beyond recall.
Such a situation can be remedied by enacting a regulation permitting the termination of the employment of employee belonging to higher managerial cadre, if the undertaking has reason to believe that his performance is unsatisfactory or inadequate, or there is a bonafide suspicion about his integrity, these being factors which cannot be called into aid to subject him to a disciplinary proceeding.
If termination is made under such a rule or regulation, perhaps it may not attract the vice of arbitrariness or discrimination condemned by Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution of India, inasmuch as the factors operating in the case of such an employee will place him in a class by himself and the classification would have sufficient nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
[931A H] [Taking into account various factors, compensation equivalent to 3.33 years ' salary (including allowances as admissible) on the basis of the last pay and allowances drawn by the appellant was determined to be a reasonable amount to award in lieu of reinstatement, with statutory relief under section 89 of the Income tax Act, 1961 read with r. 21 A of the Income tax Rules, 1961.] [934C D; 936D E]
