The Ministry of Home Affairs by its Office Memorandum dated 14th May, 1940 laid down that if a vacancy arose in the cycle meant for a direct recruit, the direct recruit would rank senior to the departmental candidates even though the direct recruit joined the post after the departmental candidate had been promoted and confirmed.
This principle of fixation of seniority was subsequently superseded by Office Memorandum dated 22nd June 1949, which provided that the seniority would be determined on the basis of the length of service.
Another Office Memorandum issued on 22nd December, 1959, in supersession of the 1949 Office Memorandum laid down that the seniority was to be fixed on the basis of the date of confirmation.
Some of the officials, who had been directly appointed as Assistants in a department of the Government of India in the year 1957, filed a writ petition in the High Court in the year 1976 questioning the validity of the appointments of certain other Assistants who had been appointed or absorbed as Assistants prior to the induction of the writ petitioners into service as Assistants, and also the assisgnment of seniority to them over and above the petitioners.
The first draft seniority list of the Assistants in that department was issued in 1958 on the basis of length of continuous service placing the officials who were respondents to the writ petition above the petitioners, and was duly circulated.
No objections were received from the writ petitioners against the seniority assigned to them in the said seniority list.
Subsequently, the seniority lists in the Grade of Assistants were again issued in 1961 and 1965 but again no objections were raised by the writ petitioners.
994 On the basis of the 1959 Office Memorandum the seniroity list, as maintained in the department up to 1965, was revised in March, 1968.
In the revised seniority list the writ petitioners became senior to many of the departmental Assistants, who had a longer length of service, but for one reason or the other had not been confirmed in the post or were confirmed after the confirmation of the writ petitioners.
Consequent to the decision of this Court in Union of India vs M. Ravi Verma, ; , the said seniority list was again revised in the year 1976 resulting in the respondents in the writ petition, who were governed by the 1949 Office Memorandum, being shown as seniors to the petitioners.
The petitioners questioned the validity of the seniority list published in 1976.
The respondents in the writ petition raised a preliminary objection to the writ petition stating that it was liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches.
The writ petition was dismissed by the Single Judge.
The Letters Patent appeal filed by the petitoners was, however, allowed by the Division Bench, without adverting to the ground of delay.
The ancillary directions given by the Court resulted in the disturbance of the seniority of the above said respondents, who had been working in the department and on the date of the judgment had put in more than twenty five years of service as Assistants.
Allowing the appeals by special leave filed by the Union of India as well as the officials, who had been appointed prior to the date on which the writ petitioners were appointed, the Court, ^ HELD: The High Court was wrong in rejecting the preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondents to the writ petition on the ground of laches.
[1000E F] It is essential that any one who feels aggrieved by the seniority assigned to him should approach the court as early as possible, as otherwise in addition to the creation of a sense of insecurity in the minds of the Government servants there would also be administrative complications and difficulties.
[1000D E] Satisfactory service conditions postulate that there should be no sense of uncertainty amongst the Government servants created by the writ petitions filed after several years.
A Government servant who is appointed to any post ordinarily should at least after a period of 3 or 4 years of his appointment be allowed to attend to the duties attached to his post peacefully and without any sense of insecurity.
[1000C; 996D E] 995 The respondent petitioners should have in the ordinary course questioned the principle on the basis of which the seniority lists were being issued from time to time from the year 1958 and the promotions which were being made on the basis of the said lists within a reasonable time.
For the first time they filed the writ petition in the High Court in the year 1976 nearly 18 years after the first draft seniority list was published in the year 1958.
The appellants have been put to the necessity of defending their appointments as well as their seniority after nearly three decades.
This kind of fruitless and harmful litigation should be discouraged.
[1000B C; 996 E F] All the promotions made in the department to be reviewed in accordance with the impugned seniority list of 1976.
[1001G] R.S. Makashi & Ors.
vs I.M. Menon & Ors., ; and Maloon Lawrence Cecil D 'Souza vs Union of India & Ors., [1975] Supp.
SCR 409, referred to.
