The appellant, a sterling company carrying on business in tea with its Head office in the United Kingdom, invested in the shares of other tea companies in different parts of the world, and had a hundred per cent share holding in an Indian subsidiary.
The appellant was assessed under the Indian Income Tax Act 1922.
For the assessment year 1955 56 the appellant was assessed on its total world income on the basis of provisional figures of its business loss including depreciation, and its income from individuals.
As its Indian income exceeded its income outside India it was assessed as a resident.
Meanwhile the appellant had already been assessed for the subsequent assessment year 1956 57 in the status of a 'non resident ' and its income from dividends was assessed under the head 'Income from other Sources '.
The loss determined for the assessment year 1955 56 could not be carried forward and set off against the income for the assessment year 1956 57, as the latter assessment was made subsequent to the farmer.
The appellant preferred two revision applications, one each for the assessment years 1955 56 and 1956 57 under sub section (2) of section 33A.
In the revision application for the assessment year 1955 56, the appellant claimed that the quantum of loss determined for that year having been based on provisional figures should be revised on the basis of final figures certified by an Inspector of Taxes in the United Kingdom, that the loss should be ascertained for the purpose of carrying it forward, and that the loss should be bifurcated between an unabsorbed deprecia 981 tion and other loss.
In the revision application for the assessment year 1956 57, the appellant claimed a set off of the loss determined for the assessment year 1955 56 against the income of the assessment year 1956 57 on the ground that the shares held by it in different companies constituted its trading assets and the dividend income accruing therefrom should be regarded as income from accruing therefrom should be regarded as income from business.
During the pendency of these revision petitions the assessment for the assessment year 1957 58 was completed as a non resident, and the income was determined as receipt by way of dividends on its share holdings.
In the appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, it was claimed that the loss for the assessment year 1955 56 should be carried forward and set off against the income of the assessment year 1957 58 under sub section
(2) of section 24 because both the losses and the income arose from business carried on by the appellant, but the appeal was dismissed holding that there would be no loss if the loss for the assessment year 1955 56 was set off against the income for the assessment year 1956 57 and that the loss could not be legally set off directly in the assessment year 1957 58.
In further appeal, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal set aside the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and directed it to dispose of the appeal afresh after determining whether the appellant was entitled to set off a business loss arising outside the taxable territories for the assessment year 1955 56 against the dividend income arising in the taxable territories for the assessment year 1957 58.
The reference to the High Court was declined by the Appellate Tribunal.
The revision application pertaining to the assessment year 1955 56 was allowed subject to the claim being verified in regard to the figures and calculation of depreciation by the Income Tax Officer.
The revision application pertaining to the assessment year 1956 57, however, was rejected holding that the dividends earned by the appellant from the investments in shares of companies carrying on the tea business could not be said to be a part of the appellant 's business because the investments were not incidental to the appellant 's business activities and were not held as trading assets, that the companies from which the dividend was earned were not companies of which the appellant was managing agent, that a set off cannot be allowed to the extent of the 982 unabsorbed depreciation brought forward from the assessment year 1955 56 against the business income derived during the assessment year 1956 57, and that there was no business income in the assessment year 1956 57.
A Petition under article 226 filed by the appellant against the disposal of his revision application for the assessment year 1956 57 was dismissed by a Single Judge, and the appeal against that order as well as dismissed.
In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant it was contended: (1) that if this Court clarified that the Appellate Assistant Commissioner can proceed in the appeal relating to the assessment year 1957 58 pending before him without being influenced by the observations of the Commissioner of Income Tax and the High Court in the case relating to the assessment year 1956 57 on the aspect of carry forward of loss under sub section
(2) of section 24, the appeal would not be pursued, and that if such clarification is not possible then this Court should confine itself to the case relating to the assessment year 1956 57; (2) that the Commissioner of Income Tax had conceded in an earlier proceeding that the dividend income was income from business; (3) that the loss should be carried forward under sub section
(2) of section 24 from the assessment year 1955 56, to the assessment year 1956 57 and it is not necessary that the business carried on in the assessment year 1956 57 should be the same as that carried on in the assessment year 1955 56, and (4) that the claim of the appellant to carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation under sub section
(2) of section 10 should be allowed.
Partly allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The order of the Division Bench and of the Single Judge as well as the order of the Commissioner of Income Tax on the revision application for the assessment year 1956 57 are set aside in regard to the claim of the appellant to the carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation and the Commissioner is directed to dispose of the revision application afresh.
As to the rest of the reliefs the appeal is dismissed.
[992C D] 2.
Income tax is a single charge on the total income of an assessee.
For the purpose of computation the statute recognises different classes of income which it classifies under different heads of income.
For each head of income the statute has provided the mode of computing the quantum of such income.
The mode of computation varies with 983 the nature of class of such income, for the deductions permissible under the law in computing the income under each head bear a particular relevance to the nature of the income.
[988B C] 3.
The statute operates on the principle that it is the net income under each head which should be considered as a component of the total income.
The statute permits specified deductions from the gross receipt in order to compute the net income.
The net income under the different heads is then pooled together to constitute the total income.
The process of computation at this stage takes in the provisions relating to the carry forward and setting off of losses and of unabsorbed depreciation.
On the conclusion of the entire process of assessment what emerges is the figure of taxable income, the quantum of income which is assessed to tax.
[988C E] 4.
Ordinarily when income pertains to a certain head, the source of such income is peculiar to that head, but it is not unusual that commercial considerations may properly describe the source differently.
For instance, a banking concern may hold securities in the course of its business.
The securities constitute its trading assets and income from them would in the commercial sense be regarded as business income.
However, for the purposes of computation under the income tax, the income from such securities would be computed not under the head 'Income from Business ' but under the head 'Interest on Securities '.
[988E G] 5(i) Business income is broken up under different heads only for the purpose of computation of the total income, and that by such breakup the income does not cease to be the income of the business.
[988G] 5(ii) Section 6 of the Indian Income Tax Act 1922, which classified the taxable income under different heads made such classification only for the purpose of computation of the net income of the assessee.
[989C] United Commercial Bank Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City vs Chugandas and Co., ; ; Commissioner of Income tax, Andhra Pradesh vs Cocandada Radhaswami Band Ltd., and O.RM.M.SP.SV.
Firm vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, , 410 followed.
The mere circumstance that the appellant showed the dividend income under the head 'Income from other Sources ' in its returns can 984 not in law decide the nature of the dividend income.
It must be determined from the evidence whether having regard to the true nature and character of the income it could be described as income from business, even though it is liable to fall for computation under another head.
[989F G] 7.
In the instant case, the appellant placed material before the Commissioner of Income tax showing that it held shares in companies carrying on the tea business, and that in India it enjoyed a hundred per cent share holding in the Indian subsidiary.
But in order that the share holdings in tea companies should be regarded as the business assets of the appellant there must be material evidence indicating that the ownership of the share holdings is necessarily incidental to the business of tea carried on by the appellant or that the share holdings are held as business assets.
[989H; 990A B] 8.
From the material placed before the Court, the Revenue cannot be said to have admitted that the dividend income received by the appellant from its share holdings in other companies can be regarded as part of the appellant 's income from business.
[990F G] 9.
The loss cannot be carried forward under sub section
(2) of section 24 from the assessment year 1955 56 to the assessment year 1956 57 because the shares held by the appellant cannot be regarded as its trading assets.
[991A B]
