By a Deed of Trust dated May 10, 1950, the Nizam of Hyderabad created a Family Trust.
A corpus of nine crores in Government securities was transferred lo the trustees under that Deed, which was notionally divided into 175 equal units, 5 units to constitute a fund called the 'Reserve Fund ', 31/2 units to constitute the 'Family Trust Expenses Account ' and the remaining 116 1/2 units were allotted to the relatives mentioned in the Schedule in the manner provided therein.
The Trust Deed provided: (1) that the income or corpus of the Reserve Fund shall be applied for any special, unusual, unforeseen or emergency expenses for the benefit of the members of the settlor 's family specified in the Schedule; (2) that if there was a deficit in the Family Trust Expenses Account, a definite proportion of the income or corpus of the Preserve Fund had to be transferred to the Family Trust Expenses Account; (3) that the net income of the Family Trust Expenses Account shall be applied to the charges for the collection of the income of the Trust Fund and the remuneration of the trustees and of the members of the Committee of Management and to other costs, charges, expenses and outgoings relating to the members, (4) that on the death of any of the settlor 's, relatives, a proportionate share of the corpus of the Reserve Fund must be added to the unit or units of the corpus of the Trust Fund allocated to such member, and the amounts so amalgama ted are to be applied in accordance with the terms of the trust deed; and (5) that the corpus of the Family Trust Expenses Account has to be ultimately handed over to the Settlor 's successor to the dignity of Nizam and falling him to his eldest male descendant in the direct male line of succession in accordance with the rule of primogeniture.
974 The income of the two Funds were separately assessed for the assessment years 1960 61 and 1961 62.
Subsequently, the Income tax officer, being of opinion that there was only one settlement under the Trust Deed, reopened the assessments for the assessment years 1960 61 and 1961 62 under clause(a) of section 147 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and assessed the trustees for each of the assessment years on the combined income of the Reserve Fund and the Family Trust Expenses Account.
Following the same line, separate original assessments for the assessment years 1962 63 to 1965 66 were also made.
On appeal by the asses see, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner cancelled the assessments for all the years.
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and the High Court confirmed the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
In the appeals by the Revenue to this Court, on the question whether the incomes arising from the Reserve Fund and the Expenses Account of the Nizam 's Family Trust Deed can be aggregated in a single assessment for each of the assessment years 1960 61 to 1965 66. ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was right that the Settlor intended to create separate Trusts in respect of the Reserve Fund and the Family Trust Expenses Account, and that the respective incomes arising from the corpus of those Trusts cannot be aggregated in one single assessment but must be assessed separately.
[979A B] 2.
It is open to a Settlor to constitute two or more distinct trusts by a single document.
[978C] In the instant case, there is no doubt that separate funds were created, even though the division of the original Trust Fund may have been notional.
The objects for which the trustees held the Reserve Fund and the Family Trust Expenses Account are clearly demarcated and there is no overlapping or duplication.
There is also no intermingling of the Funds.
The transfer of a portion from one to the other cannot lead to a confusion in the separate identity of the two Trusts.
[978B E] 3.
Although the corpus of the Trust Fund vested in the same trustees, the trustees nonetheless held distinct and severable portions of the corpus of the Trust Fund under those separate trusts.
That this construction of the document accords with the intention of the Settlor is borne out by the provisions of sub clause (4) of clause 3 of the Trust Deed, which specifically provides that on the death of the Settlor the corpus of the Trust Fund was to be divided or to be created as notionally 975 divided into the 175 equal units mentioned therein for being allocated to the Settlor 's relatives specified in the Schedule.
[977G H; 978A B]
