The prosecution alleged that the accused respondents set fire to deceased 's body and his shop after sprink ling kerosene oil, that on seeing the fire P. Ws. 4, 5 and 6 rushed to the place and put off the fire from the body of the deceased who had come out of the shop ablaze, and that C.W. 1, the Assistant Sub Inspector of Police, who was on law and order duty also came to the place of occurrence simultaneously and witnessed the incident.
The deceased made a dying declaration before these witnesses stating that the said two accused had set fire to his body after pouring kerosene.
One of the accused was caught hold of by the public red handed at the shop whereas the other accused fled away.
The Officer in charge of Police Station was informed of the incident on the telephone.
The deceased was removed to the hospital where he later died.
Cases of murder and arson were thereafter registered against the accused.
P.Ws. 4 and 6 made statements under section 164 Cr.
P.C. before the Magistrate and deposed to the factum of dying declaration made by the deceased implicating the accused.
The Sessions Court after considering the evidences of P.W. 4 and C.W. 1 as well as the statements recorded under section 164 Cr.
P.C. accepted the dying declaration made by the deceased and convicted the accused under section 302 read with section 34 I.P.C. and sentenced them to 1039 rigorous imprisonment for life.
They were further convicted and sentenced under section 436 read with section 34 I.P.C.
The High Court on appeal, however, found that the prosecution had failed to prove beyond doubt the offences for which the appellants were charged, that the entire evidence in the case was circumstantial as there was no eye witness to the occurrence, that the evidence of P.W. 4 as to the dying declaration was wholly unreliable, and therefore, set aside the conviction and sentence passed against the accused.
The appeal by the State to this Court was opposed by the accusedrespondents contending that there was no evidence to show that the deceased made the dying declaration and even if such a declaration has been made the same having not been corroborated cannot be taken into consideration in convicting them.
Allowing the Appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The accused were rightly convicted by the Sessions Court.
The prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt the charges framed against them.
The order of acquittal passed by the High Court is, therefore, liable to be set aside.
[1048G] The dying declaration made by the deceased while he was suffering severe pain from grievous injuries clearly implicating the two accused persons as his assailants is truthful and reliable.
[1048E] The eye witnesses, P. Ws. 4, 5 and 6 and C.W. 1 had undoubtedly arrived at the place of occurrence immediately on seeing the fire.
They had seen that the shop was ablaze and there was fire on the person of the deceased.
Then there is the specific evidence of P.W. 4 and C.W. 1 that the deceased was crying a lot in pain due to burn injuries and that he stated clearly that the accused persons poured kerosene on him and set fire to his body.
There are also the statements of P.W. 4 and 6 made under section 164 Cr.
P.C. to the effect that the deceased made a dying declaration.
P.W. 2, who held post mortem on the body of the deceased has stated in his evidence that a person sustaining burn injuries of such nature may have been conscious for some time before his death.
It cannot, therefore, be ruled out that the deceased was conscious in spite of the burn injuries on his person and he could speak and make dying declaration as testified to by P.W. 4 and C.W. 1.
[1046A D; 1045E] There is no infirmity in the action of the Sessions Court treating as a court witness.
It has assigned cogent reasons as to why P.W. 1 was examined as a court witness under the provisions of section 311 Cr.
P.C. He has been found an independent and disinterested witness, to be reliable and trustworthy.
He was an important witness of the case and his examination was for the just decision of the case.
His evidence has full corroborations with another independent and distinterested witness, P.W. 4, who was also found to be trustworthy and reliable.
The evidence of C.W. 1 cannot, therefore, be underestimated merely because he was a police officer.
[1046E G] The Court of appeal has acted illegally in discarding the evidence of P.W. 4 as well as his statement recorded under section 164 Cr.
P.C. There is no criticism regarding the evidence of this witness on behalf of the respondents as to why his testimony regarding the dying declaration shall not be taken into consideration.
[1044H; 1045A B] There is also the testimony of P.W. 4 and C.W. 1 that one of the accused was caught hold red handed at the spot and was detained by the public while the other fled away from the place of occurrence.
[1043F G] All these lead to the only conclusion that the two accused persons poured kerosene in the shop as well as on the deceased and set them on fire [1047C D] Ramnath Madho Prasad & Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1953 SC 420; Khushal Rao vs State of Bombay, ; ; Kusa & Ors.
vs State of Orissa, ; at 562 para 9; State of Assam vs Muaizuddin Ahmed, ; at 19 para 10; and Jayaraj vs State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1976 SC 1519 at 1522 para 16 referred to.
