One Hukum Chand Seth, who constituted a HUF with the members of his family, owned extensive properties.
The properties were partitioned between him, his wife and their son in equal shares by a Deed of Partition dated March 31, 1950.
On the same date, Hukum Chand Seth and his wife executed two trust deeds nominating their son and five grandsons as the beneficiaries in respect of their shares in the aforesaid properties.
The trust deeds which contained identical terms inter alia provided (a) that in the event of a beneficiary dying before the time of distribution of the properties between the beneficiaries, the share of the beneficiary so dying would be used to support and maintain his widow and his male issue in such manner as the trustees shall "in their absolute and uncontrolled discretion deem proper" and the surplus, if any, of the share of that beneficiary and the income therefrom would be accumulated and kept in credit to his account and preserved in order to be distributed; (b) that upon the youngest of the beneficiaries attaining the age of 30 years, the trustees would divide and distribute the trust properties together with the accumulated interest and income thereon among the beneficiaries according to their respective rights and shares; and (c) that if at the time of the division and distribution any beneficiary should have died without leaving any son but leaving only a widow, the widow would get half of the share of that beneficiary while the other half would be distributed among the remaining beneficiaries and the heirs of the beneficiaries entitled to distribution.
With the passage of time the beneficiaries came into possession of their respective shares of the properties and the income from those properties was returned by them for the purpose of their income tax 1021 assessment in their individual status, but subsequently they began to assert that the properties were received by them as the Karta of their respective Hindu undivided families and that therefore the income was liable to be assessed in that status.
The Income Tax Officer, during the relevant assessment years assessed the assessees/beneficiaries in their individual status and these assessments were confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal.
However, in a reference at the instance of the assessees, the High Court held that the properties had been settled with the assessees in their representative capacity as Kartas of their respective Hindu undivided families.
Allowing the appeals by the Revenue to this Court, ^ HELD 1.1 The High Court has erred in the view taken by it of the two trust deeds.
The question whether the income belongs to the individuals or Hindu undivided families has to be resolved upon the contents of the trust deeds, their terms and conditions being free from ambiguity.
[1028D; 1026F] 1.2 Where the document contains no clear words describing the kind of interest which the donee is to take, the question is one of construction and the court must collect the intention of the donor from the language of the document taken along with the surrounding circumstances.
There is no presumption one way or the other.
Each case must be decided on its own facts and each document calls for its own particular construction.
[1026H; 1027A B] C.N. Arunachala Mudaliar vs C.A. Muruganatha Mudaliar and Another, , referred to.
In the instant case, on the plain terms of the trust deeds, the properties were intended to devolve on the beneficiaries in their individual capacity.
The circustances surrounding the execution of the two documents indicate that a common intention inspired the minds of the two settlors.
This has considerable significance when it is realised that while one trust deed was executed by a male member of the family the other was executed by a female member of the family.
The course of devolution under the Hindu law would be materially different in the two cases and, therefore, the principles of the Hindu law governing the devolution of property in the case of property passing from a father to his son and grandsons cannot be invoked in these appeals.
[1027B C] 1022 2.
The terms and conditions of the trust deeds are wholly inconsistent with the property passing into the hands of the beneficiaries as Kartas of their respective Hindu undivided families.
There is clear indication in the trust deeds which bears this out.
In the first place, had it been intended that the beneficiary should receive the property as Karta of his Hindu undivided family the document would not have empowered the trustees, in clause 1 to exercise an absolute and uncontrolled discretion on the death of a beneficiary to apply his share to the maintenance of his widow and his male issue and to accumulate the surplus to the account of the said beneficiary for distribution.
On the contrary, the trustees would have been under an obligation to entrust the income falling to the share of the deceased beneficiary to the members of his Hindu Undivided family and no discretion would have been permissible in regard to the disposal or otherwise of any part thereof.
Secondly, the document would not have provided that if before the time of division and distribution a beneficiay died leaving only a widow, the widow would get a half of the share belonging to the deceased beneficiary while the other half would be liable to distribution among the remaining beneficiaries.
These two conditions are sufficient in themselves to lead to the conclusion that it was never intended that the properties should pass to the beneficiaries to be held by them for their respective Hindu undivided families.
[1027D H]
