Respondent, a chartered accountant and a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants, was appointed liquidator of three insurance companies in pursuance of the orders of the High 48 372 Court.
He received records, cash and securities on behalf of these companies.
The Assistant Controller of Insurance found that his conduct as liquidator was wholly unsatisfactory and that he would not even reply to the letters addressed to him.
His appointment was cancelled and another person was appointed.
In spite of repeated demands he failed to return all the records, cash and securities.
A complaint was lodged against him with the Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants.
After inquiry the respondent was found guilty of misconduct, and the report was forwarded by the Council to the High Court for necessary action under section 21 of the .
The High Court rejected the reference on the ground that the conduct of which the respondent was found guilty could not be said to be professional misconduct and did not attract the provisions of sections 21 and 22 of the Act.
Held, that the respondent, when working as a liquidator, must be deemed to have been in practice as a chartered accountant within the meaning Of section 2(2) of the Act.
The definition of misconduct in section 22 is inclusive and the Council may hold an inquiry and find a member guilty of conduct which, in its opinion, renders him unfit to be a member of the Institute, even though such conduct does not attract any of the provisions of the schedule referred to in section 22.
The conduct of the respondent was grossly improper and unworthy and amounted to professional misconduct within the meaning of the Act.
In a reference under section 21 of the Act the High Court has ample powers to adopt any course which would enable it to do complete justice between the parties.
It can examine the correctness of the findings recorded by the Council or refer the matter back for further inquiry and call for a fresh finding.
The High Court is not bound to deal with the merits of the finding as it has been recorded and either to accept or reject it.
