The appellant the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India was created as a body corporate under the .
Its members are Chartered Accountants.
The affairs of the Institute are managed by a body known as the Council of the Institute which is headed by the President.
Below him is the Vice President.
One of the Standing Committees of the Council is the Disciplinary Committee.
It consists of the President and the Vice President ex officio of the Council, two members elected by the Committee from its members, and a third member nominated by the Central Government.
Section 21 of the Act lays down the procedure for conducting inquiries relating to cases of misconduct by the members and the penalty which may be imposed.
Sub section
(1) of section 21 provides that where 1050 the Council is prima facie of opinion that any member has been guilty of any professional or other misconduct it shall refer the case to the Disciplinary Committee which is to hold an inquiry and report the result to the Council.
Sub section
4 lays down that where the finding of the Disciplinary Committee is that a member has been guilty of professional misconduct it shall afford an opportunity of being heard and may thereafter make an order either to: (a) reprimand the member; or (b) remove the name of the member from the Register for such period not exceeding five years, or (c) where it appears to the Council that the case is one in which the name of the member ought to be removed from the register for a period exceeding five years or permanently or if the member is guilty of misconduct other than any such misconduct as is referred to in sub section
4, it shall forward the case to the High Court with its recommendations thereon.
Section 22A of the Act entitles a member to prefer an appeal to the High Court against an order of the Council.
The respondents Chartered Accountants and members of the Institute, were charged for committing the offences of professional misconduct under clauses 6 & 7 of of the First Schedule to the Act, in that they had prepared and brought out a brochure relating to Management Consultancy Services, and had sent out letters to Auditor Firms appraising them of its existence.
The Council considered their replies and being of the prima facie opinion that they were guilty of professional misconduct referred the cases to the Disciplinary Committee which, after affording a personal hearing to the respondents, submitted its report to the Council opining that they were guilty of professional misconduct.
The Council considered the aforesaid report, and, after having found the respondents guilty of the misconduct, proposed to remove their names from the register of members for a period not exceeding five years in accordance with the procedure laid down in section 21(4).
The respondents were informed that they would be called upon to appear before the Council to make a representation against the proposed action and that the scope of the oral hearing or written representation would be restricted to the penalty proposed.
Aggrieved by the order of the appellant, the respondents filed Writ Petitions in the High Court.
A Single Judge of the High Court allowed the petitions, quashed the orders imposing penalty on the respondents and remanded the cases to the Council for fresh consideration on the finding: (i) that the Council should have given an opportunity to the respondents to represent before it against the report of the Disciplinary Committee; and (ii) that the decision of the Council was 1051 vitiated inasmuch as the President, the Vice President and the two members of the Institute, who were also members of the Disciplinary Committee, were disqualified from participating in the proceedings of the Council when it considered the report of the Disciplinary Committee.
The appeals filed by the appellant having been summarily rejected by the Division Bench, the Institute appealed to this Court.
Dismissing the appeals of the appellant, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 A member accused of misconduct is entitled to a hearing by the Council when, on receipt of the report of the Disciplinary Committee, it proceeds to find whether he is or is not guilty.
[1067D] 1.2 The Council is empowered to find a member guilty of misconduct.
The penalty which follows is so harsh that it may result in his removal from the register of Members for a substantial number of years.
The removal of his name from the register deprives him of the right to a certificate of practice.
In these circumstances there is every reason to presume in favour of an opportunity to the member of being heard by the Council before it proceeds to pronounce him guilty of misconduct.
[1063F G] 2.1 In the scheme incorporated in section 21 of the Act there are separate functionaries, the Disciplinary Committee, the Council and in certain cases, the High Court.
The controlling authority is the Council.
The Disciplinary Committee plays a subordinate role.
It conducts an inquiry into the allegations.
Since the inquiry is into allegations of misconduct by the member, it possesses the character of a quasi judicial proceedings.
The Disciplinary Committee thereafter submits a report of the result of the inquiry to the Council.
The Disciplinary Committee is merely a Committee of the Institute, with a function specifically limited by the provisions of the Act.
Its conclusions are tentative only.
They cannot be regarded as 'findings '.
The Disciplinary Committee is not vested by the Act with power to render any findings.
It is the Council which is empowered to find whether the member is guilty of misconduct.
The finding by the Council is the determinative decision as to the guilt of the member, and because it is determinative, the Act requires it to be recorded.
[1062C H] A responsibility so grave as the determination that a member is guilty of misconduct, and the recording of that finding, has been specifically assigned by the Act to the governing body, the Council.
It is also 1052 only upon a finding being recorded by the Council that the Act moves forward to the final stage of penalisation.
The recording of the finding by the Council is the jurisdictional spring board for the penalty proceeding which follows.
[1062H; 1063A B] 2.2 The report constitutes the material to be considered by the Council.
The Council will take into regard the allegations against the member, his case in defence, the recorded evidence, and the conclusions expressed by the Disciplinary Committee.
The nature of the function discharged by the Council in rendering its finding is quasi judicial.
A member whose conduct has been the subject of inquiry by the Disciplinary Committee ending in conclusions adverse to him can legiti mately entertain an apprehension that the President and the Vice President of the Council and the other members of the Disciplinary Committee would maintain the opinion expressed by them in their report and would press the acceptance of the report by the Council.
Although the member has participated in the inquiry, he has had no opportunity to demonstrate the fallibility of the conclusions of the Disciplinary Committee.
It is the material which falls within the domain of consideration by the Council.
It should also be open to the member, to point out to the Council any error in the procedure adopted by the Disciplinary Committee which could have resulted in vitiating the inquiry.
[1063B D] section 21(8) arms the Council with power to record oral and documentary evidence, and it is precisely to take account of that eventuality and to repair the error that this power has been conferred.
It cannot, therefore, be denied that even though the member has participated in the inquiry before the Disciplinary Committee, there is a range of consideration by the Council on which he has not been heard.
He is clearly entitled to an opportunity of hearing before the Council finds him guilty of misconduct.
[1063D E] 3.1 The finding by the Council operates with finality in the proceedings, and it constitutes the foundation for the penalty by the Council on him.
[1063G H] The power to find and record whether a member is guilty of misconduct has been specifically entrusted by the Act to the entire Council itself and not to a few of its members who constitute the Disciplinary Committee.
[1063H; 1064A] 3.2 It is the character and complexion of the proceeding consi 1053 dered in conjunction with the structure of power constituted by the Act which leads to the conclusion that the member is entitled to a hearing by the Council before it can find him guilty.
[1064A B] Manek Lal vs Dr. Prem Chand, ; , referred to.
There is no doubt that there is difference between the provisions of section 21(3) and 21(4), in that while in section 21(4) Parliament has indicated that an opportunity of being heard should be accorded to the member, nowhere in section 21(3) there is such requirement.
But, that does not affect the question.
The textual different is not decisive.
It is the substance of the matter, the character of the allegations, the far reaching consequences of a finding against the member, the vesting of responsibility in the governing body itself, all these and kindred considerations enter into the decision of the question whether the law implies a hearing to the member at that stage.
[1064D E] 5.
There is nothing in Regulation 14 which excludes the operation of the principle of natural justice entitling the member to be heard by the Council when it proceeds to render its finding.
[1065B C] The principles of natural justice must be read into the unoccupied interstices of the statute unless there is a clear mandate to the contrary.
[1065C] 6.
There are cases where an order may cause serious injury as soon as it is made, an injury not capable of being entirely erased when the error is corrected on subsequent appeal.
Where a member of a highly respected and publicly trusted profession is found guilty of misconduct and suffers penalty, the damage to his professional reputation can be immediate and far reaching.
To many a man, his professional reputation is his most valuable possession.
It is often the carefully garnered fruit of a long period of scrupulous, conscientious and diligent industry.
It is the portrait of his professional honour.
In such a case, after the blow suffered by the initial decision, it is difficult to contemplate complete restitution through an appellate decision.
Therefore, there is manifest need to ensure that there is no breach of fundamental procedure in the original proceeding, and to avoid treating an appeal as an overall substitution for the original proceeding.
[1066F H; 1067A C] 7.1 By virtue of section 17(3) it is obligatory that the Disciplinary Committee should be composed of the President and the Vice President of the Council and three other members of the Council.
While that is so, 1054 there is nothing in the Act to suggest that the meetings of the Council must always be presided over by the President or the Vice President and that no meeting can be held in their absence.
There is an element of flexibility which makes it possible for the Council to consider the report of the Disciplinary Committee without the participation of the members of the Committee.
Because of the 'flexibility ' potential in the scheme, the doctrine of necessity, cannot come into play.
[1069E H] 7.2.
There is nothing in section 21 of the Act to indicate whether the members of the Disciplinary Committee should be excluded when the Council enters upon its task.
The function of the Disciplinary Committee of holding an inquiry under section 21(1) of the Act into the conduct of the member calls for a recording of evidence by the Committee.
Its duty does not end there.
It must consider the evidence and come to its conclusions.
Section 21(2) of the Act plainly says, it must report "the result of its enquiry" to the Council.
In the absence of express or implied statutory intendment to the contrary, the members of such a committee would be disqualified from participating in the deliberations of the Council when it proceeds to consider the report in order to find whether the member is guilty of misconduct.
For that alone would be consistent with the fundamental principle that justice must not only be done but must also appear to be done.
[1068B F] Re Daneyger and Alberta Pharmaceutical Association, , Re Prescott, , Re Merchant and Benchers of the Law Society, and Law Socieety of Upper Ganada vs French, , distinguished.
The Council is obliged to give reasons for its finding that a member is guilty of misconduct.
In fairness and justice, the member is entitled to know why he has been found guilty.
[107 1E G] The member has been given a right of appeal to the High Court under section 22 A of the Act.
To exercise his right of appeal effectively he must know the basis on which the Council has found him guilty.
Further, a finding by the Council is the first determinative finding on the guilt of the member.
It is a finding by a Tribunal of first instance.
The conclusion of the Disciplinary Committee does not enjoy the status of a "finding".
Moreover, the reasons contained in the report by the Disciplinary Committee for its conclusion may or may not constitute the basis of the finding rendered by the Council.
The Council must, therefore, state the reasons for the finding.
[1071F G] 1055 9.
Due recognition should be given to the fundamental principles and accepted axioms of law.
[1070B C] [Removal of the anomaly by suitable legislative amendment of section 17(3) of the Act so that the constitution of the Disciplinary Committee should not necessarily include the President and the Vice President of the Council was suggested by the Court.] [1070B C] James Edward Jeffs and Others vs New Zealand Dairy Production and Marketing Board and others, [1967] 1 AC 551, Chandra Bhavan Boarding and Lodging Bangalore vs The State of Mysore and Anr.[1970] 2 SCR 600 and K.L. Tripathi vs State Bank of India and Others, , inapplicable.
Leary vs National Union of Vehicle Builders, , Re Cardinal and Board of Commissioners of Police of City of Cornwall, , Wisland vs Medical Practioners Disciplinary Committee, and Reid vs Rowley, , referred to.
