Plaintiff respondent Ravinder Kumar Sharma joined serv ice as a Line Man under the respondent Electricity Board.
The terms and conditions of the service of the Line Man as well as of the Line Superintendent were governed by the P.W.D. (Electricity Branch) Provisional Class III (Subordi nate posts) Rules 1952.
The Line Man are either diploma holders or I.T.I. trained or non diploma holders and they form and constitute one common cadre known as Line Man and were in the same scale of pay.
The seniority list of all the Line Man is common and joint.
By order dated 12.7.1977, the respondent Board promoted Gutdial Singh, Jaswant Singh and Ramesh Kumar shown in the common seniority list at section Nos. 1451, 1546 and 2309 respectively, to the pest of Line Super intendent even though the plaintiff respondent 's position in the seniority list was at section No. 995 and he was senior to the said officials.
By order dated 17.8.1977 the Chief Engineer of the respondent Electricity Board further promot ed Sudesh Kumar and Virender Kumar whose name stand at section No. 1877 and 2279 in the joint seniority list.
The Plain tiff respondent filed a suit alleging that this policy of promotion from Line Man to Line Superintendent on a pick and choose basis by fixing a quota between the diploma holders and non diploma holders is wholly illegal, unconstitutional and arbitrary as it adversely affected the promotional prospect of the non diploma holders Line Men and prayed for a decree declaring that the orders dated 12.7.1977 and 73 17.8.1977 promoting the defendants 3 to 7 are illegal, discriminatory and null and void as it arbitrarily affects the rights of the plaintiff who is senior to them and that he be promoted to the post of Line Superintendent from the date defendant Nos. 3 to 7 were promoted.
The defendant Nos. :1 and 2 contested the claim of the plaintiff contending that the terms and conditions of serv ice of Line Man and the Line Superintendent are governed by the P.W.D. (Electricity Branch) Provisional Service Class III (Subordinate Posts) Rules 1952 framed by the State Government under article 309 of the Constitution, that the Electricity Board by various orders prescribed quota for diploma holders Line Men for promotion to the post of Line Superintendent, that according to this quota the defendant Nos. 3 to 7 have been promoted and that the fixation of the quota on the basis of educational qualification cannot be questioned as arbitrary or discriminatory The Subordinate Judge First Class decreed the suit, holding that the plaintiff was entitled to promotion to the post of Line Superintendent and the orders dt.12.7.1977 and 17.8.1977 whereby the defendant Nos. 3 to 7 were promoted even though they were junior to the plaintiff are illegal and in violation of the rights of the plaintiff and, there fore, the plaintiff was declared to have been promoted from the date when his said juniors were promoted.
The appeal filed by the State Electricity Board was dismissed by the Additional District Judge holding that there was no reasonable nexus by fixing quota for promoting diploma holders Line Men to the post of Line Superintendent even though the non diploma holders as well as the diploma holders formed the joint cadre of Line Man for promotion to the post of Line Superintendent The judgments and decrees of the Courts below were affirmed by the High Court.
Dismissing the Appeals and the Special Leave Petition, HELD: 1.
There is no dispute, rather it is not contro verted that in the joint seniority list of Line Men the plaintiff respondent 's name was mentioned at section No. 995 whereas names of defendant Nos. 3 to 7 appear in the said list at section Nos. 1451, 1546, 2309, 1877 and 2279 respective ly Therefore, all the defendant Nos. 3 to 7 are junior to the plaintiff respondent It is also clear and evident from the Office Order No. 97 dated 22.10.68 that the qualifica tion for promotion to the post of Line Superintendent from Line Man is either holding certificate or diploma in Elec trical Engineering from any recognised institute or 74 having passed 11/2 years course in the electrical trade of Electrician/ Line Man/Wire Man from recognised Industrial Training Institute and are matriculates and have worked as Line Man for four years continuously and immediately before the promotion.
[80A C] 2.
The plaintiff respondent who is an Arts Graduate and have I.T.I. Certificate (in the trade of electrician two years ' duration) and also have National Apprentice Certifi cate in the trade of Line Man 3 years ' duration is eligible for promotion to the post of Line Superintendent as he has fulfilled all the requisite qualifications.
All the line men either diploma holders or non diploma holders are performing the same kind of work and duties and they belong to the same cadre having common/joint seniority list for promotion to the post of Line Superintendent.
The Orders dated 12.7.1977 being Order No. 73 promoting defendant Nos. 3, 4 and 5 as well as Office Order No. 898 dated 37.8.77 promoting defend ant Nos. 6 and 7 on the basis of quota from diploma holders as fixed by the order of the State Electricity Board dated 9.5.74 is wholly arbitrary, illegal, discriminatory and violative of the equality clause contained in articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution in as much as it purports to promote defendant Nos. 3 to 7 who are admittedly junior to the plaintiff respondent in service as Line Man in the State Electricity Board.
[80D G] Shujat Ali 's case ; at 480 followed.
There is no infirmity in the judgment of the High Court affirming the judgment and decree of the Courts below.
