The appellant contractor entered into two agreements with the respondent State for carrying out certain road repairing works.
Clause 68 of the agreement provided for preparation of the final bill of the contractor after taking into account amounts received by him earlier, while clause 71 permitted the State to retain or deduct money due under the contract from an amount due to the contractor under any other contract.
While the work was in progress the contrac tor made certain claims in respect of loss suffered on account of delay, escalation of rates and other heads.
The arbitrator held the contractor entitled to Rs.99 lacs.
The civil court refused to pass a decree in terms of the award.
The High Court on appeal allowed the claim to the extent of Rs.16 lacs together with interest.
The contractor claimed recovery of decretal amount with interest in terms of the award and cost of execution proceedings.
The respondent State contested the claim contending that a sum of Rs.22 lacs was recoverable from the appellant and claimed adjust ment against the amount due under the decree.
The Executing Court held the respondent State entitled to set off.
In the revision petition before the High Court it was contended for the appellant that the respondent State was not entitled to set off in execution proceedings, and that the sum of which adjustment was sought consisted of (a) an amount claimed by respondent State as due to it upon prepa ration of the final bill in respect of the contracts covered by the award, and (b) an amount claimed by the respondent State under a separate contract on the ground that the appellant had committed a breach of that contract.
The High Court having regard to cl.
68 of the agreement found the respondent State entitled to set off so far as the first claim was concerned.
It justified the second claim also by reference to cl. 71 of the contract but held that adjustment claimed could not be made against the decretal amount but must await determination upon the arbitration.
109 In this appeal by special leave it was contended that Order 21, Rule 18 of the Code of Civil Procedure, under which a set off can be claimed, does not apply in terms to the present case.
Allowing the appeal in part, the Court, HELD: 1.
The Court has the power to allow a set off in certain circumstances even in cases which do not strictly fail within the terms of Order 21, Rule 18 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
[112B] Bhoganadham Seshaiah vs Budhi Veerabhadrayya (died) & Ors., AIR 1972 Andhra Pradesh 134, approved.
The respondent State 's claim to adjustment of the amount due to it upon the preparation of the final bill is covered by cl. 68 of the contract.
What was awarded to the contractor under the decree was an amount relating to a part only of the work entrusted to him.
The contract was still in the process of execution.
Any amount claimed by him for such work was subject to a final settlement of account on the preparation of the final bill.
The fight to payment depended on the terms of the contract.
Any payment made while the contract was still being worked out was in the nature of a provisional payment.
It was always subject to adjustment against amounts found due on preparation of the final bill.
Such adjustment was implied in the very terms of the con tract.
The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that the amount claimed by the State Government on this count was entitled to be set off against the decretal amount claimed by the contractor.
[112C E] 3.1 The claim to adjustment of the amount claimed on breach of another contract is rounded in the doctrine of equitable set off but there is no evidence on record to bring the case within the operation of the doctrine.
It is not a case where cross demands rise out of the same transac tion, or the demands are so connected in their nature and circumstances that they can he looked upon as part of one transaction.
[112F G] 3.2 The benefit of cl. 71 of the contract can be claimed only if the amount sought to.
he retained is an ascertained sum, an amount which can be readily adjusted against the amount payable under the other contract.
In the instant case, the amount sought to be adjusted had yet to be deter mined as a liability against the contractor.
The decision of the High Court cannot, therefore, he sustained.
[112GH, 113A]
