Section 29 A of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 inserted by section I7 of the U.P. Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1969 pro vided for refund of the amount, realised by a dealer as tax on sale of goods and deposited under sub s.(4) or sub s.(5) of s.8 A of the Act, to the person from whom such dealer had actually realised the same, and to no other Coal became a taxable commodity under the U.P. Sales Tax Act for the first time on 1st October 1965.
The appellants, who were registered as dealers in coal under the Act, on the assumption that sales tax was payable by them on sale of coal from and after 1st October 1965, corrected amounts by way of sales tax from the purchasers and submitted their returns for the assessment year 1965 66 after depositing a sum representing the amount of tax payable by them in ac cordance with their returns.
The Sales Tax Officer, however, found that no sales tax was payable by the appellants on sale of coal under the Act.
The appellants thereupon claimed refund of the amount deposited but the Sales Tax Officer rejected their claim under s.29 A of the Act.
A Writ Petition challenging the correctness of that order and the constitutional vires of s.29 A was rejected by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court, HELD: Section 29 A of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 introduced by section I7 of the U.P. Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1969 fails within the legislative competence of the State Legislature and is constitutionally valid.
[9OF, 89F] Clause (3) of Art.246 of the Constitution read with Entry 54 in List H of the Seventh Schedule thereto empowers the State Legislature 87 to make laws with respect to taxes on the sale or purchase of goods.
An Entry in a Legislative List must be read in its widest amplitude and the legislature must be held to have power not only to legislate with respect to the subject matter of the entry but also to make ancillary or incidental provision in aid of the main topic of legislation Taking over of sums collected by dealers from the public under guise of tax solely with a view to returning them to the buyers so deprived is necessarily incidental to tax on the sale and purchase of goods.
The enactment of s.29 A can thus he said to be justified as exercise of an ancillary or incidental power of legislation under Entry 54.
[89G, 90D, 89H] R.S. Joshi v; A}it Mills; , , followed.
Ashoka Marketing Ltd. vs State of Bihar & Anr., ; , dissented from.
R. Abdul Qader & Co. vs Sales Tax Officer, Hyderabad, ; , Orient Paper Mills Ltd., vs State of Orissa & Ors., ; and State of Orissa vs Orissa Cement Ltd. & Ors., , referred to.
