Rule 2(b) of the Kerala State Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1961 requires that the cycle of rotation governing reservation of posts as laid down in Rule 14(c) of the Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958 be followed in the selection and appointment of District Judges by direct recruitment.
Under Rule 14(c) appointments shall be made in the order of rotation specified therein in every cycle of 20 vacancies.
It is not often that there is no eligible candidate available from a community or group of communities.
To meet such a situation, r. 15(a) provides that if a suitable candidate is not available for selection from any particular community or group of communities speci fied in the annexure, the said community or group shall be passed over and the post filled by a suitable candidate from the community .or group of communities immediately next to the passed over communitY or group in the order of rotation.
Rule 15(b) enjoins that if a suitable candidate is not available for selection from the group of communities clas sified as "Scheduled Castes", in the turn allotted for such a group in the annexure, the said group shall be passed over and the post Shall be fired by a suitable candidate from the group of communities classified as "Scheduled Tribes" and vice versa.
If no suitable candidate for selection in any of the two groups namely, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is available, the vacancy has to be filled by open competi tion.
Rule 15(c) provides for restoration of the benefit of the turn forfeited at the earliest opportunity.
Proviso thereto however enjoins that the restoration of the benefit of the turn forfeited by the carry forward rule, 137 shall not exceed 50% of the vacancies to be filled in a particular year.
Rule 16 provides for sub rotation among major groups of other backward classes.
Rule 17(1) lays down the manner in which appointments have to be made from candi dates belonging to other backward classes.
Other backward classes are enumerated in List III to Part I of the Rules and there are 73 communities or groups divided into 8 cate gories specified in Rule 17(1).
Categories 1 to 7 are Ezha vas and Thiyyas, Muslims, Latin Catholics and Angin Indians, Nadars, Scheduled Castes converts to Christianity, Viswakar mas and Dhooravas.
All other backward classes put together constitute the 8th category.
Rule 17(2) provides for sub rotation among the other backward classes.
In the last recruitment made in the year 1978 appointments had been made upto 7th turn in the cycle of rotation.
The Committee of three senior most Judges constituted by the Full Court interviewed the candidates and drew up a list of fifteen candidates adjudged on an overall assessment of the merits.
One of the fifteen ' candidates Ms. Mary Teresa Dias belonging to the Latin Catholic community, however, was considered unsuitable for appointment by the Committee by a majority of 2:1.
On an approval of the revised panel of fourteen candidates by the Full Court by a majority at a meeting held on 12.6.1984, the said list was sent to the Chief Minister.
As there was no candidate belonging to the 'Latin Catholics and Anglo Indians ', 'Other Backward Classes and 'Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ', 8th, th and 12th in the cycle of rotation, the first vacancy had be filled by reason of rule 15(a) of the Rules by a suitable candidate belonging to the community or group of communities immediately next to the passed over community or group i.e. by respondent No. 1 Smt.
A. Lakshmikutty, a member of the 'Ezhava ' community, 6th in order of merit, failing in the group 'Ezhavas ', Thiyyas and Billavas ', 14th in the cycle of rotation.
The second vacancy i.e. 9th in the cycle rotation had to be filled by respondent No. 3, Krishnan Nair, 1st in order of merit, by open competition.
The third vacancy had to go to 'other Backward Classes ', 10th in the cycle of rotation.
As there was no 'other Backward Classes ' candidate belonging to the 'Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ', 10th and 12th in the cycle of rotation, it had to be filled by a Muslim candidate C. Khalid, respondent No. 4 who was 5th in order of merit and 16th in the cycle of rotation.
The fourth vacancy had to be filled by a candidate on the basis of open competition i.e. by respondent No. 5 Achuthan Unni, 2nd in order of merit and 11th in the cycle of rotation.
The fifth vacancy was to be filled by respondent No. 6 Rajappan Asari, a Viswakarma, 4th in order of merit and 2Oth in the cycle of rotation.
138 Shortly thereafter, on June 27, 1984, Ms. Mary Teresa Dias filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for grant of a writ of mandamus claiming her right to the first vacancy being a candidate belonging to the Latin Catholic and Anglo Indian community with a direction to the State Government not to fill up any of the five vacancies in the post of District Judges without inclusion of her name in the panel and a further direction to the High Court to forward her name for appointment as a District Judge.
The said writ petition was however dismissed later on.
Subsequently pursuant to a news item appearing on 31.1.1985 in several malayalm newspapers to the effect that the cabinet as its meeting held on 30.
I. 1985 had decided to appoint only four out of the said five candidates leaving A. Lakshmikutty sixth in order of merit belonging to the Ezhava community as one post was to be kept vacant for a candidate belonging to the group of Latin Catholic Anglo Indian community, Respondent No. 1 Smt.
Lakshmikutty moved the High Court by a petition under Article 226 of the Con stitution for grant of an appropriate writ, direction or order to quash the decision of the Council of Ministers dated January 30, 1985 deciding not to appoint her as per the panel sent up by the High Court.
Her application for grant of an ad interim prohibitory order to restrain the State Government from appointing only Respondents 3 to 6 as District Judges as per the Cabinet decision was ordered by a learned Single Judge on a prima facie case being made out.
The State Government having been restrained from making the appointments for a period of one month.
i.e. till March 20, 1985, the matter of direct recruitment of District Judges from the bar again came up before a meeting of the Council of Ministers held on February 28, 1985.
The Govern ment reconsidered the whole question of direct recruitment of District Judges from the bar afresh and decided not to appoint anybody from the panel of names recommended by the High Court due to non representation of 'Latin Catholics and AngloIndians ' 'Other Backward Classes ' and 'Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ', 8th, 10th, and 12th turns in the cycle of rotation, However, the Kerala High Court al lowed the writ petition filed by Respondent A. Lakshmikutty by its judgment and order dated 29.4.1985, quashed the Cabinet decisions of 30.1.1985 and 28.2.1985 and issued a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents State to fill up five vacancies in the posts of District Judges meant for direct recruitment from the bar, by the appointment of Respondents t and 3 to 6 as recommended by the High Court under Article 233 (1) of the Constitution.
Hence the State appeals, by special leave.
139 Allowing the appeals and modifying the order, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The power of appointment of persons to be District Judges conferred on the Governor, meaning the State Government, under article 233(1) in consultation with the High Court is executive function.
The power of the State Govern ment is not absolute and unfettered but is hedged in with conditions.
The exercise of the power of the Governor under article 233(1) in the matter of appointment of District Judges is conditioned by consultation with the exercise of the power that the power can only be exercised in consultation with the High Court.
Therefore, the eligibility of appoint ment of persons to be District Judges by direct recruitment from amongst the members of the bar depends entirely on the recommendation of the High Court.
The State Government has no power to appoint any person as a District Judge except from the panel of names forwarded by the High Court.
But, the consultation between the Governor and the High Court in the matter of appointment of District Judges under Article 233 (1) must not be an empty formality but real, full and effective.
[156H I57E] Chandra Mohan vs State of U.P. & Ors., ; A Panduranga Rao vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors., ; Mani Subrat Jain vs State of Haryana & Ors., ; M.M. Gupta & Ors.
vs State of Jammu & Kashmir & Ors.
, ; ; Chandra mouleshwar Prasad vs Patna High Court & Ors., ; ; High Court of Punjab & Haryana etc.
vs State of Haryana, ; and Union of India vs Sankalchand, Himatlal Sheth & Anr., ; , referred to.
As well settled the duty of the Governor to consult the High Court in the matter of appointment of District Judges is so integrated with the exercise of his power that the power can only be exercised in the manner provided by article 233(1) or not at all.
Normally, as a matter of Rule, the recommendations of the High 'Court for the appointment of a District Judge should be accepted by the State Govern ment and the Governor should act on the same.
If, in any particular Case, the State Government for 'good and weighty reasons ' finds it difficult to accept the recommendations of the High Court, the State Government should communicate its views to the High Court and must have complete and effective consultation with the High Court in the matter.
In the instant case, therefore, before rejecting one panel forward ed by the High Court, the State Government should have conveyed its views to the High Court to elicit its opinion.
[I66C E] The fulfilment by the Governor of his constitutional obliga tion to 140 place full facts before the High Court was a pre condition before the State Government could arrive at a decision not to appoint respondents Nos. 1 and 3 6 as District Judges.
On its part, there was a constitutional obligation cast on the High Court under article 233(1) to express its opinion on a consideration of the facts and circumstances on the basis of which alone the nature of the problem could be appreciated and the right decision taken.
Therefore, the State Govern ment was wrong in taking a unilateral decision to cancel all steps taken in pursuance of the notification dated September 24, 1983 and to issue a fresh notification inviting applica tions, without taking the High Court 'into confidence.
And the proper course for the High Court to adopt was to have issued a writ in the nature of mandamus requiring the State Government to place before the High Court the facts i.e. the difficulties as expressed in the letter of the Chief Minis ter dated March 4, 1985 to elicit its opinion.
[166G 167A] 1.3 The respective powers of the three wings of the State are well defined with the object that each wing must func tion within the field earmarked for it.
The objects of such demarcation is to exclude the possibility of encroachment on the field earmarked for the wing by the other or theirs.
As long as each wing of the State functions within the field carved out and shows due deference for the other two branch es, there would arise no difficulty in the working of the Constitution.
But, when one wing of the State tries to encroach on the field reserved for the other, special re sponsibility devolves upon the Judges to avoid an overactiv ist approach and to ensure that they do not trespass within the spheres earmarked for the other two branches of the State.
Therefore, the High Court could not intervene at a stage where the Council of Ministers had reviewed the situa tion and decided to reject the panel sent by the High Court and not to appoint any of the five advocates to be District Judges except by issuing a writ in the nature of mandamus requiring the State Government to refer back the matter to the High Court for reconsideration.
[168F 169A].
2.1 It is well settled that a writ of mandamus is not a writ of course or a writ of right, but is, as a rule, dis cretionary.
There must be a judicially enforceable right for the enforcement of which a mandamus will lie.
The legal right to enforce the performance of a duty must be in the applicant himself.
In general, therefore, the Court will only enforce the performance of statutory duties by public bodies on application of a person who can show that he has himself a legal right to insist on such performance.
[165C] 2.2 The issuance of a writ of mandamus by the High Court direct 141 lag the State Government i.e. the Governor to act on the recommendation of the High Court to fill up the five vacan cies in the posts of District Judges meant for direct re cruitment from the members of the bar under article 233(1) was constitutionally impermissible.
Although the High Court was not oblivious that the 'advice ' of the Council of Ministers to reject the panel of fourteen names submitted by the High Court could not be subject to judicial review and that article 163(1) of the Constitution, precludes an inquiry as to the nature of the advice given by the Council of Ministers to the Governor, still it has issued a writ in the nature of mandamus upon the basis that it is called upon to adjudge the legality and propriety of the two decisions taken by the State Government through the instrumentality of the Council of Ministers.
By doing so, the High Court has virtually tendered an advice to the Governor to act on the recommenda tion of the High Court i.e. contrary to the advice of the Council of Ministers and thereby entered into the process of decision making which as constitutionally impermissible.
The Governor has to act on the advice of the Council of Minis ters under article 163(1) in the matter of appointment of District Judges under article 233(i) and not on the advice of the High Court.
Appointment of persons to be, and posting and promotion of, District Judges by the Governor under article 233(1) is purely an executive function The High Court there fore had no authority or jurisdiction to issue any writ of mandamus of the kind complained of.
It was certainly not open to the High Court to embark Upon an inquiry as to the reasons which impelled the Council of Ministers at the meeting held on February, 28, 1985 to review the decision taken on January 30, 1985 and decide not to appoint anyone as a District Judge under article 233(1) from the panel of names drawn up by the High Court.
It was also not justified in observing that the reasons as disclosed by the Chief Minister in his letter dated March 4, 1985 on the basis of which the Council of Ministers on February 28, 1985, decided not to appoint respondents Nos. 1 and 3 6 as District Judges on the recommendation of the High Court namely due to non representation of certain important communities or groups of communities, were no reasons at all and in any event, the reasons given were bad in law.
There is no basis for the ridding reached by the High Court.
[167B D, 164E G] 3.
Normally, the principle of passing over laid down in Rule 15(a) of the Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958 is an integral part of the process of appoint ment and therefore the Government being the appointment authority would have the right to take a decision in the matter.
But the Government failed to appreciate that the High Court plays a decisive rule in the matter of appoint ment of District Judges under article 233(1).
Adjudging suit ability of a candidate for appointment 142 as a District Judge under article 233(1) is a function of the High Court which must necessarily imply that if the High Court finds that the candidate belonging to a particular community or group is not suitable for appointment, it has to find a candidate from the community or group next follow ing in the cycle of rotation.
It must logically follow, as a necessary consequence that it is for the High Court to decide whether or not a particular community or group should be passed over under r. 15(a) of the Rules for want of a suitable candidate and the vacancy be filled up from the community or group immediately next to the passed over community or group in the order of rotation or sub rotation provided in rule 14(c).
All that the State Government could do was to convey to the High Court the difficulties faced by the Government in implementing the recommendations.
It must accordingly be held that the State Government wrongly as sumed to itself the power to decide the question whether the principle of passing over laid down in r. 15(a) of the Rules should be resorted to or not.
[169F 170B] 4.
Whatever the Council of Ministers may say in regard to a particular matter, does not become the action of the State Government till the advice of the Council of Ministers is accepted or deemed to be accepted by the Head of the State.
Before an advice of the Council of Ministers amounts to an order of the State Government, there are two require ments to be fulfilled, namely; (1) The order of the State Government had to be expressed in the name of the Governor as required by article 166(1) and (2) It has to be communicated to the persons concerned.
It must therefore follow ' that unless and until the decision taken by the Council of Minis ters on JanUary 30, 1985 was translated into action by the issue of a notification expressed in the name of the Gover nor as required by article 166(1), it could not be said to be an order of the State Government.
Until then, the earlier decision of the Council of Ministers was only a tentative one and it was therefore fully competent for the High Court to reconsider the matter and come to a fresh decision.
[170E G] State of Punjab vs Sodhi Sukhdev Singh, ; ; and Bachhittar Singh vs State of Punjab, , referred to.
