Jodhpur was a sovereign State till April 6, 1949.
The said Jodhpur State merged with the other sovereign States to form the United State of Rajasthan on April 7, 1949.
On April 7, 1949, Ordinance No. 1 of 1949 was promulgated which provided for the continuance of the laws of the covenenting States (which included the Jodhpur State) in the United State of Rajasthan, by virtue of section 3 which provided, inter alia, that all laws in force in the aforesaid cove nanting States immediately before the commencement of the Ordinance shall continue to be in force.
On September 13, 1946, some two and a half years prior to the merger of the then State of Jodhpur with the United States of Rajasthan, the then Ruler of Jodhpur passed an order CB/7114 (exhibit 1) granting an annual allowance of Rs.30,000 per annum to each of the four Maharajkumars from the dates of their birth and for the period of their minori ty.
The amounts claimed by the sons by filing our different suits in 1955 were decreed by the Trial Court.
The appeals preferred by the State were allowed by the High Court hold ing that the order dated 13.9.49 granting the annual allow ance was not a 'law ' within the meaning of section 3 of the Ordinance.
Hence the appeals by certificate granted under Article 133(1)(a) of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1 In substance the amount directed to be paid as per Order exhibit I was nothing else but "a gift" by the then Ruler to his.sons, unrelated to any legal rights of the said sons (appellants).
It did not create any legal obligation enforceable against the State of Rajasthan inasmuch as the order in question was not a 'law ' obtaining in the then State of Jodhpur.
And accordingly it cannot be held that the said order 210 continued to prevail as a 'law ' in the State of Rajasthan under the 1949 ordinance or any other law.
The order cannot therefore be enforced against the State of Rajasthan treat ing it as a 'law ' creating a legally enforceable obligation.
[216C D, H 217B] 1.2 Having regard to the language of the order itself, it appeared to be an executive order conferring a grant (or a gift) on the appellantsplaintiff.
It did not have the characteristics of a legislative measure and did not consti tute a law inasmuch as it failed to pass the tests laid down by the Supreme Court.
[215C D] State of Gujarat vs Vora Fiddali, ; = ; ; Narsingh Pratap Singh Deo vs Sate of Orissa, AIR = ; ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhargavendra Singh, ; = ; ; and State of Madhya Pradesh vs Lal Rampal, AIR 1966 SC 821 = ; , referred to.
1.3 In so far as it relates to the period anterior to the passing of the order (stretching from 8 to 21 years) the order cannot be said to be an order passed in connection with his maintenance of the junior members of the Ruler 's family for they had already been maintained at the expense of the State exchequer as revealed by the evidence, includ ing the budget estimates.
[217D] 1.4 "Jagir" has been associated with the grant in re spect of land revenue.
In Thakur Amar Singhji 's case, the Supreme Court construed the term "jagir" in that sense only.
Though the expression "Jagir" would also be applicable to maintenance grants in favour of persons who were not culti vators, such as the members of the Ruling family, the grant has been construed in relation to rights in respect of land revenue recoverable from the actual tillers by intermedi aries known as Jagirdars.
Testing the grunt said to have been made under the order in question by the Ruler of Jodh pur in favour of the appellants, it cannot be said that it is a grunt of a 'Jagir ' in this sense, for, no question of alienation of land revenue in favour of the appellants is involved.
All that the Ruler has done is to order that a particular amount of money be paid in respect of a specified period anterior to the date of the order at the specified rate.
Further the order in question providing for payment of annual allowance for the past years during which the appel lants had already been maintained by the State exchequer lacks in the essential ingredients which would justify characterising the order as a rule or a regulation.
To put it somewhat crudely, divesting of refinement, the 211 order merely directs payment of a specified sum to the appellants which payment has no nexus with any services rendered by them or any customary right enjoyed by them by virtue of their status as junior members of the family, but merely by reason of the fact that the appellants were the sons of the Ruler on whom the Ruler intended to confer cash benefit.
[217F G, 218B D, 219H 220B] Thakur Amarsinghji vs State of Rajasthan, [1955] 2 SCR p. 303; and Madhaorao Phalke vs The State of Madhya Bharat, [1961] 1 SCR p. 957.
distinguished.
