On the death of the owner, landlord of the tenanted premises, his heirs respondents, Nos. 3 to 12 became the owners.
The appellanttenant tendered rent to respondent No. 3 but he did not accept the same.
The appellant made appli cation before the Munsif under section 30(1) of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent & Eviction) Act, 1972, who permitted deposit of the rent and since then the appellant had been depositing rent in the Munsif 's Court.
The respondentlandlords served a notice on the appellant calling upon him to vacate the premises, hand over posses sion and pay the arrears of rents from 18.10.1979 to 17.9.1982.
In his reply the appellant stated that he was ready and willing to pay the rent, and if respondent No. 3 was willing to accept the rent he may inform him within reasonable time so that he may pay the same to him otherwise he would deposit the rent in the Munsif 's Court.
The re spondent landlords did not give any reply to the appellant instead they filed suit for his eviction.
Meanwhile the appellant deposited the entire amount of arrears in Munsif 's Court.
The Judge, Small Causes Court, decreed the suit holding that the appellant had committed default for a period of four months from the date of suit.
The revision filed by the appellant was dismissed by the District Judge.
The High Court dismissed the petition of the appellant under Article 226 holding that the appellant had failed to tender arrears of rent within one month from the date of service of notice on him and, therefore, he was liable to ejectment.
In appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant ten.ant it was urged, that the courts below failed to appre ciate, that the appellant had all along been ready and willing to pay the rent to the landlords and in the reply to the notice he had offered to pay rent on hearing from re spondent No. 3 but since the appellant did not receive any reply, he 225 deposited the rent in Munsil"s Court under s.30 and, there fore, he was not liable to ejectment.
On behalf of the respondent landlords it was urged that all the three Courts have recorded findings holding the appellant in arrears of rent for a period of more than four months on the date of the suit, therefore, the impugned orders do not suffer from any illegality warranting interference by this Court.
Allowing the appeal of the appellant tenant, HELD: 1.
The High Court as well as the Courts below have taken a too technical view in holding the appellant guilty of wilful default in payment of rent.
[230B] 2.
The High Court as well as the Courts below have committed error in holding that the appellant had failed to pay ar rears of rent for a period of more than four months and on that ground he was liable to ejectment from the premises in dispute.
[231B] 3.
On landlord 's serving notice of demand on a tenant who may be in arrears of rent for a period of more than four months, and on the tenant 's failure to tender the rent to the landlord within one month from the service of the no tice, the tenant is liable to eviction, but in the instant case, having regard to the special facts and circumstances available on the record it cannot be said that the appellant failed to tender the rent to the landlords or that he was in arrear for a period of more than four months.
He was all along already to pay and since the landlord did not give any reply to his notice, he was justified in depositing the arrears in the Munsif 's Court.
Since the deposit was made it must be deemed that the appellant had tendered rent to the landlords as contemplated by section 13(6) of the Act.
[230H 231B] 4.
The question whether the tenant is justified in depositing the rent in Court and whether the deeming provi sion of section 30(6) would be applicable to relieve him from the liability of eviction would depend upon facts of each case.
The appellant, in the instant case, had relieved himself from the liability of eviction and he was not in arrears of rent for a period of more than four months.
[23IF G] 5.
The scheme, structure and the policy discernible from the provisions of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 unmistakably aim at regulating the conditions of tenancy, rent and preventing eviction of tenants.
The legislature has taken care to make special provisions protecting the interest of tenants 226 from eviction while placing obligation on him to pay rent.
The right of a tenant not to be evicted and the prohibition against a landlord from seeking eviction except upon speci fied grounds are well protected by the provisions of the Act, and the tenant is afforded an opportunity to pay ar rears of rent even after filing of the suit and, in some cases even after a decree of eviction is passed.
[229G 230A] 6.
The special provisions as contained in sections 30(4), 30, 39 and 40 indicate the legislative policy to safeguard the interest of a tenant, who deposits rent in accordance with those provisions.
The Court must strive to so interpret the statute as to protect and advance the object and purpose of the enactment.
Any narrow or technical interpretation of the provisions would defeat the legislative policy.
The Courts must, therefore, keep the legislative policy in mind in applying the provisions of the Act to the facts of the case.
[230B] 7.
Primarily a tenant is under a legal obligation to pay rent to the landlord as and when due and if he fails to pay the same on demand from the landlord and if he is in arrears for a period of more than four months he would be liable to ejectment.
Where there is a bonafide dispute regarding the landlord 's right to receive rent on account of their being several claimants or if the landlord refuses to accept the rent without there being any justification for the same, the tenant would be justified to take proceeding under section 30 of the Act and deposit the rent in Court.
Thereupon he would be deemed to have paid the rent to landlord, consequently, he would be relieved of liability of eviction.
It does not, however, follow that the tenant is entitled to disregard the landlord or ignore his demand for payment of rent to him and deposit the same in Court.
There should be justification for depositing rent in court, in the absence of any justifica tion, tenant would be liable to eviction.
[231C E]
