The appellant, an Indian national who had undertaken general maintenance work and repairs at the Embassy of Algeria and at the residence of the then ambassador in New Delhi in the year 1976, in order to recover certain alleged payments due from the Embassy sought the consent of the Central Government under section 86(4)(aa) of the Code of Civil Procedure which was refused on "political grounds".
Hence the writ petition by the aggrieved citizen.
Allowing the petition, the Court, HELD: 1.1 Immunity of foreign States to he sued in the domestic forum of another State was and still is part of the general international law and international order.
In India where the rule of law prevails, the foreign State ought to he entitled to such immunities but to no more as are enjoyed by the domestic state before its own Tribunal.
[119E, 120H] Mirza Ali Akbar Kashani vs United Arab Republic and Anr., ; , followed.
Cristina at 498; and Rahimtoola vs Nizam of Hyderabad and Anr., 1958 Appeal Cases 379 at 418, quoted with approval.
Mirza Ali Akbar Kashani vs United Arab Republic and Anr., AIR 960 Calcutta 768, approved.
115 1.2 Indian Constitution guarantees the right of a citi zen to carry on his business and carry on trade freely subject to certain limitations as contained in the relevant provisions of the Constitution.
In the instant case, the petitioner had the right to be paid his reasonable remmuner ation or dues in accordance with the law subject to the bargain between the parties and subject further to any reasonable prohibitions or restrictions under the law of the country.
The disputes that has arisen have to he resolved both under the principles of Lex Loci Contractus and lex Situs.
Since the disputes have not been judicially deter mined nor the claim held frivolous, a foreign State in this country if it fulfills the conditions stipulated in sub section (2) of section 86 of the Code of Civil Procedure would he liable to he sued.
That would be in conformity with the Principles of international law as recognised as part of our domestic law and in accordance with the Indian Constitu tion and human rights.
[118G 119B, 122G] 1.3 It is true that the provisions both of sections 86 and 87 of the Code of Civil Procedure are intended to save the foreign states from harassment which would he caused by the institution of a suit but except in cases where the claim appears to he frivulous patently, the Central Govern ment should normally accord consent or give sanction against foreign states unless there are cogent political and other reasons.
Normally, however, it is not the function of the Central Government to attempt to adjudicate upon the merits of the case intended to be made by the litigants in their proposed suits.
It is the function of the courts of compe tent jurisdiction and the Central Government cannot under section 86 of the Code usurp that function.
The power given to the Central Government must he exercised in accordance with the principles of natural justice and in consonance with the principle that reasons must appear from the order.
[123H 124C] Maharaj Kumar Tokendra Bir Singh vs Secretary, to the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs and Anr., , followed.
1.4 There is no provision of any appeal from the order of the Central Government in either granting or refusing to grant sanction under section 86 of the Code.
This sanction or lack of sanction may, however, be questioned in the appropriate proceedings in court but inasmuch as there is no provision of appeal, it is necessary that there should he on objective evaluation and examination by the appropriate authority of relevant and material factors in exercising its jurisdiction under section 86 by the Central Government.
There is an implicit re 116 quirement of observance of the Principles of natural justice and also the implicit requirement that decision must be expressed in such a manner that reasons can be spelled out from such decision.
[124H I25B] 1.5 Though this is an administrative order, in a case of this nature, there should be reasons.
If the administrative authorities are enjoined to decide the rights of the par ties, it is essential that such administrative authority should accord fair and proper bearing to the person to be affected by the order and give sufficiently clear and ex plicit reasons.
Such reasons must be on relevant material factors objectively considered.
There is no claim of any privilege that disclosure of reasons would undermine the political or national interest of the country.
[125C] 1.6 The expression 'political ground ' covers a wide range and connotes without further particulars vague and fanciful attitude.
The refusal by the Central Government to accord its sanction to sue the foreign ambassador, in this case, is not in accordance with law.[124F, 125C]
