The proviso to section 3(1) of the Madras Inams (Assessment) Act, 1956 provides that no assessment shall be leviable in the case of an inam granted on service tenure which is proved to consist of an assignment of land revenue only.
Certain lands were granted to the respondent Matam by one of the Tanjore Princess.
The purpose of the grant was not known but it was presumed to have been made for the benefit of the Matam.
The original grantee was the then Jeer of the Matam.
The Inam Title Deed granted in 1881 by the Inam Commissioner acknowledged the title of the Matam to 'a religious endowment or a Matam Inam consisting of the right to the Government Revenue on the said land held for the support of the Matam ' and confirmed the Inam to the Manager and his successor tax free.
Consequent on the enactment of the Madras Inams (Assess ment) Act, 1956 the Revenue Divisional Officer made an order in 1963 levying full assessment on the lands.
The writ petition filed by the Matam against that order was allOWed by the High Court on the ground that the proviso to section 3(1) of the Act prevented the levy of full assessment on lands held on service tenure.
It took the view that the expression 'service tenure ' was not to be restricted to a service Inam and that it would include any grant for the support of a religious or charitable institution.
233 In appeal to this Court under article 133(1)(c) of the Constitution, it was contended for the respondent Matam that the imposition of full assessment on lands held by a reli gions institution would be hit by article 26 of the Constitu tion.
Allowing the appeal by the State, the Court, HELD: The proviso to section 3(1) of the Madras Inams (As sessment) Act, 1956 is not applicable to lands held by religious institutions The inam lands in question are, therefore, liable to full assessment.
[237A] Three possible views have been taken of the grants made in connection with religions institutions: first, that the land was granted to the institution; secondly, that it was intended to be attached to a particular office; and thirdly, that it was granted to a named individual, burdened with service, the person so named happening to be the office holder at the time of the grant.
This distinction between grants to institutions as such and grants made for the performance of service either by attaching the service to a particular office or by naming the individual grantee and burdening the grant with service, the named individual being the holder of an office, for the the time being, places the former in a category different from service inams.
[236 D] In the instant case, the lands were granted for the benefit of the Matam.
They fall in the first category.
These cannot, therefore, be considered as lands subject to service tenure.
[234H, 236G] Subramania vs Kailasanatha, AIR 1934 Madras 258 and Hindu Religious Endowments Board, Madras vs Thadikonda Koteswara Rao, , applied.
The High Court was not right in interpreting the expres sion 'service tenure ' by referring to section 44B of the Madras Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1927 (Act 2 of 1927) where that expression is in fact not used at all.
The classifica tion of grants for the benefit of a religious institution along with other service inams by Paragraph 54 of the Stand ing Orders of the Board of Revenue also does not throw any light on the interpretation of the expression 'service tenure ' in Madras Inams (Assessment) Act.
The expression has to be construed with reference to the object of the Act to impose full assessment on inam lands hitherto wholly or partly exempt from levy of land revenue.
[236H, 235H 236 B] The mere imposition of assessment on lands held by a reli gious 234 denominational institution cannot attract the right guaran teed by article 26.
The burden imposed is a burden to be shared in the same manner by all the owners of the lands in the State and not a special burden imposed on the denominational institution.
Burdens of that nature are outside the right guaranteed by article 26.
[237C]
