Chapter IV of the Delhi School EdUcation Act, comprising of sections 8 to 12 deal with "Terms and conditions of service of employees of recognised private schools".
Chapter V consisting of sections 13 to 15 contains "the provisions applicable to unaided minority schools".
Section 10(1) specifically requires that, "the scales of pay and allow ances.
medical facilities, pension, gratuity, provident fund and other prescribed benefits of the employees of a recog nised private school shall not be less than those of the employees of the corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate authority".
But section 12 provides, "Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to an unaided minority school.
" Chapter V contains certain provisions relating to unaided minority schools.
The effect of section 12 of the Act is to make sections 8,9,10 and 11 inapplicable to unaided minority schools: First, the Administrator may not make rules regulating the conditions of service of employees of unaided minority schools.
But so far as the minimum qualifications for re cruitment of employees are concerned, Section 13 enables the Administrator to make regulations even in respect of unaided minority schools.
Second, the prior approval of the Director need not be obtained for the dismissal.
removal.
reduction in rank or termination of service otherwise than by dismiss al or removal of an employee of an unaided minority school.
Third.
against such dismissal.
removal or reduction in rank, there is to be no appeal.
Fourth, neither prior nor subse quent approval of the Director need be obtained to suspend any of the employees of an unaided minority school Fifth, the scales of pay and allowances.
medical facilities, pen sion.
gratuity.
provident fund and other 239 benefits which may be given to employees are subject to no regulation except that they should be contained in a written contract of service and need not conform to the scales of pay and allowances etc.
of the employees of the correspond ing status in schools run by the appropriate authority as in the case of other recognised private schools.
Frank Anthony Public School is a recognised unaided minority school within the meaning of sections 2(x) read with 2(e), 2(o) and 2(t) of the Act.
In the matter of emolu ments and conditions of service such as leave etc.
, teachers and employees of the Frank Anthony Public School lag far behind the teachers and employees of Government schools.
Several other conditions of service of teachers and employ ees also comare unfavourably with the conditions of service of teachers and employees of Government Schools.
But for section 12 and if sections 8 to 11 were applicable to them, they would at least be as well off as teachers and other employees of Government Schools.
The Petitioner association, therefore, has filed the writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, seeking equalisation of their pay scales and conditions of service with those of their counterparts in Government Schools and for a declaration that section 12 of the Act is void and constitutionally invalid as offending Articles 14, 21 and 23 of the Constitution.
Sometime after the filing of the writ petition and before the preliminary hearing of the writ petitions, some developments took place.
On May 9, 1986 at 10.30 A.M. during the daily school break between 10 A.M. and 10.40 A.M. the teaching staff other than one or two teachers who are re quired to be on duty, took out a "silent march" which was joined by the Class IV Staff also.
Except those on duty, all the others took part in the "silent march".
Classes were resumed at 10.40 A.M. and were not affected in any manner.
There were ' no speeches, no shouting of slogans.
no violence and no disruption of studies.
But even so a notice was issued by the principal on April 10, 1986 warning the mem bers of the staff.
Despite the warning a similar silent march was taken out on April 10, 1986 also.
The management issued orders of suspension against Mrs. Malik, Mrs. Dhar, Mrs. Balman and Mr. Bush.
The Petitioner Association chal lenged the said suspension orders as well and sought stay of the operation of the orders of suspension of the four teach ers.
The respondents in response to the "Rule Nisi" contend ed; (i) that the classification made by section 12 was perfectly valid; (ii) that but.
for section 12, sections 8 to 11 would have to be held to interfere with the right guaranteed by Article 30 of the Constitution to religious 240 and linguistic minorities to administer educational institu tions of their choice; (iii) the petitioner school was an educational institution of great repute whose excellence spoke for itself and therefore it did not necessitate any regulation by any other authority; (iv) that the scale of fee should continue to be low so that it may be within the reach of the ordinary people whom it was intended to reach.
It was because of this desire of the management to keep the scale of fee low that the management could not pay higher salaries and allowances; and (v) that if section 12 was struck down and the management was compelled to pay the same scale of salary and allowances as was paid to employees of Government schools, the Frank Anthony Public School would have to be closed down.
Allowing the writ petition, the Court, HELD: 1.
Section 12 of the Delhi School Education Act which makes the provisions of Chapter IV inapplicable to minority institutions is discriminatory and void not only because it makes section 10 inapplicable to minority insti tutions, but also because it makes sections 8(1), 8(3), 8(4), 8(5), 9 and 11 inapplicable to unaided minority insti tutions.
That the Parliament did not understand sections 8 to 11 as offending the fundamental right guaranteed to the minorities under Article 30(1) is evident from the fact that Chapter IV applies to aided minority institutions and it cannot for a moment be suggested that surrender of the right under Article 30(1) is the price which the aided minority institutions have to pay to obtain aid from the Government.
[272G 273A] 2.1 From the decided cases, it is clear, that there is a general and broad consensus about the content and dimen sion of the Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
The right guaranteed to religious and linguistic minorities by Article 30(1) is two fold, to establish and to administer educational institutions of their choice.
The key to the Article lies in the words "of their own choice".
These words indicate that the extent of the right is to be determined, not with reference to any concept of State necessity and general societal interest but with reference to the educational institutions themselves, that is, with reference to the goal of making the institu tions "effective vehicles of education for the minority community or other persons who resort to them".
It follows that regulatory measures which are designed towards the achievement of the goal of making the minority educational institutions effective instruments for imparting education cannot be considered to impinge upon the right guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
The question in each case is whether the particular mea 241 sure, it in the ultimate analysis, designed to achieve such goal, without of course nullifying any part of the right of management in substantial measure.
[267C E] In re Kerala Education Bill, 1957 ; Rev. Sidhajbhai School and Ors., vs State of Bombay and Anr., ; ; State of Kerala etc.
vs Mother Provincial etc.
; , ; The Ahmedabad St. Xaviors College Society & Anr., vs State of Gujarat and Anr., ; ; All Saints High School etc., vs The Government of Andhra Pradesh AIR 1960 SC 1042 discussed.
2.2 What was decided by the Supreme Court in In re Kerala Educational Bill, 1957 was that Anglo Indian Schools which were entitled to receive grants under the Constitution and which received no more aid than that to which they were entitled under the Constitution could not be subjected to stringent terms as fresh or additional conditions precedent to enable them to obtain the grant.
Such conditions would infringe their rights under Article 337 and violate their rights under Article 30(1).
To place an interpretation that any conditions imposed for granting recognition to unaided minority educational institutions would infringe on the right of administration granted to them by Article 30(1) of the Constitution would be subversive of the right guaranteed by Article 30(1) since it would make the extent of the right depend on the receipt or non receipt of aid.
If one thing is clear, it is this that the Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 30(1) cannot be surrendered, wholly or partly, and the authorities cannot make the grant of aid conditional on the surrender of a part of the Fundamental Right.
[253D E] 2.3 Sections 8(1), 8(3).
8(4) and 8(5) do not encroach upon any right of minorities to administer their educational institutions.
Section 8(2), however does interfere with such right and, therefore, inapplicable to minority institutions section 4 is again innocuous since section 9 which applies to unaided minority schools is virtually on the same lines as section 9.
[272F G] 2.4 Section 8(1) merely empowers the Administrator to make rules regulating the minimum qualifications for re cruitment, and the conditions of service of recognised private schools.
Section 8(1) is innocuous and in fact section 13 which applies to unaided minority schools is almost on the same lines as section 8(1).
Section 8(2) which requires the prior approval of the Director for the dismiss al, removal, reduction in rank or other termination of the services of an employee of 242 a recognised private school is objectionable.
Section 8(3) provides for an appeal to the Tribunal constituted under section 11, that is, a Tribunal consisting of a person who has hold office as a District Judge or any equivalent judicial of fice.
The appeal is not to any departmental official but to a Tribunal manned by a person who has held off`ice as a District Judge and who is required to exercise his powers not arbitrarily but in the same manner as a court of appeal under the Code of Civil Procedure.
The right of appeal itself is confined to a limited class of cases, namely, those of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank and not to every dispute between an employee and the management.
The limited right of appeal, the character of the authority constituted to hear the appeal and the manner in which the appellate power is required to be exercised make the provi sion for an appeal perfectly reasonable.
[270E G, 271D F] 2.5 Section 8(4) would be inapplicable to minority institutions if it had conferred blanket power on the Direc tor to grant or withhold prior approval in every case where a management proposed to suspend an employee but it is not so.
The management has the right to order immediate suspen sion of an employee in case of gross misconduct but in order to prevent an abuse of power by the management a safeguard is provided to the employee that approval should be obtained within 15 days.
The Director is also bound to accord his approval if there are adequate and reasonable grounds for such suspension.
The provisions is eminently reasonable and sound.
[271H 272B] The Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society & Anr.
vs State of Gujarat and Anr.
, ; ; All Saints High School etc.
vs The Government of Andhra Pradesh AIR 1960 SC 1042 referred to.
2.6 The excellence of the instruction provided by an institution would depend directly on the excellence of the teaching staff, and in turn, that would depend on the quali ty and the contentment of the teacher.
Conditions of service pertaining to minimum qualifications of teachers, their salaries, allowances and other conditions of service which ensure security, contentment and decent living standards to teachers and which will consequently enable them to render better service to the institution and the pupils cannot surely be said to he violative of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
The manage ment of a minority Educational institution cannot be permit ted under the guise of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution, to oppress or exploit its employees any more than any other private employee.
Oppres sion or exploitation of the teaching staff of an educational institution is bound 243 to lead, inevitably, to discontent and deterioration of the standard of instruction imparted in the institution affect ing adversely the object of making the institution an effec tive vehicle of education for the minority community or other persons who resort to it.
The management of minority institution cannot complain of invasion of the fundamental right to administer the institution when it denies the very object of Article 30(1) which is to make the institution an effective vehicle of education.
Therefore, section 10 of the Delhi Education Act which requires that the scales of pay and allowances, medical facilities, pension, gratuity, provident fund and other prescribed benefits of the employ ees of a recognised private school shall not be less than those of the employees of the corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate authority and which further prescribes the procedure for enforcement of the requirement is a permissible regulation aimed at attracting competent staff and consequently at the excellence of the educational institution.
It is a permissible regulation which in no way detracts from the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 30(1) to the minority institution to administer their educa tional institutions.
Therefore to the extent that section 12 makes section 10 inapplicable to unaided minority institu tions, it is clearly discriminatory.
[269B E, 270C D] The Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society & Anr., vs The State of Gujarat & Anr., ; ; In re Kerala Education Bill, 1957, ; The State of Kerala vs Mother Provincial ; ; All Saints High School vs Government of Andhra Pradesh AIR 1960 SC 1042 relied on.
