The respondent landlady was the owner of a premises consisting of ground floor and first floor.
Both the floors had been let out on rent and she was living with one of her relatives.
She filed a petition for eviction of the appel lant tenant from the first floor of the premises on the ground of bonafide personal necessity.
She had stated in the petition that she needed one floor for her residence and the other one i.e. the ground floor to let out to have income to support herself because that was her only source of liveli hood.
During the pendency of the petition, the ground floor in the house fell vacant twice and she let it out on higher rent.
The Trial Court allowed the eviction petition section 14(1)(e) of Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 on the ground (i) that the landlady must have some income; and (ii) that it was landlady 's choice to occupy the first floor premises and there was no mala fide, her requirement was bona fide.
The High Court upheld the aforesaid order of eviction.
In appeal to the Supreme Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant tenant that the second limb of the defini tion contained in s.14(1)(e) of the Rent Act was not satis fied since the respondent landlady had other reasonably suitable accommodation and by her own conduct, she had disentitled herself of the user of the same inasmuch as the accommodation of ground floor fell vacant twice when tenant left during the pendency of the proceeding for eviction but she chose not to go into that possession but let out the same to fetch higher income.
Therefore, taking these facts into question which indubitably could he taking 276 into account, it cannot be said that the landlady had 'no other reasonably suitable accommodation '.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: (1) The order and judgment of the High Court are set aside.
In view of the undisputed facts that the landlady had in her choice to go into the premises in question but she did not, she had become disentitled to the right of eviction.
[287A, 286H] (2)(i) The Rent restriction laws are both beneficial and restrictive, beneficial for those who want protection from eviction and rack renting, but restrictive so far as the landlord 's right or claim for eviction is concerned.
Rent restriction laws would provide a habitat for the landlord or landlady if need be, but not to seek comforts other than habitat that right the landlord must seek elsewhere.
The philosophy and principle of rent restriction law have noth ing to do with the private exploitation of property by the owners of the property in derogation of the tenant 's need of protection from eviction in a society of shortage of accom modation.
[285F, 286G] (2)(ii) Administration of justice demands that any changes either in fact or in law must be taken cognizance of by the Court but that must be done in a cautious manner of relevant facts.
Therefore subsequent events can be taken cognizance of if they are relevant and material.
[283G] Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu vs The Motor & General Traders, ; , Hasmat Rai & Anr.
vs Raghunath Prasad, ; and Variety Emporium vs V.R.M. Mohd. Ibra him Naina; , , relied upon.
Firm Ram Sewa Hari Ram vs Sain Datt Mal, AIR 1967 Delhi 113 and Abdul Hamid and another vs Nur Mohammad, AIR 1976 Delhi 328, approved.
Bishambhar Dayal Chandra Mohan and Others etc.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh and Others etc.
; , , referred to.
(3) In a proceeding for the ejectment of a tenant on the ground of personal requirement under a statute controlling the eviction of tenants, unless the statute prescribes to the contrary the requirement must continue to exist on the date when the proceedings was finally disposed of either in appeal or revision by the relevant authority.[284D] 277 In the instant case, if cognizance is taken of events and developments subsequent to the initiation of proceed ings, it must be held that the landlady had the opportunity of occupying a floor in the house which fell vacant not once but twice subsequent to arising of her need for reasonable accommodation She chose not to occupy the said premises.
Therefore.
it cannot be said that the landlady had no other reasonably suitable accommodation and thus the second limb of section 14(1)(e) of the Act is not satisfied.
[283D E, 285A B]
