The Appellant Company, in a writ petition, challenged the order passed by the respondent Electricity Board levy ing surcharge of 5.5 paise per unit on electricity drawn by the Company in excess of the permissible 70% authorised by the State Government.
The writ petition having been dis missed by a Single Judge of the High Court and the Division Bench having confirmed the decision, the appellant appealed to this Court.
In the appeal, it was contended; (i) that the Electrici ty Board had no authority to charge 5.5 paise per unit in excess of the agreed rate without giving one month 's notice as contemplated by the agreement; and (ii) that the levy of the surcharge resulted in retrospective levy and was there fore not in accordance with law.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The Electricity Board had the legal authority to levy and collect surcharge of 5.5 paise per unit from the appellant in regard to the supply of electricity in excess of the 70% authorised in the context of section 22 B of the .
[334 C] 2.
The agreement itself does not envision the supply of electricity in violation of the ban imposed by the State Government in exercise of the power under section 22B of the Act.
[333 G H] 3.1 Section 49(3) of the Electricity Supply Act autho rises a Board to supply electricity by charging different tariff having regard to the geographical position of the area, the nature of the supply, purpose for which the supply is required and any other relevant factors, and is wide enough to cover a situation where electricity in excess of the authorised quantum is drawn in disregard of the ban imposed in view of the shortage of the supply under section 22 B of the as also to cover a situation where at the express request of 332 the consumer electricity is purchased from some other au thority and is supplied.
[334 D, B] 3.2 The combined effect of s.49 and the terms and condi tions of supply is that having regard to the nature of supply and other relevant factors particularly when there is shortage of electricity the Board has the power to enhance the rates.
If there is shortage of electricity there is justification to impose restriction on supply.
The Board can also impose higher rates by way of sanction if the quota is exceeded.
[334 E] Adoni Cotton Mills etc.
vs The Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board and Others, ; , relied upon.
In the instant case, having regard to the fact that the supply was made after obtaining it from the Damodar Valley Corporation at a higher rate and having further regard to the fact that the impost of the surcharge is construed as having been made under the statutory authority, the stipula tion in the agreement does not come into play.
[335 A B]
