The State of Rajasthan issued a Notification No. 7.1(6)H/Unit x 75 Home (Court x) dated 15.7.1975 under section 129A of the empowering certain officers of the Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation to exercise in respect of all stage carriages and contract carriages on the Notified Routes under section 68 D(3) of the Act, the powers that can be exercised under section 129A of the Act by the police officers who are empowered in that behalf.
The writ petitioners and the appellants are holders of contract carriage permits carrying on business in the State of Rajasthan and other adjoining States.
Under the said permits they are entitled to run the contract carriages throughout Rajasthan, except on the notified routes.
Some of them also own motor vehicles which are covered by permits issued under section 63(7) of the Act having the privilege of carrying on passengers on contract throughout India.
The petitioners/appellants contended (i) that the ap pointment of the officers of the Corporation who are their rivals in motor transport business, as officers entitled to exercise powers conferred under section 129A of the Act was violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution; and (ii) that the said officers who are very much interested in seeing that the Corporation earns much profit, have been overzealous in exercising their powers conferred on them and by seizing and detaining the motor vehicles belonging to the petitioners/appellants have acted contrary to law.
Allowing the petitions and appeals, the Court, 301 HELD: 1.1 The Deputy General Manager (Traffic), the Assistant Depot Managers and the Traffic Inspectors of the Corporation could not have been authorised by the State Government to discharge the powers under section 129A of the .
[315 E] 1.2 Ordinarily, whenever a statute empowers the State Government to appoint persons to administer any of the provisions of the statute, the persons who may be appointed by the State Government under such provision can only be persons appointed in connection with the affairs of the State.
In other words they should be employees or officers of the State Government, who are subject to the administra tive and disciplinary control of the State Government di rectly.
1.3 The expression 'other person ' mentioned in section 129A of the Act which has to be read ejusdem generis with the words 'any police officer ' which precede that expression in section 129A of the Act can only refer to an officer of the Government and not to any officer or employee of any statutory corporation or to any other private person.
[314 G] 1.4 A reading of section 129A and section 133A of the together shows that the 'other person ' referred to in section 129A of the Act, who may be empowered to discharge the powers under that section can only mean an officer of the Government, such as the Motor Vehicles Officer appointed under section 133A of the Act or of any other department.
It could never have been the inten tion of the Central Legislature, while enacting section 129A and section 133A of the Act that the powers exercisable under section 129A of the Act could be conferred on persons who were not officers of the Government.
If the Central Legislature intended that such powers could be entrusted to private persons or employees of any statutory Corporation the section would have expressly provided in that regard.
[313 H 314 B] 1.5 Under the Rajasthan State Road established under section 3 of the Road Transport Corporation Act LXIV of 1950, the officers and servants of the Corporation are not holders of civil posts under the State Government, so as to fall within the term 'other persons '.
Further, there is no provision in the Corporations Act, authorising the Corpora tion to permit any of its officers to exercise the powers under Section 129A of the or to spend money on the safe custody of the vehicles which are seized and detained under section 129A of the .
[310 C D, 311 H 312 A] From the reading of the provisions of the and of the Corporations Act it is evident that the Corporation is just another operator of motor vehicles which is entitled to run motor vehicles in accordance with law 302 after obtaining permits.
When the Corporation applies for permits under Chapter IV of the Act it has to compete with other applicants to obtain permits in accordance with the provisions of that Chapter.
When an approved scheme is brought into operation under Chapter IV A of the Act it is no doubt entitled to get permits to the exclusion, complete or partial of other operators.
It is also true that when the approved scheme provides that other operators are excluded completely or partially no private operator can operate his motor vehicles along the notified route or in the notified area in question except in accordance with the approved scheme.
Barring what is stated above and some other liabili ties from which the Corporation is expressly exempted under the Act, the Corporation is subject to all the obligations and responsibilities which are imposed on other private operators by the Act.
It is subject to the powers of super vision and control of the transport authorities under the Act and to the rules governing the proper maintenance of transport vehicles.
The Corporation is also subject to the jurisdiction of the Motor Vehicles Department which is established under section 133 A of the Act and its vehicles are liable to be inspected and checked by the officers appointed under that section in the interests of the travel ling public.
It is thus clear that the Corporation is one of the many operators of the motor vehicles in the State though the fleet of the motor vehicles owned by it and the magni tude of the operations carried on by it may be very large.
[312 C F] 1.6 Further every permit issued under Chapter IV of the Act contains a number of conditions which are specified therein.
The contravention of either section 22 or section 42(1) of the Act or any of the conditions mentioned in the permit would entitle and officer empowered under section 129A of the Act to seize and detain the vehicle in question and also to provide for the temporary safe custody.
A report or complaint, as the case may be, also may be filed by.
him before the Magistrate for taking action against the owner of the vehicle for violation of any of the provisions of the Act referred to above.
It is thus seen that the powers are of a drastic nature and have the effect of depriving the owner of a motor vehicle of his property, which sometimes may be of the value of Rs.2 to 3 lakhs.
They also have the effect of depriving the passengers who are travelling in that vehicle of a transport service right in the middle of a route and may expose them to 'hunger and thirst '.
Since the Corporation is only entitled to a preference in the grant of permits as respects the Notified routes or in any NOtified area.
The police officers who are empowered to exercise certain powers under the should exercise these powers in respect of motor vehicles owned by the private operators and also in respect of the motor vehicles owned by the State Road Transport Corporation.
Such a power cannot be granted to the officers of the Corporation by resorting to the term 'other person ' in the .
[309 F 310 A, 312 G, 311 H] 303 Having regard to the nature of the power, the expression 'other person ' in section 129 also will have to be inter preted as meaning any other person appointed in connection with the affairs of the State Government and not any private person or officer of a Corporation.
[315 C] Krishna Bus Service Pvt. Ltd. vs State of Haryana & Ors., [1985] 3 S.C.C. 711, followed.
Transport Commissioner, Andhra Pradesh vs Sardar Ali Bus Owner, ; , referred to.
OBSERVATION: 1.
The police officers and the officers of the Motor Vehicles Department are expected to discharge their duties properly and diligently and if they discharge their duties in accordance with law with the amount of diligence which is required of them, there should no difficulty in plugging any kind of unauthorised running of stage carriage or contract carriages on the notified routes.
Negligence on the part of the Transport Authorities, the Motor Vehicles Department and the police officers in exercising their powers of supervi sion, inspection and control in respect of the motor vehi cles of the Corporation leads to grave public suffering and sometimes to disasters.
They should not take it for granted that the motor vehicles of the Corporation do not need to be checked or inspected only because it is established by the State Government.
Omission on their part in discharging these duties amounts to dereliction of public duty.
[315 G H, 312 G H] 2.
Prima facie, the Corporation is not entitled to be paid compensation under section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
It can be paid such compensation only when it is open to the Corporation to file a suit and recover damages in law for such unauthorised operation of stage carriages.
Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 provides for payment of compensation out of the fine to certain persons.
The orders directing payment of compensa tion to the Corporation may have been passed under clause (b) of that section which provides that the fine recovered may be applied in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury caused by the offence, when compensa tion is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by such person in a Civil Court.
Magistrates should hereafter pass such orders only after heating all the parties.
[316 D F]
