Consequent upon the State Government declaring a part of the jungle lands in two tehsils of the District of Mirzapur as reserved forest under s.20 of the and notifying other areas under s.4 of the Act for final declaration as reserved forests, the forest officers started interfering with the operations of the Adivasis living for generations in those areas.
Criminal cases for encroachments as also other forest offences were registered against them and systematic attempts were made to obstruct their free movement, and even steps were taken under the U.P. Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1972 for throwing them out of the villages raised by them, and in existence for quite some time.
Their attempts to cultivate the lands around these villages, converted by them into cultivable fields and on which they had been raising crops for food, were also resisted.
On the basis of a letter received from the petitioner Ashram, a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution was registered by this Court with regard to the claims of these Adivasis to land and related rights.
By its order dated August 22, 1983 the Court directed the claims of Adivasis or tribals, to be in possession of land and to regularisation of such possession, to be inves tigated by a high powered committee with a view to 337 reaching a final decision.
The committee has since identi fied 433 villages relevant for the present dispute, and roughly one lakh eighty two thousand acres in unauthorised occupation.
On December 15, 1983 the Court directed appointment of a high powered committee consisting of a retired High Court Judge and two officers for the purpose of adjudicating upon the claims of the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and backward classes.
The Government by notification dated August 5, 1986 has established a special agency for survey and record operations.
While the matter had been pending before the court the Government decided to locate a super thermal power plant of the National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) in a part of these lands and acquisition proceedings were initiated.
NTPC, now a party before the Court, is seeking dispossession of person in occupation and takeover of lands sought to be acquired for its propose.
The Court gave the following directions: 1.
The lands which have already been declared as re served forest under section 20 of the Act not to form part of the writ petition.
[342 C] 2.
Forest Officers to demarcate and identify the lands notified under s.4 of the Act within six weeks from 1st December, 1986.
The matter to be widely publicised.
Claims as contemplated under s.6(c) of the Act to be received within three months from 15th January, 1987.
[342 F 343 A] 3.
Adequate number of record officers to be appointed by December 31, 1986.
Five Additional District Judges to be located at five notified places in the area and to exercise the powers of the Appellate Authority as provided under section 17 of the Act.
[343 C F] 4.
After the Forest Settlement Officer has dealt with the matter, the findings with the requisite papers to be placed before the Additional District Judge of the area, even though no appeal is filed.
These to be scrutinized by him as if an appeal has been taken.
The order of the Addi tional District Judge passed therein to be taken to be the order contemplated under the Act.
[343 G] 5.
When the Appellate Authority finds that the claim is admissible, the State Government to honour the said decision and proceed to implement the same.
[344 A] 338 6.
Assistance by way of legal aid to be provided to the persons seeking to raise claims and for facilitating infor mation for lodging of claims and processing them both at the original as also the appellate stage.
State Government to provide the necessary funds.
[344 C] 7.
The land sought to be acquired by the NTPC to be free from the ban of dispossession.
However, provisions of the Land Acquisition Act to be complied with.
Necessary record to be maintained, as indicated, for use in proceedings that may be taken subsequently.
Facilities to be given to land oustees as undertaken before the Court.
[344 F] 8.
A Board of Commissioners to supervise the operations and oversee the implementation of the directions.
[345 C D] Forests are a much wanted national asset.
On account of the depletion thereof ecology has been disturbed; climate has undergone a major change and rains have become scanty.
, These have long term adverse effects on national economy as also on the living process.
At the same time, the court cannot lose sight of the fact that for industrial growth as also for provision of improved living facilities there is great demand in this country for energy such as electricity.
A scheme to generate electricity, therefore, is equally of national importance and cannot be deferred.
[342 AB]
