The non gazetted members of the Delhi police Force wanted to form an association of their own and for that purpose constituted the Karmachari Union in 1966 and applied for its registration under the Trade Union Act, 1926 and this was refused.
After the coming into effect from 2.12.1966 of the Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Act, 33 of 1966 another, application for recognition was again made on 9.12.1966 which was granted on 12.12.1966.
The non gazetted members of the Delhi Police Force were permitted to become members of the Sangh.
The Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Rules, 1966 made by the Central Government on 12.12.1966 were amended by the Amendment Rules of 1970.
Rule 11 thereof provides for revocation of the recognition grant ed to an association, if the said associations articles are not in conformity with the Rules or are not brought in conformity with the provisions of the amended Rules within a period of 30 days.
Since the Articles of Association of the appellant Sangh contained a number of provisions not in conformity with the rules and since the Sangh failed to bring the same in conformity, by a circular dated 1.4.1971 the recognition granted was revoked.
The appellants, there fore, filed a writ petition before the Delhi High Court challenging the constitutional validity of the Act, Rules and the impugned circular.
The writ petition having been rejected the appellants have come by way of special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, 348 HELD: 1.1 The Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Act (33 of) 1966, the Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Rules 1966 (as amended by the 1970 Rules) and the circular dated 1.4.1971 are all constitutionally valid.
They do not offend the provisions of Articles 14 and 19(1)(c) of the Constitu tion.
[350 C, 355 E F] 1.2 The right under Article 19(1)(c) is not absolute.
Article 19(4) specifically empowers the State to make any law to fetter, abridge or abrogate any of the fights under Article 19(1)(c) in the interest of public order and other considerations.
While the right to freedom of association is fundamental, recognition of such association is not a funda mental fights and the Parliament can by law regulate the working of such associations by imposing conditions and restrictions on such functions.
[355 E, 356 F] 1.3 The fundamental fights guaranteed by Article 19(1)(c) can be claimed by Government servants.
A government servant may not lose his right by joining government serv ice.
Article 33 which confers power on the Parliament to abridge or abrogate such rights in their application to the Armed Forces and other similar forces shows that such fights are available to all citizens, including government serv ants.
What has happened in this case is only to impose reasonable restrictions in the interest of discipline and public order.
[356 G H] 1.4 Rule 11 read with Rule 3(c) of the Amended Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Rules, 1966 has to be judged keeping in mind the character of the employees to whom it applies.
It is true that the rules impose a restriction on the right to form association.
It virtually compels a gov ernment servant to withdraw his membership of the associa tion as soon as recognition accorded to the said association is withdrawn or if, after the association is formed, no recognition is accorded to it within six months.
In other words, the right to form an association is conditioned by the existence of the recognition of the said association by the government.
If the association obtains recognition and continues to enjoy it, government servants can become mem bers of the said association, if the said association does not secure recognition from the government or recognition granted to it is withdrawn, government servants must cease to be members of the said association.
That is the plain effect of the impugned role.
These rules are protected by Articles 33 and 19(4) of the Constitution.
Besides, it is settled law that the right guaranteed by Article 19(1)(c) to form associations does not involve a guaranteed right to recognition also.
[357 A C] 1.5 Section 3 of the Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Act permits the rule making authority to define any group of Police Force that can form an Association.
It also gives power to prescribe the nature of activity that each such association of members can indulge in.
It, therefore, follows that if rules can be 349 framed defining this aspect, a rule can also be framed enabling the authorities to revoke or cancel recognition once accorded, if the activities offended the rules.
Besides the classification based on ranking has its own rationale behind it.
The Court is dealing with a Force in which disci pline is the most important prerequisite.
Non gazetted officers consist of men of all ranks; the lowest cadre and officers who are superior to them.
If all the non gazetted officers are grouped together irrespective of rank, it is bound to affect discipline.
It was perhaps, realising the need to preserve discipline that the changes in the rule were effected.
[357E, G ] Damyanti Naranga vs The Union of India & Ors., ; ; Ous Kutilingal Achudan Nair & Ors., vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; and Raghubar Dayal Jai Prakash vs The Union of India & Ors., ; fol lowed.
