Section 68 FF of the prohibits grant of permit in respect of notified area or notified route by State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority except in accordance with the scheme published under subs.
(3) of section 68 D but provides for grant of tempo rary permits in cases where no application for a permit has been made by the State Transport Undertaking in respect of such notified area or route.
Section 59 bars transfer of permits from one person to another except with the permis sion of the concerned Transport Authority.
Section 42 pro hibits the owners of transport vehicles from plying them in public places except in accordance with the conditions of the permit.
Under an agreement entered into with the respondent Corporation the petitioner was permitted to PlY his bus on a specified route as a nominee of the former for a period of five years ending on December 23, 1982.
Thereafter the respondent was issued temporary permits and the petitioner was permitted by it to ply his motor vehicle on monthly basis.
The route in question had by that been brought within a scheme published under section 68 C of the Act.
The respondent through an advertisement dated August 12, 1984 invited tenders from private operators for the grant of privilege of running buses as stage carriages as its nomi nees.
Aggrieved by the said advertisement the petitioner filed a writ petition in the High Court assailing the deci sion to invite tenders as arbitrary and illegal, and for a writ in the nature of mandamns directing the respondent Corporation to allow him to ply his motor vehicle as its nominee for a further period of five years.
Under an interim order of the Court he continued to ply his bus as a stage carriage till May 31, 1985.
Subsequently, the High Court dismissed the petition since the scheme 370 published under section 68 C of the Act had been approved and brought into effect from June 1, 1985.
Dismissing the petition for special leave, the Court, HELD: 1.1 It is not permissible under the for a State Transport Undertaking to obtain a permit under Chapter IV A and to allow a private operator as its nominee to operate under that permit his motor vehicle as a stage carriage on the notified route.
It cannot by granting such permission collect any money either as nomination fees or as royalty or supervision charges.
Section 42 and 59 of the Act which equally apply to permits issued under Chapter IV A, debar all holders of permits, including the State Transport Undertakings from indulging in such unauthorised trafficking in permits.
[373E, 374A, D] 1.2 The petitioner was not, therefore, entitled to the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus to the respondent Corporation to allow him to operate his ' motor vehicle as a stage carriage under the permit obtained by the latter, as its nominee.
The agreement entered into by the petitioner with the respondent was clearly contrary to the Act and could not be enforced.
The advertisement issued by the respondent was equally ineffective.
[374E] 2.
If the respondent Corporation cannot run its vehicle under a permit issued to it, it must surrender it so that the Regional Transport Authority may grant the permit to some other deserving applicant or it must transfer it to somebody else with the permission of the Regional Transport Authority granted under s.59 of the Act.
It cannot allow the permit to be used by others either for consideration or without consideration.
If it does so it would be exercising the power of the Regional Transport Authority.
The Corpora tioncannot thus indirectly clutch at the jurisdiction of the Regional Transport Authority.
[374F] 3.1 Even though the Corporation was established by the State Government under the and the State Government had by an executive order approved the action of the Corporation to allow private operators to operate their vehicles under the permits issued to the Corporation, the Corporation could not in law allow its nominees to exploit the permits in such manner.
[374B] 3.2 Section 19(2)(h) of the Road Transport Corporation Act only authorises the Corporation to purchase or otherwise secure by agreement vehicles owned or possessed by the owner of any other undertaking for use thereof for the purpose of its undertaking.
It does not authorise the 371 Corporation to permit another person to run his vehicle on his own under a permit issued to the Corporation by paying some amount to the Corporation.
[375B] 3.3 It would have been different if there had been a law corresponding to the Uttar Pradesh Motor Vehicles Special Provisions Act (27 of 1976) under which the competent au thority can authorise such operation subject to the condi tions specified therein.
[374C] Adarsh Travels Bus Service & Ant., vs State of U.P. & Ors., ; ; Sumer Chand Sharma & Anr.
vs State of U.P. & Anr.
; , referred to.
