The appellant landlord instituted an eviction suit in 1970 against the respondent tenant on the ground of unlawful subletting.
The respondent had inherited the tenancy upon the death of his father in 1968.
The subletting was created, in 1952 during the life time of appellants father.
Neither the appellant, nor the respondent had any personal knowledge about the terms and conditions of the lease originally granted by the father of the appellant in favour of the father of the respondent.
The High Court, while dismissing the appeal of the appellant landlord, held that a tenant sought to be evicted on the ground of unlawful subletting under s.10(2)(ii)(a) of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent control) Act, 1960 must himself have been guilty of the contravention and that the alleged contravention by his father when he was a tenant can be of no avail for evicting the tenant.
Dismissing the Appeal of the appellant landlord, this Court, HELD: 1(i) Section 10(2) of the Act opens with the words, "a landlord who seeks to evict his tenant" and pro vides that if the tenant has created a subtenancy without the written consent of the landlord, he will he liable to be evicted.
When the statute says the tenant who is sought to he evicted must he guilty of the contravention, the Court cannot say, "guilt of his predecessor in interest" will suffice.
[382C D] (ii) The flouting of the law, the sin under the Rent Act, must he the sin of the tenant sought to be evicted and not that of his father or predecessor in interest.
It being a penal provision in the sense that it visits the violator with the punishment of eviction, it must he strictly con strued, for it causes less misery to be sheltered in a jail, than to be shelterless without.
[382E] In the instant case, there is nothing on record to show that the subletting 380 which was made in 1952,18 years before the institution of the eviction suit in 1970, was in violation of the relevant provisions of law.
There is no evidence, direct or circum stantial, on the basis of which it can be said that the lease did not confer on the father of the respondent the right to create a sub tenancy, or that it was done without the written consent of the then landlord, the father of the appellant.
Under these circumstances, the appellant cannot successfully evict the respondent on the ground of having created an unlawful sub tenancy within the meaning of S.10(2)(ii)(a) of the Act.
[381G, 382A B]
