The U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent & Eviction) Act of 1972 was amended in 1976 and Chapter IV A was added.
Section 24A, section 24B and section 24C are contained in the said Chapter.
They provide for summary trim of eviction petitions in certain circumstances.
By a Notification dated 17th February, ' 1982 issued under s.3 of the Cantonments (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Act of 1957, the Government extended to all the cantonments in the State of Uttar Pra desh the provisions of the Rent Act.
The appellant a government servant, was in occupation of the government accommodation at Meerut.
He was also owner of a house situated in the cantonment area in Meerut.
The house had a ground floor and a first floor with common bathroom and latrine situated on the ground floor.
It had also a common courtyard and a common entrance.
The ground floor of the house was in his possession while the first floor had been let out to the respondent tenant.
Pursuant to a notice received by the appellant landlord to vacate the government quarter, he filed an eviction petition against the respondent tenant in respect of the first floor of the premises under section 24 C of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 on 14th December, 1979.
The respondent tenant contested the application on the ground that the appellant landlord had two residential houses one in which he was living and the other in which the respondent tenant was living and since the appellant landlord was in possession of a resi dential accommodation, he had no right to get another resi dential accommodation vacated from the tenant under the provisions of section 24B or 24C of the said Act.
The Delegated Authority 412 allowed the petition by its order dated 17th August, 1981 and its order was confirmed in revision by the Additional District Judge.
Aggrieved by the order of the Additional District Judge, the respondent tenant moved the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
It was contended by the respondent tenant before the High Court that (i) Chapter IV A had been applied to the Cantonment areas on a subsequent date, i.e. 27th February, 1982, the Act being not applicable to the accommodation in question in November, 1979 when the appli cation under s.24B of the Act was filed by the respondent and as such the same was liable to be dismissed; and (ii) that as the appellant landlord was living in the ground floor of the said house, petition under s.24B was not main tainable.
The High Court upheld the second contention of the respondent tenant and set aside the order of eviction with out deciding the question as to whether the Act would apply to buildings constructed and situated within the cantonment limit.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1(i) The whole purpose behind s.24A or s.14A of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 which are in pari materia is that when a landlord or a person who is in occupation of a government accommodation and has to leave that accommoda tion and yet he has residential building in the area in his own name or in the name of any member of his family, then such a person or landlord will have a right accrued to him to recover immediate possession of the building let out by him.
The rationale behind these provisions or similar provi sions is that when a government servant lets out his house and is without residential premises then if he is the owner of any residential building either in his name or in the name of any member of his family then he has a right to ask for immediate recovery of the said residential building.
It is an urgency provision to help the government servant to have residential accommodation vacated if he is obliged to vacate his governmental residential accommodation.
The proviso to s.24B deals with the situation where the landlord has more than one dwelling house, he will exercise a choice in respect of one.
[420 E F] 1(ii) Subs.
(1) of s.24B uses the expression "if the landlord owns residential building" and the proviso uses the expression "dwelling houses".
In the Act in question, howev er, there is no definition provided except that 'building ' is defined in clause (i) to section 3 which is not relevant for the present purpose.
It is therefore necessary to determine what kind of a residential building or dwelling house must a landlord possess to be entitled to the urgency procedure of section 24A to 24C of the Act to recover immediate possession.
[420 G, H 421 A] 2(i) Law should take pragmatic view of the matter and re spond to the 413 purpose for which it was made and also take cognizance of the current capabilities of technology and life style of the community.
The purpose of law provides a good guide to the interpretation of the meaning of the Act.
The legislative futility is to be ruled out so long as interpretative possi bility permits.
[421 H 422 A] 2(ii) A dwelling house means a building used or con structed or adapted to be used wholly or principally for human habitation and dwelling house includes any part of a house where that part is occupied separately as a dwelling house.
Therefore, to be a dwelling house or residential accommodation it must be capable of being separately enjoyed and whether or not the premises in question can be so en joyed does not depend merely because that a portion cannot be locked up independently or separately.
Busching Schmitz Private Ltd. vs
P.T. Menghani and Anr., ; , relied upon.
Stroud 's "Judicial Dictionary.
" Vol. 2 at page 858 (4th Edition); Corpus Juris Secundum Vol.
28 pages 604 605, Words and Phrases legally defined, 2nd Edition, Vol.
2 page 127 and Black 's Law Dictionary 1979, 5th Edition page 454, referred to.
In order to determine whether two parts of a building consist of one or more dwelling houses, the tests to be applied are; (i) consider the building and see whether it constitutes a whole house or a part of the house; (ii) if one part is reasonably needed for convenient and comfortable occupation and enjoyment of the other part of the building then both the parts of the building constitute one dwelling house and to arrive at this finding the relevant factors to be taken in consideration are: (a) the situation; (b) en trance; (c) the Municipal Number; (d) the nature of the construction; (e) inter communication between the two parts; (f) completeness and independence of each unit; and (g) other relevant material circumstances.
None of these taken singly is decisive but the cumulative effect should be considered.
[422 D F] In the instant case, after the death of the mother of the appellant the portion was separately let out and a tenant used to occupy the said portion separately.
There fore, in view of the fact that the premises can be enjoyed with common facilities for dwelling purposes, it would constitute a separate and independent dwelling houses and the High Court in the facts of the case was not in error in holding that the two parts could be separately enjoyed.
If the portion in the occupation of the appellant could not separately dwelled in by the appellant, it was only then that the extraordinary provisions of section 24A, 24B and 24C could be resorted to.
Otherwise the owner or the landlord is entitled.to take recourse to other provisions of the Rent Act contending that the premises in 414 question is reasonably required bona fide for the landlord 's use but in the situation like the present, the landlord was not entitled to take recourse to the urgency provisions in section 24A, 24B and 24C of the Act.
[423 F 424 C] Jai Singh Jairam Tvagi etc '.
vs Mamanchand Ratilal Agarwal and Ors., ; , relied upon.
Sarwan Singh & Anr.
vs Kasturi Lal, ; , inap plicable.
V.L. Kashyap vs R.P. (Delhi), 1977 (1 ) Rent Con trol Reporter Vol.
9 page 449, S.S. Makhijaniv.
V.K. Jotwa ni, 1977 Rajdhani Law Reporter 207, and Narain Khamman vs Parduman Kumar Jain; , , referred to.
The provisions of Chapter IV A of the Act would be applicable.
When the order was, made in this case and the application was filed the building in the cantonment area did not come within the ambit of the Act in question.
When, however, the revisional order was passed by the Additional District Judge, the Act had come into operation and the building in question was within the purview of the operation of the Act.
[419 D F]
