The Central Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981 are the rules applicable to civilian employees under the Government of India.
In regard to Defence person nel a similar set of regulations is in force.
In the case of civilians the total amount of pension which can be commuted is upto onethird, while in the case of Defence personnel, commutation is admissible upto 43% in the case of officers and upto 45% in respect of other ranks.
In petitions under Article 32, the petitioners have asked for striking down certain provisions of the said Rules as they permit the Union to recover more than what is paid to the pensioners upon commutation and for a direction that an appropriate scheme rationalising the provisions relating to commutation be brought into force because there has been a substantial improvement in the life expectancy of the people, and since commutation portion out of the pension is ordinarily recovered within about 12 years, there is no justification for fixing the period at 15 years.
The respondent Union of India challenged the maintain ability of the petitions as also the claim of the petition ers.
On the suggestion of the Court, the Union of India examined the matter and agreed to restore the commuted portion of the pension in regard to civilian employees at the age of 70 years or after 15 years, whichever is later, effective from April 1, 1986.
So far as Defence employees were concerned, it was contended that retirement in their case was at an early age and merely with 1apse of a period of 15 years full pension could not be restored because they receive in consideration of the exigencies of the service a higher rate of pension as compared to civilian employees and the benefit contained in the Government order cannot be extended to all classes of Defence personnel.
Allowing the petitions, 498 HELD: 1.
When a pensioner commutes any part of his pension upto the authorised limit, his pension is reduced for the remaining part of his life by deducting the commuted portion from the monthly pension.
[501 B] 2.
Commutation brings about certain advantages.
The commuting pensioner gets a lump sum amount which ordinarily he would have received in course of a spread over period subject to his continuing to live.
Two advantages are cer tainly forthcoming out of commutation (1) availability of a lump sum amount, and (2) the risk factor.
Many State Govern ments have already formulated schemes accepting the 15 years rule.
This Court would not be justified in disturbing the 15 years formula so far as civilian pensioners are concerned.
[501 C D] 3.
On the expiry of 15 years from the date of retire ment, restoration of commuted value of pension would take place and it would be just and equitable that the benefit of commuted portion of the pension should be effective from 1.4.1985 so far as civilian employees are concerned.[500 E, 501 G] 4.
The decision of the respondent Government does not cover all classes of Defence personnel, having been confined to personnel of Armed Forces in whose case the retirement age varies in accordance with the colour service prescribed for the rank (attaining the age of 37/38 years or more).
Previously the retiring age for the lower ranks such as sepoys, used to be after 15 years ' service but now it has been enhanced to 20 years ' service.
A sepoy retiring after 20 years ' service is entitled to 5 years of weightage, for his pension entitlement.
Similarly a Naik retiring after 22 years ' of service and a Havildar after 24 years ' service are also given credit of five yeats.
While a civilian employee ordinarily retires after a full term of service entitling him to full pension, it does not happen in the case of the lower ranks in the Defence services and with the extra advantage by the addition of years of credit, the benefit in terms of money works out in the range of about 75% to 6%.
[501 H 502 B] 5.
More than 50% of the Defence personnel belong to the lowest rank and about 81% in all retire early.
The weightage factor relied upon by the respondent to treat the Defence personnel differently is not a tenable feature.
The Defence personnel are a class by themselves.
In their case, retire ment takes effect in certain classes as justified by the exigencies of the service rather early.
Weightage, if any, is intended to cover this so that an equation for other purposes could be established.
There is no merit in the stand of respondent that the early age of retirement is fully compensated by the higher rate of pension.
[502C D] 6.
No separate period need be fixed for the Armed Forces personnel and 499 they should also be entitled to restoration of the commuted portion of the pension on the expiry of 15 years as is conceded in the case of civil pensioners, and for them too the effective date should be from 1.4.1985.
[502 F G] 7.
In dealing with a matter of this nature it is not appropriate to be guided by the example of Life Insurance; equally unjust it would be to adopt the interest basis.
The conclusion should be evolved by relating it to the 'years of purchase ' basis.
An addition of two years to the period necessary for the recovery on the basis of years of purchase justifies the adoption of the 15 year rule, which appears to be equitable.
[502 E]
