Clause (1) of article 323 A, brought in by Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976, authorised Parliament to provide by law for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect to re cruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services.
Clause (2)(d) of that Article envisaged exclusion of the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136 with re spect to the disputes or complaints referred to in cl.
Section 28 of the originally enacted within the ambit of article 323 A, provided for exclusion of jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 32.
The Act as amended by the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Ordinance, 1986, replaced by Act No. 19 of 1987 now saves the jurisdiction of Supreme Court both under article 32 in respect of original proceedings as also under article 136 for entertaining appeals.
Section 6(1)of the Act which lays down qualifications of Chairman, states that he should be or have been (a) a Judge of a High Court, or (b) has for at least two years held office of Vice Chairman, or (c) has for at least two years held the post of Secretary to the Govern ment of India.
Sub section (2) provides that a Vice Chairman should be or have been (a) a Judge of a High Court, or (b) for at least two years held the post of a Secretary to the Government of India, or (bb) for at least five years held the post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, or (c) for a period of not less than three years held office as a Judicial Member of an Administrative Tribunal.
Sub section (3) states that the Judicial Member (a) should or should have been qualified to be a Judge of a High 436 Court, or (b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service, Grade 1, for at least three years.
Sub section (3A) provides that a person to be appointed as Administrative Member (a) should have for at least two years held the post of Addi tional Secretary to the Government of India, or (b) has for at least three years held the post of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
The petitioners in these writ petitions and transfer petitions challenged the vires of the 1985 Act.
It was contended that the exclusion of the jurisdiction of the High Court under articles 226 and 227 in service matters specified in s.28 of the Act was unconstitutional and void, and that the composition of the Tribunal and mode of appointment of Chairman, Vice Chairman and Members was outside the scope of the power conferred on Parliament under article 323 A.
Allowing the petitions in part, the Court, By the Court HELD: It is the High Court which is being supplanted by Administrative Tribunal.
The office of Chairman of the Tribunal, therefore, for all practical purposes should be equated with the office of the Chief Justice of a High Court.
Judicial discipline generated by experience and training in an adequate dose is a necessary qualification for that post.
It is thus essential that he should have been a Judge of the High Court or he should have for at least two years held office as Vice Chairman.
A person who has merely held the post of Secretary to the Government of India and who has no legal and judicial experience if appointed Chair man would not only fail to inspire confidence in the public mind but would also render the Administrative Tribunal a much less effective and efficacious mechanism than the High Court.
Clause (c) of s.6(1) of the Act, therefore, must be struck down as invalid.
[445 C, 455 DE, 445 ABE] Per Bhagwati, CJ.
1.1 Judicial review is a basic and essential feature of the Constitution and no law passed by Parliament in exercise of its constituent power can abrogate it or take it away.
It is, however, within the competence of Parliament to amend the Constitution so as to substitute in place of the High Court another alternative institutional mechanism or ar rangement for judicial review without in any way violating the basic structure doctrine, provided it is no less effica cious than the High Court.
Then it would be another authori ty which would be exercising the power of judicial review with a view to enforcing the constitutional limitations and maintaining the rule of law.
[441 B, Minerva Mills Ltd. & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
[1981]1 SCR 206, referred to.
1.2 Clause (2Xd) of article 323 A specifically authorises the exclusion of the jurisdiction of the High Court under articles 226 and 227 by any law made by Parliament under cl.(1).
If this constitutional amendment were to permit a law to exclude the jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226 and 227 without sating up an effective alternative institutional mechanism or arrangement for judicial review it would be violative of the basic structure doctrine and hence outside the constitutent power of Parliament.
It must, therefore, be read as implicit in the amendment that such a law to be coustitutionally valid must not leave a void but it must set up another equally effective alternative author ity and vest the power of judicial review in it.
[443 F, H, 44 A B] 2.1 What is needed in a judicial tribunal which is intended to supplant the High Court is legal training and experience.
Service matters which are removed from the jurisdiction of the High Court under articles 226 and 227 and entrusted to the Administrative Tribunal invariably involve questions of interpretation and applicability of articles 14, 15, 16 and 311 which require for their determination not only judicial approach but also knowledge and expertise in this particular branch of constitutional law.
[445 D, 444 D] 2.2 The Chairman of the Administrative Tribunal should be or should have been a Judge of a High Court or he should have for at least two years held office as Vice Chairman.
It is the High Court which is being supplanted by the Adminis trative Tribunal.
Substituting the Chief Justice of a High Court by a Chairman of the Administrative Tribunal who has merely held the post of a Secretary to the Government of India and who has no legal or judicial experience would not only fall to inspire confidence in the public mind but would also render the Administrative Tribunal a much less effec tive and efficacious mechanism than the High Court.
Clause (c) of s.6(1) of the Act, therefore, must be struck down as invalid.
[445 A, C, B, E] 3.
Since the Administrative Tribunal has been created in substitution of the High Court, its Vice Chairman would be in the position of a High Court Judge.
Therefore, a District Judge or an advocate who is qualified to be a Judge of the High Court should be regarded as digible for being Vice Chairman of the Administrative Tribunal.
The provisions of the Act in regard to the composition of the Administrative Tribunal are weighted in favour of members of the Services.
This value discounting of the judicial members does have the effect of making the Administrative Tribunal less effective and efficacious than the High Court.
Unless an amendment to that effect is carried out on or before 31st March, 1987 the Act would have to be declared to be invalid because the 438 provision in regard to the composition of the Administrative Tribunal cannot be severed from the other provisions con tained in the Act.
A, 445 G, 446 B] 4.1 Under the Act the sole and exclusive power to make appointment of Chairman, Vice Chairman and Administrative Members is conferred on the Government.
No obligation is cast on the Government to consult the Chief Justice of India or to follow any particular selection procedure in this behalf.
Total insulation of the judiciary from all forms of interference from the coordinate branches of Government is a basic essential feature of the Constitution.
In case of High Court Judges the President cannot make any appointment without consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court and the Chief Justice of India.
This check or safe guard is totally absent in the case of appointment of the Chairman, Vice Chairman and Administrative Members of the Administrative Tribunal.
If the Tribunal is created in substitution of the High Court and the jurisdiction of the High Court under articles 226 and 227 is taken away and vested in it, it is but essential that the same independence from possibility of executive pressure or influence must also be ensured to the Chairman, Vice Chairman and Members of the Tribunal.
[446 D, 447 D, B, E] 4.2 The appointment o[ Chairman, Vice Chairman and Administrative Members, therefore, should be made by the concerned Government only after consultation with the Chief Justice of India and such consultation must be meaningful and effective.
Alternatively, a High Powered Selection Committee headed by the Chief Justice of India or a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or concerned High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India may be set up for making these appointments.
If either of these two modes of appointment is adopted, it would save the impunged Act from invalidation.
Otherwise, it will be outside the scope of the power con ferred on Parliament under article 323 A. [447 F, G, 448 B] 5.
The Government should set up a permanent bench and if that is not feasible having regard to the volume of work, then at least a circuit bench of the Administrative Tribunal wherever there is a seat of the High Court on or before 31st March 1987 so that the provisions of the Act could be sus tained.
[448 D] 6.
Judgment to operate only prospectively and not to invalidate appointments already made.
[448 B] Per Ranganath Misra, J. 1.
The Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985, as amended by Act No. 19 of 1986 saves jurisdiction of the Supreme Court both under Article 32 in respect of original proceedings as also under Article 136 for entertaining appeals.
There is thus a forum where matters of importance and grave injustice can be brought 439 for determination or rectification.
The exclusion of the jurisdiction of the High Court, therefore, does not totally bar judicial review.
[451 C, 453 A] 2.1 It is open to Parliament to make effective alterna tive institutional mechanisms or arrangements in place of the High Court for providing judicial review.
But such an authority or tribunal must be a worthy successor and real substitute of the High Court not only in form and de jure but in content and de facto so as to be effective and effi cient as also capable of upholding the constitutional limi tations enshrined in Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitu tion.
[453 B, 454 C, 453 E] 2.2 The Tribunal under the scheme of the Act has been contemplated as a substitute and not as supplemental to the High Court.
It is not designed as an additional froum from where parties could go to the High Court.
Under sections 14 and 15 of the Act all the powers of the Courts, except those of the Supreme Court, in regard to matters specified therein vest in the Tribunal either Central or State.
Barring of the jurisdiction of the High Court under articles 226 and 227 cannot, therefore, be said to be ultra vires the Constitu tion.
[443 CD, FG, 449 A] Minerva Mills Ltd. & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , 287 and K.K. Dutta vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
3.1 The Office of Chairman of the Tribunal should for all practical purposes be equated with the office of Chief Justice of a High Court.
Judicial discipline generated by experience and training in an adequate dose being a neces sary qualification for that post, ordinarily a retiring or retired Chief Justice of a High Court or when such a person is not available, a senior Judge of proved ability, either in office or retired should be appointed.
In order that the Tribunal may be acceptable to the litigants, who are them selves members of the various Services, therefore, s.6(1)(c) of the Act, which makes a Secretary to the Government of India also eligible for the post of Chairman, should be omitted.
[455 D F] 3.2 The selection of Vice Chairman and Members, when it is not of a sitting Judge or retired Judge of a High Court, should be done by a high powered committee with a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court, to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India, as its Chairman.
This will ensure selec tion of proper and competent people to man these high of fices of trust and help to build up reputation and accept ability.
The Central Government to bring the provisions of the Act in accord within a reasonable time not beyond March 31, 1987.
Or else, the constitution of Tribunal as a substi tute of the High Court would be open to challenge.
[455 G, 456 A, H] 3.3 The judgment to operate prospectively and not to affect the 440 appointments already made to the office of Vice Chairman and Members.
[456 B] 4.
The term of five years prescribed under s.8 of the Act for Chairman, Vice Chairman and Members of the Tribunal requiting them to retire at the end of it is too short, which is neither convenient to the person selected for the job nor expedient to the scheme.
When amendments to the Act are undertaken this aspect of the matter deserves to be considered.
[456 C, F, G]
