The appellant is a tenant in respect of a room forming part of the property Unit No. B IX 148 (New), Chaura Bazar, Ludhiana, which has been rented on a monthly rental of Rs. 23 by the landlady Smt.
Guran Devi on the basis of rent deed dated 7th July, 1967 for a period of three months.
After the expiry of the term of the tenancy, he continued in possession of the suit premises as a statutory tenant under Smt.
Guran Devi.
Guran Devi, however, gifted away this property in favour of the Respondent on February 13, 1968 and.
from that date the appellant became a tenant under the respondent.
The ejectment was sought on the ground of default in payment of rent from 13.2.1968 till the date of filing of the application for ejectment in July, 1969 under Section 13 of East Punjab Urban Rent Restric tion Act, 1949.
The summons of this applica tion was served on the tenant appellant and the returnable date was fixed for 26.6.1969.
On that date, the appellant appeared before the Rent Controller, Ludhiana with his counsel and prayed for adjournment for filing written statement.
The case was adjourned to 2.7.1969.
On that date the written statement was filed and the tenant tendered a sum of Rs. 336 on account of arrears of rent from 13.2.1968 to 12.6.1969 together with Rs. 15 as interest and Rs. 25 as costs as fixed by the Rent Control ler.
The landlord accepted the amount under protest.
One of the issues framed in the said case was whether the tender was a valid tender within the meaning of proviso to section 13(2) of East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949.
The Rent Controller allowed the eviction petition being of the view that since on the first day of appearance the tenant did not tender payment he was in default.
On appeal, the appellate authority reversed the finding holding that the next date fixed by the Rent Controller for filing written statement and on which date the payment was tendered ,and received by the landlord under protest was the "first day of hearing" contemplated by proviso to section 13(2Xi) of the Rent Act.
In Revi sion, the High Court restored the order of the Rent Controller.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, 510 HELD: The day mentioned in the summons i.e. 26.6.1969, in the instant case, cannot be treated to be day of first hearing of the ejectment application but it is the day for appearance of the defendent as on that day the Court does not take up the hearing or apply its mind to the hearing of the application.
It is only after written statement is filed, the issues are framed and hearing commences.
[513A] The object of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act as stated in the Preamble to the Act is to restrict the increase of rent of certain premises situated within the limits of urban areas and eviction of tenants therefrom.
From the objects of this Act it is abundantly clear that this Act was enacted with the object of affording protection to the tenants against arbitrary increase of rent of certain premises within the limits of urban areas as well as from eviction of the tenants from the rented premises.
In this context, it is imper ative that the word "the first hearing of the application" have to be interpreted in a manner which promote the object of this bene ficial legislation.
Viewed from this aspect it must be held that the words "first hearing of the application" as used in proviso (i) to sub section 2 of section 13 of the said Act does not mean the day fixed for return of the summons or the returnable day but the day when the Court applies its mind to the case.
[515E G] Ved Prakash vs Vishwa Mohan, , followed.
Mangat Rai vs Ved Prakash, 1969 Vol. 1 Rent Control Reporter p. 96; Shah Ambalal Chhotalal & Ors., vs Shah Babal Das Dayabhai & Ors., AIR 1964 (Gujarat) p. 9 and Khanderao Malkarjun Dhotre vs Anandrao Laxmanrao Mashal kar, AIR 1959 (Bombay) p. 471, approved.
