The appellant was charged with murder.
The eye witnesses against him were not relied upon.
He made a confession before a magistrate.
One of the questions put by the magis trate to the appellant before recording the confession was: " For what purpose are you going to make a statement?" To this he replied, " Others will be implicated in the case for murder, I alone have committed murder.
" It was argued that an inducement was given by the magistrate by the manner in which the question was put.
The next day after the murder " a drawer, a baniyan and a bed sheet", all stained with human blood were recovered from the appellant, for which no expla nation was given by him.
The confession was retracted before the Court of Session.
These recoveries 429 were used as corroboration of the confession.
It was con tended that this was no corroboration.
Held, that the confession was voluntary and the putting by the magistrate of a perfectly innocuous question which was prescribed by the Madras Criminal Rules of Practice did not amount to an inducement to make a confession.
Held, further, that there can be no absolute rule that retracted confession cannot be acted upon unless it is corroborated materially.
But as a matter of prudence and caution, which has sanctified itself into a rule of law, a retracted confession cannot be made solely the basis of conviction unless it is corroborated.
It is not necessary that each and every circumstance mentioned in the confession regarding the complicity of the accused should be separately and independently corroborated, nor is it essential that the corroboration must come from facts and circumstances discov ered after the confession was made.
It would be sufficient if the general trend of the confession is substantiated by some evidence which would tally with what is contained in the confession.
In the instant case the recovery of clothes stained with human blood for which the appellant gave no explanation was sufficient corroboration of the confession.
Balbir Singh vs State of Panjab, A.I.R. (1957) S.C. 216 relied on.
