Dr. Mahesh Madhay Gosavi appellant in CA 4453/86 and respondent in CA 4452/86 was a failed candidate at the M.D. examination in the speciality of Gynaecology and Obstetrics held in the year 1985.
He filed a writ petition under Arti cle 226 of the Constitution of India in the High Court of Bombay challenging the results of the M.D. examination held in November ' 85.
He alleged that favouritism was shown by one Dr. Rawal who went to the extent of tampering with grade sheets of the examinees so as to clear unsuccessful candi dates and in particular Smt.
Chandrakala Patil daughter of the Chief Minister of Maharashtra appellant in CA 4452/86 and respondent in cross appeal CA 4453/86.
In support of the writ petition alleging how the malpractice took place, he filed an affidavit (hearsay evidence) of one Dr. Manikant Mishra, who is supposed to have heard certain talks that took place between Dr. Rawal and Smt.
Chandrakala Patil at Dr. Rawals ' Chambers and that what the deponent heard came to be proved by the M.D. (Gynae) results in which one Dr. Smita Thakkar and Smt.
Chandrakala Patil who could not clear the said examination thrice were shown to have passed.
It was alleged that the tampering of the grade sheets were done by Dr. Rawal at the behest of the appellant in C.A. 4452/86.
The said allegations were refuted by the appellant Shivaji Rao Patil, Smt.
Chandrakala Patil, his daughter, Dr. Rawal and another Dr. Shah on oath by filing their affidavits.
The 459 respondent, though he had verified his petition, did not disclose the so called reliable source of information de rived by him.
(about the allegations made against the appel lant & others.
The learned Single Judge held: (i) that the evidence of Respondent Madhav Gosavi as well as of Dr. Mishra were unsatisfactory and unreliable: (ii) that it was impossible to place any reliance on the evidence of Dr. Mishra as it was not known how he came to contact Dr. Gosavi or why he did not choose to file affidavit till 28.2.1986 when the appellant Patil had already filed his affidavit on 26.1.86; (iii) that the allegation and the averments made in para graph 14 of the writ petition were wholly unsatisfactory and insufficient because the Respondent petitioner had not disclosed from whom he derived them; (iv) that there was tampering with grade sheets of Respondents 4 to 15 by Dr. Rawal and (v) that in the facts and circumstances of this it could reasonably be inferred that the alteration was done at the behest of the appellant in CA 4452/86 and her daughter Chandrakala.
This was because Dr. Rawal was an experienced examiner, not young or immature and a person like him would not proceed to do a criminal act and tamper with the record of the examination on his own with a view merely to please the people in power.
The risk involved in what Dr. Rawal had done was so enormous that it was difficult to conceive that he did it on his own.
Accordingly he allowed the writ peti tion, passed some structures against Dr. Rawal and the appellant in CA 4452/86 and gave certain directions about examination of 12 other candidates whose results were also affected by the conduct of Dr. Rawal.
An application made before the Judge for adducing cer tain additional evidence was rejected.
After the judgment the Vice Chancellor and the Chief Minister resigned from their posts.
Three appeals, No. 214/86 by Dr. Rawal No. 215/86 by Dr. Chaodrakala Patil and No. 216/86 by the appellant Shivaji Rao Patil, were heard and disposed of by the Division Bench consisting of the Acting Chief Justice Kania and Shah J. of the Bombay High Court on 16th June, 1986.
So far as appeal No. 216 of 1986 is concerned, according to the Division Bench; (i) there was no direct evidence that the alterations in the grades of Chandrakala Patil were made at the instance of the appellant; (ii) the reasonings of the trial Judge in coming to the conclusion that respondents No. 3 and 4 the original petition were responsible for getting Dr. Rawal to alter the grades was based on certain contingencies and were too tenuous for the conclusion based on such reasoning to amount to a positive finding; (iii) Merely because respond ent No. 3 to the original petition held a position of great power and would have been happy to see that his daughter had passed the M.D. examination, it was difficult to conclude, as a finding of fact that he must have 460 influenced Dr. Rawal to alter the grades of his daughter; (iv) it was true that a seasoned examiner like Dr. Rawal would not have taken the risk involved in altering the grades except under a great pressure or pursuation, but it cannot be ruled out the possibility of various motives which might have induced Dr. Rawal to take the risk of altering the grades; (v) however in all probability Dr. Rawal would not have acted unless he had made him assured that the appellant Shivaji Rao Patil was behind the person who pur suaded him 'to alter the grades; (vi) that when allegation of this type is made against anyone holding a position of prestige and power, it was necessary that the evidence should be closely examined before holding such allegation well founded.
Therefore the Bench observed that the remarks made against the appellant.
Nilangekar Patil cannot be supported as conclusions arrived at against him but these can be regarded as adverse comments and not finding of fact and such comments were not wholly unjustified in the facts of this case.
However, the Division Bench refused to enter tain an application to introduce additional evidence as part of the claim of public interest litigation.
Hence the appeal No. CA 4452/86 by Nilangekar Patii against the adverse comments were allowed to remain and there was a cross appeal 4453/86 by Dr; Madhav Gosavi against refusal to accept additional evidence.
Dismissing the appeals by special leave, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The basic principle of admission of addition al evidence is that the person seeking the admission of additional evidence should be able to establish that with the best efforts such additional evidence could not have been adduced at the first instance.
Secondly the party affected by the admission of additional evidence should have an opportunity to rebut such additional evidence.
Thirdly that additional evidence was relevant for the determination of the issue.
[474 G] Here, the additional evidence sought to be introduced mainly consist of alleged instances when the appellant on previous occassions had in respect of some criminal proceed ings and other matters pending used his influence to drop those proceedings.
Applying the principle as to admission of "similar fact evidence" it must be held that the allegations of the alleged conduct of the appellant in similar cases would not be a safe basis upon which to admit additional evidence in this case having regard to the issues involved and nature of the issues involved in these matters and at the stage when these were sought to be introduced.
[474 H, 476 E] Mood Music Publishing Co. Ltd. vs De Wolfe Ltd., @ 766, quoted with approval.
461 2.
The mere fact that several infirmities were noticed in the affidavit of Dr. Mishra upon which the original petitioner Dr. Gosavi based his own petition could not lead to the argument that the entertainment of the petition itself was wrong.
The allegations made in the petition disclose a lamentable state of affairs in one of the premier universities of India.
The petitioner might have moved in his private interest but enquiry into the conduct of the examiners of the Bombay University in one of the highest medical degrees was a matter of public interest.
Such state of affairs having been brought to the notice of the court, it was the duty of the court to the public that the truth and the validity of the allegations made be inquired into.
It was in furtherance of public interest that an enquiry into the state of affairs of public institution becomes necessary and private litigation assumed the character of public interest litigation and such an inquiry cannot be avoided if it is necessary and essential for the administra tion of justice.
[477F, 477G 478A] 3.1 It is true that exercise of the power under Article 136 of the Constitution is discretionary.
There is no ques tion in this case of giving any clean chit to the appellant in the first appeal.
It leaves a great deal of suspicion that tampering was done to please Shri Patil or at his behest.
It is true that there is no direct evidence.
It is also true that there is no evidence to link him up with tampering.
Tampering is established.
The relationship is established.
The reluctance to face a public enquiry is also apparent.
Apparently Shri Patii, though holding a public office does not believe that "ceaser 's wife must be above suspicion".
The erstwhile Chief Minister in respect of his conduct did not wish or invite an enquiry to be conducted by a body nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court.
The facts disclose a sorry state of affairs.
Attempt was made to pass the, daughter of the erstwhile chief Minister who had failed thrice before by tampering the record.
The person who did it was an employee of the Corporation.
It speaks of a sorry state of affairs and though there is no distinction between comment and a finding and there is no legal basis for such a comment.
[484A D] 3.2 The court cannot be oblivious that there has been a steady decline of public standards or public morals and public morale.
It is necessary to cleanse public life in this country along with or even before cleaning the physical atmosphere.
The pollution in the values and standards is an equally grave menace as the pollution of the environment.
Where such situations cry out the Courts should not and cannot remain mute and dumb.
[484 E] 3.3 Where allegations of mala fide were made, the Court must be cautious.
It is true that allegation of mala fides and of improper motives on the part of those in power are frequently made and their frequency has increased 462 in recent times.
In this task which is cast on the courts, it will be conducive to have disposal and consideration of them if those against whom allegations are made came forward to place before the court either the denials or their ver sion of the matter so that the courts might be in a position to judge whether the onus that lay upon those who make allegations of mala fides on the part of the authorities had been discharged in proving it.
It is true that the basis of the allegations being the affidavit of Dr. Mishra was con sidered to be thoroughly unreliable.
In this case there was specific and categorical denial by the erstwhile Chief Minister that tampering was done at his behest.
Therefore, while the court should be conscious to deal with the allega tions of mala fide or cast aspirations on holders of high office and power, the court cannot ignore the probabilities arising from proven circumstances.
[478 B, F G] C.S. Rawjee & Ors.
vs Andhra Pradesh State Road Trans port Corporation, , referred to.
3.4 Where evidence was adduced by affidavits, such affidavits might be properly verified either on knowledge or from sources.
Here it is true that undoubtedly the affidavit and the petition were defective, but the court has taken cognizance of the matter and certain inferences followed from the inherent nature of facts apparent from the facts brought before the court.
[479A. D] The Barium Chemicals Ltd. & Anr.
vs The Company Law Board & Ors., [1966] Supp.
SCR 311; Padmabati Dasi vs Rasik Lal Dhar, ILR XXXVII Calcutta 259; The State of Bombay vs Purushottam Jog Naik; , ; E.P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu & Anr. ; ; Tara Chand Khatri vs Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Ors., [1977] 2 SCR 198; and Sukhvinder Pal Bipan Kumar vs State of Punjab & Ors., ; ; Seth Gulabchand vs Seth Kudilal & Ors., ; at 629; Jarat Kumari Dassi vs Bissesur, ILR 39 Cal.
245:16 C.W.N. 265; Raja Singh vs Chaichoo Singh, AIR 1940 Patna 281 at 203, referred to.
The State of Uttar Pradesh vs Mohammad Naim, ; Vineet Kumar vs Mangal Sain Wadhera, AIR 1985SC817; The Bank of lndia & Ors., vs Jamesetji A.H. Chiney and Messrs. Chinoy and Co., AIR 1950 PC 90; Sri Harasingh Charan Mohantv vs Sh.
Surendra Mohanty, ; ; Niranjan Patnaik vs Shashibhushan Kar and Anr. , distinguished.
