Rule 3 of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retire ment) Rules, 1975 empowers the appropriate authority to retire an employee on the date on which he completes twenty five years of qualifying service, or attains fifty years of age or thereafter, in public interest by prior notice in writing of not less than three months.
Rule 2(1) designates the officer having powers to make substantive appointments to the post as the 'appropriate authority '.
Rule 12.1 categorises Superintendents of Police as the authority competent to make appointments to the non gazetted ranks of Sub Inspectors and Assistant Sub Inspectors.
Rule 13.9(2) empowers Deputy Inspector General of Police to make substantive promotions to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspec tor in accordance with r. 13.1.
The respondent who was working as Sub Inspector of Police was compulsorily retired by an order dated 24th September, 1975 issued by the Senior Superintendent of Police.
He was earlier suspended from service with effect from 5th September, 1974.
A suit filed by him for a declara tion that the said order was illegal, mala fide, unconstitu tional, and against the rules of natural justice was dis missed by the trial court holding that the impugned order was not vitiated by any malice or mala fides, having been innocuously made in public interest, and decreed the suit in part for the arrears of salary for the suspension period.
Both the State and the respondent preferred appeals.
The appellate court allowing the respondent 's appeal, held that the order of compulsory retirement was made by an officer who was below the rank of Inspector General of Police, the 'appointing authority ' of the petitioner, and that the judgment and decree as regards the payment of balance of emoluments for the period of suspension after the reinstatement was legal and valid and dismissed the appeal filed by the State.
The High Court dismissed the second appeal preferred by the State.
504 Allowing the State 's appeal by special leave in part, the Court, HELD: In view of the specific provision made in role 12.1 of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 that the Superintendent of Police is competent to make the appointment to the non gazetted ranks of Sub Inspectors of Police, the contention that only the Deputy Inspector General of Police was competent to make the im pugned order cannot be sustained.
[507G] Rule 12.1 read with rule 13.9(2) makes it dear and apparent that the Senior Superintendent of Police was legal ly competent to make the order of compulsory retirement of a Sub Inspector of Police from service in public interest after attaining 50 years of age, in accordance with the provisions of rule 3(1) (a) and (b) of the Rules.
The order of retirement made in the instant case, was, therefore, legal and valid.
[50711] The decree of the lower. "appellate court as regards payment of the balance of pay for the period of suspension of the respondent is affirmed.
[508B]
