The Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1965 by Rule 27 casts a duty on the Appellate Authority in the case of an appeal against an order imposing any of the penalties specified in Rule 11 to consider: (a) whether the procedure laid down in the rules has been complied with: and if not, whether such non compliance has resulted in violation of any of the provisions of the Constitution or in the failure of justice (b) whether the findings of the disciplinary authority are warranted by the evidence on record; and (c) whether the penalty imposed is adequate and thereafter pass orders confirming, enhancing etc.
the penalty, or remit back the case to the authority which imposed the same.
The appellant was appointed as Supervisor in the Border Roads Organisation on probation for a period of two years.
Before the expiry of the probation period, the Chief Engineer terminated this services.
The order of termination however could not be served as the appellant absented himself without leave.
He was later transferred and the Officer Commanding forwarded the order of termination to him.
On his representation the Director General cancelled the order of termination on a misapprehension that the period of probation having expired no order of termination could be made.
He, however, directed that the taking of disciplinary action against him as a deserter since he had absconded from service to evade service of the termination order.
After a regular departmental enquiry, he was served with a show cause notice under article 311(2) of the Constitution and after consideration of his representation, the Chief Engineer imposed the punishment of removal from service under Rule 12 read with Rule 11 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1965.
948 The appeal under Rule 23 of the Rules preferred by the appellant was dismissed by the Director General observing, that 'after thorough examination of the facts brought out in the appeal, the punishment imposed upon the appellant was just and in accordance with the rules '.
The writ petition having been dismissed in limine the appellant appealed by special leave to this court.
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD: The word 'consider ' in Rule 27(2) implies 'due application of mind '.
[951A] In the instant case, there is no indication in the order that the Director General was satisfied as to whether the procedure laid down in the Rules had been complied with.
No finding has been given on the crucial question as to whether the findings of the disciplinary authority were warranted by the evidence on record.
[951C] 2.
The Director General only applied his mind to the requirement of clause (c) of Rules 27(2) viz. whether the penalty imposed was adequate or justified in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Rule 27(2) casts a duty on the appellate authority to consider the relevant factors set forth in clauses (a), (b) and (c) thereof.
[951E] 3.
There being non compliance with the requirements of Rule 27(2) of the Rules, the order passed by the Director General is set aside.
He is directed to dispose of the appeal afresh after applying his mind to the requirements of Rule 27(2) of the Rules.
[951E; 953E] 4.
It is not the requirement of article 311(2) of the Constitution of India or of the Rules of natural justice that in every case the appellate authority should in its order state its own reasons except where the appellate authority disagrees with the findings of the disciplinary authority.
[951F] State of Madras vs A.P. Srinivasan, AIR 1966 SC 1827; Som Datt Datta vs V.O.I. and Ors.
and Tara Chand Khatri v, Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Ors., AIR 1977 SC 567, referred to.
