The respondents filed an eviction petition against the appellanttenant in respect of a shop room under s.10(3)(a)(iii) of the Andhra Pradesh Buildings (Lease, rent and eviction) Control Act 1960 on the ground of bona fide requirement for starting a business in readymade garments.
The Rent Controller, passed the eviction order against the appellant holding that the respondents required the suit shop for their personal occupation.
The Appellate Authority as well as the High Court affirmed the findings of the Rent Controller in the appeal and revision respectively.
In appeal to this Court by the appellant tenant, it was contended for the first time that since there was no aver ment of the facts constituting the grounds or conditions of eviction as contained in sub section
(3)(a)(iii) of section I0 of the Act, the courts below were not justified in passing the order of eviction against the appellant.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Under the law of pleadings facts mentioned in sub cl.(iii) of section 10(3)(a) of the Act are to be pleaded in the petition and thereafter proved at the trial for the purpose of an order of eviction against the tenant.
Further, any amount of proof offered without appropriate pleading is generally of no relevance.
Therefore, the landlord has to plead and establish (i) that he bona fide requires the accommodation let to the tenant for non residential purposes for the purpose of continuing or starting the business; and (ii) that he has no other reasonably suitable non residen tial accommodation of his own in his occupation in the city or the town concerned.
[677H; 678A B] Hasmat Rai vs Raghunath Prasad, , relied upon, 675 2.
The point regarding absence of any averment of the facts constituting the grounds or conditions of eviction as contained in subs.(3)(a)(iii) of section 10 of the Act was not taken in any of the courts below nor has it been taken in the Special Leave Petition.
For the first time, it has been raised in the argument.
Therefore, there is no justification to interfere with the order of eviction.
[679D] In the instant case, the respondents did not suppress any fact at the trial and disclosed the non residential buildings owned by the respondent No. I but not in their occupation.
Indeed it is the case of the respondents that the disputed shop room is centrally located in the heart of Guntur city in a business locality, that there are a number of readymade garment shops in that locality, and that the disputed shoproom is the best place for commencing such a business.
It has also been observed by the High Court that the respondents have come forward with a clean and clear case and with reasons as to why they chose the disputed shop room for the proposed business to be commenced by the respondent No. 2.
Moreover, it is not the case of the appel lant that if he is given an opportunity to adduce further evidence after amendment of pleadings, he would be able to furnish any new material showing that the respondents are occupying any non residential building suitable for commenc ing the proposed business therein and, as such, they are not entitled to an order for eviction.
In view of the aforesaid facts also, the appeal is liable to be dismissed.
[678E H]
