The petitioner an organisation, said to be committed to the upholding of fundamental rights of citizens, filed an application under Article 32 of the Constitution alleging that there was a dispute relating to possession of 26 deci mals of low lying land at Arwal between members of a rich Rajak family on one side and members of nine poor families on the other; and that on April 19, 1986, the members of one community mostly belonging to the backward classes assembled in the compound of Gandhi library at Arwal for holding a peaceful meeting.
At that time, the Superintendent of Police reached the spot with police force, surrounded the gathering and without any warning or provocation opened fire, as a result of which several people were injured and at least 21 persons including children died.
The police, it was also alleged, started a false case implicating several innocent people to cover up the aforesaid atrocities.
The petitioner in the writ petition prayed: (i) Full and proper compensation should be awarded to the victims rela tions of the dead and to those injured by the police firing; (ii) A direction be given for withdrawal of the police case; (iii) Direction for settlement of the land in dispute with the nine poor families; and (iv) transfer of the writ peti tion pending in the Patna High Court to this Court for hearing.
During the pendency of the Writ Petition, the State Government held a judicial inquiry into the aforesaid inci dent by a Member of the Board of Revenue, and, awarded compensation to the heirs and relations of a few of the dead people to the tune of Rs. 10,000 each.
Disposing of the writ petition, this Court, HELD: I.
It would be appropriate that the matter is examined by 632 the High Court.
It would be convenient to the parties to produce material before the High Court on account of proxim ity; the High Court will be in a position to call for docu ments and if necessary, affidavits of parties concerned as and when necessary while dealing with the matter.
Without notice and without affording a reasonable opportunity to the parties in the writ petition before the High Court an order of transfer may not be appropriate.
It would not be proper therefore to have the writ petition in the High Court trans ferred to this Court.
However, the petitioner is at liberty to get itself impleaded before the High Court in the pending writ petition or by filing an independent application.
[634F H] 2.
It is a normal feature that when such unfortunate consequences emerge in police firing, the State comes for ward to give compensation.
No justification has been indi cated as to why the said compensation has not been given in every case of death or injury.
Ordinarily in the case of death compensation of Rs.20,000 is paid and there is no reason as to why the quantum of compensation should be limited to Rs.10,000.
However, in the case of death the liability of the wrong doer is not absolved when compensa tion of Rs.20,000 is paid.
[635B D] 3.(a) Without prejudice to any just claim for compensa tion that may be advanced by the relations of the victims who have died or by the injured persons themselves, for every case of death compensation of Rs.20,000 and for every injured person compensation of Rs.5,000 shall be paid.
Where some compensation has already been paid, the same may be adjusted when the amount now directed is being paid.
[635D F] (b) In case the petitioner presses for disclosure of the report submitted by the Member, Board of Revenue, the High Court may examine the question as to whether the report will be made public and in the event of privilege being claimed the question of privilege will also be examined by the High Court.
[635F G] (c) The investigation of the pending police case shall be completed within three months.
In case charge sheet is submitted, it would be open to the petitioner or any other aggrieved party to challenge the maintainability of the charges in accordance with law.
[636B]
