Haryana Service of Engineers, Class II, Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules relating to recruitment etc.
of Asst.
Engineers and Haryana Service of Engineers Class I, Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) relat ing to Executive Engineers came into force in 1970 and 1964 respectively.
Respondent No. 2, B.L. Gupta and Respondents Nos.
B.S. Jain were appointed as temporary engineers (ad hoc) with effect from 19.5.1969 and 2.1.1971 respectively, the former sponsored by the Employment Exchange and the latter with reference to an advertisement in the newspapers.
Their appointments were de hors the said Class II Rules to meet the exigencies of service.
In the letters of appoint ment issued to them it was specified (i) that their appoint ment was purely on an ad hoc basis for a period of six months from the date of their joining the post on a fixed salary of Rs.400 plus allowances and their services were terminable without notice; (ii) that the appointment would not entitle them to any seniority or other benefit under the service rules for the time being in force and would also not count towards increment in their salary; (iii) that the posts of Tempor 604 ary Engineers in Class II service would be advertised in the course by the Haryana Public Service Commission and they should apply for such posts through the Commission, and that if they were not selected by the Commission, their services would be liable to be terminated without notice; and (iv) that their inter se seniority among the Temporary Engineers would be in the order of merit in the list of candidates as settled by the Commission.
The services of respondents Nos. 1 and 2 were however continued by the State Government from time to time, six months at a time till the Secretary, Haryana Public Service Commission by his letter dated July 8, 1973 addressed to the Commissioner and Secretary to the State Government of Haryana, Public Works Department (Irri gation Branch) conveyed the approval of the Commission to the ad hoc appointment of 251 Temporary Engineers beyond the period of six months till regular appointments were made to the posts through the Commission.
Accordingly both these respondents continued to hold the posts of Temporary Engi neers on ad hoc basis till the end of the year 1974 i.e. till they were recruited as Asst.
Engineers through the Public Service Commission on April 21, 1975 on regular basis.
In the letter of appointment issued by the Commis sioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana (Irrigation & Power Department) dated January 13, 1975 it was specified again that inter se seniority of Asst.
Engineers would be determined on the basis of the combined merit list prepared by the Public Service Commission.
In the combined merit list prepared by the Commission, respondents Nos. 1 and 2 were placed very much below the appellants and respondents Nos.
5 24 being at serial Nos. 148 and 150 respectively.
The State Government of Haryana by order dated December 20, 1978 promoted 62 Asst.
Engineers including the appel lants and respondent Nos.
5 24 as Executive Engineers on a purely ad hoc basis for a period of six months subject to certain terms and conditions, namely; (i) the promotions were subject to the approval of the Public Service Commis sion as also to the claims of other officers; (ii) such promotions were not to give any right to the officers for being appointed on a substantive basis as Executive Engi neers; and (iii) such of the officers as had not passed the departmental professional and revenue examinations were required to pass such examination within a period of one year or otherwise they were liable to be reverted to their original post.
These ad hoc promotions of the appellants and respondents Nos. 5 24 were made in relaxation of the provi sions contained in rr. 6(b) and 15 of the Haryana Service of Engineers, Class I Public Works Department (irrigation Branch) Rules, 1964.
Presumably, the State Government ex cluded from consideration the case of respondents Nos. 1 and 2 for 605 promotion because in the combined seniority list they ranked below the appellants and respondents Nos.
5 24 being placed at serial Nos.
I48 and 150 respectively.
The said ad hoc promotions to Class I posts were as sailed by respondents I and 2 by a petition under Article 226.
A learned Single Judge by his judgment dated 8.10.1980 quashed the impugned order of the State Government making the said ad hoc promotions and directed the State Government to reach a decision afresh as regards the ad hoc promotions with advertence to the observations made by him.
Thereupon, the appellants preferred an appeal under clause 10 of the Letters Patent but the appeal was dismissed in limine by the Division Bench, by its order dated 6.11.1980.
The appel lants ' contention that the appointment of respondents Nos.
I and 2 as Temporary Engineers on an ad hoc basis was contrary to para 8.312 of the Manual of Administration and therefore the period during which they worked as Temporary Engineers (ad hoc) could not be taken into consideration, was repelled by the Bench on the ground that no such point was taken before the learned Single Judge.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court HELD: 1.
The High Court ought not to have exercised their powers under Article 226 of the Constitution and entertained the writ petition of respondents I and 2 partic ularly when the impugned order of the State Government making promotion of the 62 Asst.
Engineers including the appellants and respondents 5 24 as Executive Engineers was purely on an ad hoc basis for a period of six months and expressly made subject to the rights of other officers.
Instead of interfering with the impugned order of the State Government the proper course for the High Court should have been to issue a direction to the State Government to consid er the cases of the eligible officers including respondents Nos.
I and 2 for ad hoc promotion as Executive Engineer if their turn was due for such promotion according to their placement in the seniority list and it should have in the meanwhile allowed the appellants and respondents Nos.
5 24 to continue in their posts as Executive Engineers (ad hoc) subject to the condition that while considering their cases for promotion the State Government would not take that circumstance into consideration that they had continued to function as Executive Engineers on an ad hoc basis.
[613G H; 614A C] 1.2 Rule 15 of the Punjab/Haryana Service of Engineers Class I P.W.D. (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1970 in terms provides that the 606 departmental professional and revenue examinations for purposes of promotion to the Class I service have to be passed within such period as may be prescribed.
The word 'prescribed ' in Rule 15 clearly empowers the State Govern ment to provide for the period during which the promoted officers had to pass the departmental test.
In terms of that rule, the State Government by the impugned order directed that the officers who had not passed the departmental pro fessional and revenue examinations were required to pass such examinations within a period of one year otherwise they were liable to be reverted to their original post.
There fore, no question of relaxation under Rule 22 arose.
[613C E] 2.1 The period of service rendered by persons like respondents Nos. 1 and 2 who were appointed on ad hoc basis purely on a stop gap arrangement for six months at a time de hors the rules, cannot be considered for purposes of their seniority in Class II service or in reckoning their eligi bility of 8 years ' service in that class of service under Rule 6(b) of the Class I Rules.
[625F G] 2.2.
As a matter of construction the words "Class II service" in Rule 8(2) introduced by amendment in 1975 must be construed to have the same meaning as the expression "Class II service" as defined in Rule 2(5).
Prior to the amendment in 1975, the expression, "Class II Service" as defined in Rule 2(5) meant the members of Class II service including Temporary Engineers.
The key to the interpretation of the definition clause in Rule 2(5) is the words "for the purpose of promotion.
" The effect of the enlarged definition of Class II service in Rule 2(5) is that these words when found in the Act must, for the purpose of promotion, be understood in that context in a certain sense i.e. to in clude not only members of CIass II Service including Tempo rary Engineers but also Offg.
Sub Division Officers and Offg.
Assistant Design Engineers who, but for the interpre tation clause, would not be so included.
That would be in consonance with the purpose and object of the amendment.
[619G H; 620B C] 2.3 The meaning of the word "as" in the collocation of the words "any service rendered as a Temporary Engineer" in Explanation to Rule 6(b) of the Class I Rules must obviously mean "in the capacity of".
[621A B] Dr. Asim Kumar Bose vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , applied.
2.4 It is true that though respondents Nos. 1 and 2 were 607 appointed as Temporary Engineers on an ad hoc basis, they should be deprived of the period of their officiation as such till they were absorbed to the post of Assistant Engi neer on a regular basis through the Public Service Commis sion on April 21, 1975.
That is a legal consequence which cannot be avoided on well settled principles.
[623D E] 2.5 According to the accepted cannos of service juris prudence, seniority of a person appointed must be reckoned from the date he becomes a member of the service.
The date from which seniority is to be reckoned may be laid down by rules or instructions (a) on the basis of the date of ap pointment (b) on the basis of confirmation (c) on the basis of regularisation of service (d) on the basis of length of service; or (e) on any other reasonable basis.
It is well settled that an ad hoc or fortuitous appointment on a tempo rary or stop gap basis cannot be taken into account for the purpose of seniority even if the appointee was qualified to hold the post on a regular basis, as such temporary tenure hardly counts for seniority in any system of service juris prudence.
[624B D] 2.6 It must now be well taken as well established that after the Supreme Court decisions from N.K. Chauhan to Baleswar Das in the absence of any other valid principle of seniority, the inter se seniority between direct recruits and promotees should as far as possible be determined by the length of continuous service whether temporary or permanent in a particular grade or post (this should exclude periods for which an appointment is held in a purely stop gap or fortuitous arrangement).
These decisions particularly that in Baleshwar Das 's case clearly lay down that ordinarily and in the absence of any specific rule of seniority governing the cadre or service, the length of continuous officiation should be counted in reckoning seniority as between direct recruits and promotees.
These authorities nowhere lay down that the same principle i.e. the length of continuous offi ciation must be the sole guiding factor and the only crite rion in determining seniority of such adhoc employees vis a vis direct recruits.
On the contrary, they clearly proceed on the principle that persons appointed on an ad hoc basis or for fortuitous reasons or by stop gap arrangement, constitute a class which is separate and distinct from those who are appointed to posts in the service in strict conform ity with the rules of recruitment.
[629E G; 627.E F] N.K. Chauhan & Ors.
vs State of Gujarat & Ors.
, ; ; S.B. Patwardhan & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, ; and Baleshwar Das & Ors.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
, [1981] 1 SCR 449, discussed.
608 A.P.M. Mayakutty etc.
vs Secretary, Public Service Department, ; State of Gujarat vs
C.G. Desai Ors.
; , ; O.P. Singla vs Union of India, ; ; G.S. Lamba vs Union of India, ; P.S. Mahal vs Union of India, ; ; and Pran Krishna Goswami & Ors.
vs State of West Bengal & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
Narendra Chadha & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; G.P. Doval & Ors.
vs The Chief Secretary, Govern ment of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., ; ; and C.P. Damodaran Nayar vs State of Kerala & Ors., ; , distinguished.
