The respondent a society registered under the is also a Public Trust under the Bombay Public Trusts Act of 1950.
It has set up many Obser vation Homes under the provisions of the Bombay Children 's Act 1948.
The appellant, in a letter 10 the High Court, made certain grievances about the working of the New Observation Home managed by the respondent at Mankhurd.
The High Court treated the aforesaid letter as a writ petition and disposed it of by giving certain directions.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appel lant filed the present appeal by special leave contending that the High Court failed to consider (i) that children while staying in the Observation Homes are forced to work without remuneration and are engaged in hazardous employ ment; (ii) that the shortfall in follow up action in the Observation Homes has not been properly considered by the High Court and the directions given by the High Court are inadequate; and (iii) that the Society should have been treated as a State and not as a voluntary organisation within the meaning of articles 21 and 24 of the Constitution.
Disposing of the appeal, HELD: 1.1 Children are the citizens of the future era.
On the 871 proper bringing up of the children and giving them the proper training to turn out to be good citizens depends the future of the country.
In recent years, this proposition has been well realised.
Every society must, therefore, devote full attention to ensure that children are properly cared for and brought up in a proper atmosphere where they could receive adequate training, education and guidance in order that they may be able to have their rightful place in the society when they grow up.
[875D; 877C] 1.2 The Children 's Act 1948 has made elaborate provi sions to cover all the rights of the child and if these provisions are properly translated into action and the authorities created under the Act become cognizant of their role, duties and obligation in the performance of the statu tory mechanism created under the Act and they are properly motivated to meet the situations that arise in handling the problems, the situation would certainly be very much eased.
[875F G] 1.3 The Child Welfare Officer (Probation) as also the Superintendent of the Observation Home must be duly motivat ed.
They must have the working knowledge in psychology and have a sense of keen observation.
On their good functioning would depend the efficacy of the scheme.
[876C D] 1.4 The Juvenile Court has to be manned by a Judicial Officer with some special training.
Creation of a court with usual Judicial Officer and labelling it as Juvenile Court does not serve the requirement of the statute.
If that were so, the statute has no necessity of providing a Juvenile Court.
The statutory scheme contemplates a judicial officer of a different type with a more sensitive approach oriented outlook.
Without these any Judicial Officer would, indeed not be competent to handle the special problem of children.
[876G H] 2.
Children in Observation Homes should not be made to stay long and as along as they are there, they should be kept occupied and the occupation should be congental and intended to bring about adaptability in life aimed at bring ing about a self confidence and picking of humane virtues.
However, for employment in Children 's home, the children would not be given any remuneration.
[876E] 3.
The Children Aid Society should have been treated as a State within the meaning of article 12 and it is undoubtedly an instrumentality of the State on the basis of the test laid down by the Supreme Court.
The Society has, therefore, to regulate its activities not only in accordance 872 with the statutory requirements but also act in a manner satisfying the requirements of the constitutional provisions in Article 21 and 24 as also the Directive Principles of State Policy.
The State of Maharashtra is therefore directed to take prompt action to strictly enforce the law, act up to the requirements of the constitutional obligations and the directions given by the High Court as also by the Supreme Court in this judgment.
[877D F]
