The appellant was elected to the Municipal Board under the U. P. Municipalities Act, 19i6.
He was in arrears in the payment of Municipal tax in excess of one year 's demand, to which section 166 of the Act applied, at the time of the filing of nominations, but made the payment before the date of the poll.
Under section 13D, cl.
(g) of the Act "a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of a board if he is in arrears in the pay ment of Municipal tax or other dues in excess of one year 's demand to which section 166 applies, provided that the disquali fication shall cease as soon as the arrears are paid.
" On an election petition filed by a defeated candidate, the elec tion was set aside by the Election Tribunal on the ground that the appellant was not entitled to the benefit of the proviso to section I3 P. cl.
(g) of the Act.
It was contended for the appellant that the relevant date for the operation of the disqualification was the date of the poll and that, in any case, he did not come within the mischief of the disqualification clause in that section, as a bill for payment of the tax was not presented to him, nor a notice of demand served on him under section 168.
Held:(1) that if a person is disqualified on the date of nomination, he cannot be chosen as a candidate within the meaning of section 13 D of the U. P. Municipalities Act, 19i6, because the disqualification attaches to him on that date and the process of choosing consists of a series of steps starting with nomination and ending with the announcement of the election.
The wiping off of the 419 disqualification has no retrospective effect, and the dis qualification which subsisted on the date of the nomination cannot cease to subsist on that day by reason of a subse quent payment of the arrears of Municipal tax.
Chatturbhuj Withaldas jasani vs Moreshway Parashram and Others, ; , N. P. Ponnuswami vs The Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency and Others, ; and Harford vs Linskey, , relied on.
Ahmed Hossain vs Aswini Kumar, A.I.R. 1953 Cal.
542, ap proved.
(2)that the expression "to which section 166 applies" in section 13 D, cl.
(g) of the Act merely describes the nature or type of dues mentioned in that section and that the effect is that the demand referred to in section 13 D, cl.
(g) must be of that nature or type.
(3)that the word 'demand" in section 13 D, cl.
(g) of the Act means "claim" or "due" and only refers to the amount of arrears or dues on which the disqualification depends and does not attract the operation of section 168.
