Prosecution was launched against Respondent No. 1 under s.5(1)(d) read with s.5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 for having assets disproportionate to her known sources of income.
The Special Public Prosecutor filed application for withdrawal of the prosecution against Respondent No. 1.
The Additional Special Judge allowed the application.
The High Court dismissed the revision petition and confirmed the order permitting withdrawal of the case.
Dismissing the Appeal to this Court, HELD: Per Venkataramiah, J. The Public Prosecutor had applied his mind to the case before applying for withdrawal and the Chief Judicial Magis trate has not committed any error in giving his consent to such withdrawal.
[683D E] The State of Bihar vs Ram Naresh Pandey, [1957] S.C.R. 279 and R.K. Jain etc.
vs State through Special Police Establishment and others; , , Relied upon.
Per Khalid, J. 1.
What is to be decided in this case is whether the order passed by the Magistrate under s.32I, Criminal Proce dure Code, is proper or not.
The Court is not called upon to consider the propriety of the charge framed and then examine the evidence and see whether the accused should be dis charged or the charge framed should be upheld.
[684D E] 2.
Consent can be given for withdrawal from the prosecution of a 681 case, not only when the charge is not framed, but even after the charge is framed and at any time before the judgment.
[684B C] The State of Bihar vs Ram Naresh Pandey, [3957] SCR 279 and R.K. Jain etc.
vs State through Special Police Establishment and others; , , Relied upon.
Per Oza, J. I. Ordinarily when the exercise of considering the material on record for the purpose of determining whether there is sufficient material to sustain the prosecution can be performed by the Court under s.239 of the Code of Crimi nal Procedure 1973, the Court should not allow the prosecu tion to be withdrawn under s.321.
[688C E] 2.
In the present case, there is no point in setting aside the withdrawal and sending the case hack to the Spe cial Judge because there is no material at all to show that there is a prima facie case and the charges appear to be groundless.
Respondent No. 1 would, therefore, be entitled to be discharged under s.239.
It is, therefore, not neces sary or expedient to interfere with the order made by the Special Judge and confirmed by the High Court.
[688E F] 3.
When the charge sheet was filed, the Income Tax Department re opened the assessment, examined the whole matter afresh and passed final orders during the pendency of the case in this Court explaining all the items of assets said to have been unaccounted and suppressed as also entries pertaining to the house construction and other assets, which show that there is nothing to indicate that Respondent No. 1 was possessed of assets disproportionate to her means.
[688A B] 4.
The application moved by the Special Public Prosecutor for withdrawal from the prosecution was, therefore, clearly bona fide and ' in furtherance of public justice and it was clearly a false and vexatious criminal prosecution launched against respondent No. 1.
The Special Judge also on these facts took the view that no useful purpose would be served by continuance of the prosecution and accordingly permitted the withdrawal which was upheld by the High Court in revi sion.
[688B] 5.
The first allegation relates to payments made to Dharitri and Navjat Printers.
Dharitri is a newspaper which receives advertisements.
There is nothing to show that the payment received by Dharitri for advertisement had anything to do with respondent No.1.
[687.B C] 682 6.
The second allegation relates to valuation of assets and the construction of the house and the third relates to the monies received by the U.P.C.C. which are alleged to have been paid by respondent No. 1.
Lastly there are similar items of monies paid to the sons and found in the possession of her husband.
It was on the basis of these allegations that the Income Tax Department re opened the assessments, conducted detailed enquiries and ultimately passed a final order accepting her returns as correct and rejecting the allegations that she had suppressed any income from undis closed sources.
[687C E] 7.
The application for withdrawal was made by the Spe cial Public Prosecutor in 1980 when respondent No.1 had nothing to do with the party in power as she was in opposi tion party after the elections held in 1980.
This is a strong circumstance which indicates that the application for withdrawal was made in furtherance of public justice.
[687E G] 8.
In the fight of the facts an record and the order passed by the Income Tax Officer explaining all the items of assets alleged to be unaccounted and suppressed, the charges against respondent No. 1 appear to he groundless.
[688C] Per Natarajan, J. 1.
Section 321 makes it clear that an application for withdrawal of a case can he made by a Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor who is incharge of the case concerned, at any time before the judgment is pronounced.
The application for withdrawal of prosecution may he made at any time ranging between the Court taking cognizance of the case till such time the Court actually pronounces judgment.
Even where reliable evidence has been adduced to prove the charges, the Public Prosecutor can seek the consent of the Court to withdraw the prosecution.
The section does not, therefore, lay down that an application for withdrawal of the prosecution should necessarily he made at the earliest stages of the case or only if the evidence is of a weak and infirm nature.
[689E G] 2.
The Special Public Prosecutor had set out the reasons which justified filing of an application under s.321 of the Code for the withdrawal of the prosecution, and the Magis trate has considered the matter judicially, before giving his consent.
[689G H] The State of Bihar vs Ram Naresh Pandey [1157] SCR 279 and R.K. Jain etc.
vs State through Special Police Estab lishment and others; , , relied upon.
