The respondent was charged under sections 279, 337, 304 A IPC and Sections 89(a) and 89(b) of the Motor Vehicles Act for having driven an Express Bus in a rash and negligent manner hitting a bullock cart as a result of which one of the persons traveling in the cart sustained fatal injuries and the other person sustained simple injuries.
After the accident the respondent failed to secure medical assistance to the injured person and also failed to report the accident to the police authorities.
The respondent pleaded guilty to all the charges and was convicted and sentenced to pay a total fine of Rs. 345 under all the five charges.
In the appeal preferred by the State for enhancement of sentence, the High Court declined to interfere with the sentence.
Allowing the appeal of the State, HELD: (1) The Magistrate in utter disregard to the nature of offences, particularly the one under Section 304 A IPC and the sentences provided for them under the ' IPC and the Motor Vehicles Act, imposed 'flea bite ' sentences on the respondent.
This should have spurred the High Court to not only pass appropriate strictures against the Magistrate but also to set right the matter by enhancing the sentence at least for the conviction under Section 304 A IPC in exercise of its powers under Section 377 Cr.
P.C. [1106G H] 1104 (2) The High Court has failed to comprehend that the respondent has been let off with a total fine of Rs. 345 for his convictions under all the five charges.
The reasons given by the High Court are really nonexistent as well as irrelevant ones.
Here was a case where the respondent had not only driven his bus in a reckless manner and caused the death of one person and injuries to another but he had also attempted to escape prosecution by failing to report the accident to the police authorities.
[1107A B] (3) Consideration of undue sympathy will not only lead to miscarriage of justice but will also undermine the effi cacy of the criminal judicial system.
The imposition of a sentence of fine of Rs. 250 on the driver in such a case and that too without any extenuating or mitigating circumstances is bound to shock the conscience of any one and will unmis takably leave the impression that the trial was a mockery of justice.
[1107C E] (4) The ends of justice would be met by enhancing the sentence for the most serious of the charges namely under Section 304 A IPC to six months R.I. and fine of Rs.1000 in default to undergo R.I. for two months.
[1107.E F]
