On the question whether from the point of time an order for rateable distribution is passed by the executing Court the monies in question cease to be the property of the judgment debtor and become the property of the decree hold er, regardless of whether or not actual payment pursuant to the said order is made: Allowing the Appeal, HELD: 1. As soon as the question of rateable distribu tion between the decree holders and the State having statu tory priority is determined, and the Court passes an order as to how to appropriate the assets of the judgment debtor, the rights of the parties become crystalized and the monies in question cease to be the property of the judgment debtor and becomes the property of the decree holder, regardless of whether or not actual payment pursuant to the said order is made.
[930A B] Official Receiver of Tanjore vs M.R. Venkatarama lyer, AIR 1922 Madras p. 31, Murli Tahilram vs T. Asoomal & Co., AIR 1955 Calcutta p. 423, Basanta Kumar Bhattacharjee vs Panchu Gopal Dutta & Ors., AIR 1956 Calcutta p. 23 and Income tax Officer, Ward C. SangIi & Anr.
vs Chandanbai Balaram Doshi & Ors., AIR 1957 Bombay p. 91, approved.
2.1 The rights of the respective decree holders or claimants are governed by the order for rateable distribu tion passed by the Court as a result of the adjudication and determination made by the Court.
Nothing further remains to be done by the Court, in the judicial sphere thereafter.
The order partakes of the character of a judgment and decree passed by the Court.
[930B C] 927 2.2 Thereafter the officials of the Accounts and Cash department are only required to carry out the command of the Court by implementing or giving effect to the order.
[930C D] 2.3 The test which is to be applied is whether the said officials can refuse to implement the order by refusing to make payment once the Court has passed the order.
Obviously and undoubtedly they cannot.
Therefore, nothing turns on whether or not actual payment pursuant to the order of the Court is made.
The Court officials make payment to the decree holder because the property in the said monies has vested unto them by virtue of the order of distribution passed by the Court.
What is being paid by the officials of Accounts and Cash Sections will be the decree holder 's money, it having ceased to belong to the judgmentdebtor the moment the order for distribution was made, even though actual disbursement was made later.
[930D F] 3.
If the State lays its claim after the order for distribution is made by the Court, it will be of no avail, as the property would have gone beyond the reach of the State, it having ceased to be the property of the debtor against whom the State had a claim.
No question of priority can arise in that situation the state having missed the bus.
[930F G] 4.
In the present case, the High Court was in error in reversing the order passed by the executing Court.
The order of the High Court is set aside and that of the executing Court restored in so far as the appellant is concerned.
[930H]
