The Bombay Tenancy Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, by s.32(1) provides that every tenant should, subject to the other provisions contained in the Act, be deemed to have purchased from the landlord, free of all encumbrances the land held by him as tenant, if such tenant was a permanent tenant and cultivated the land personally; or such tenant was not a permanent tenant but cultivated the land leased personally; and the landlord has not given notice of termi nation of his tenancy under section 31; or notice had been given under section 31, but the landlord had not applied to the Mamlatdar on or before 31st day of March, 1956 under section 29 for obtaining possession of the land; or for certain other contingencies mentioned in section 32 of the Act.
Section 43A provides that the aforesaid provisions for the benefit of tillers or tenants would not apply to land granted to any bodies or persons for the cultivation of sugarcane or the growing of fruits or flowers or for the breeding of livestock.
The appellant tenant had taken the suit land on lease from the respondent.
The lease deed was alleged to have been executed for the purpose of cultivation of chillies, tobac co, sugarcane and groundnuts etc.
Suo moto proceedings for fixing the price under s.32(g) were taken on the assumption that the appellant tenant had become statutory purchaser by virtue of s.32 of the Act.
While the proceedings were pend ing, the respondents made an application under the Act for determination of reasonable rent on the basis that the lands were leased for growing sugarcane.
The trial court rejected the application holding that the lands had 914 been leased not for growing sugarcane alone, but for differ ent types of crops.
However, the Special Land Acquisition Officer held that the purpose of the lease was one for cultivating sugarcane and, as such, the lands were governed by the provisions of s.43A of the Act and directed the determination of the rent accordingly.
The Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal as well as the High Court confirmed the aforesaid order.
The High Court held that though initially there was some mention of other crops, the Kabulayat (Lease Deed) in terms intended that the land would be used for cultivation of sugarcane, and when sugarcane was not being cultivated, the other crops could be cultivated till the land was again available for sugarcane cultivation, and if that be not the intention, the entire document could not be correctly and reasonably reconciled and that the predominate purpose being sugarcane cultivation, the tenant was not entitled to the right asserted by him.
In appeal to the Supreme Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant tenant: (i) that the whole of the land is not for the cultivation of sugarcane; (ii) that in an area of 11 acres, only 1 acre was subjected to the culti vation of sugarcane, and that the Kabulayat or the lease clearly indicated that there were other purposes; and (iii) that the land could not be exempted because the lease was not for the cultivation of the sugarcane alone.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The Bombay Tenancy Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 was enacted with a high purpose of transferring the land tilled to the tillers of the soil with the exception of the lands which were leased out for growing sugarcane be cause of the need for protection of the industry of sugar cane and development of the economy.
[924G H] 1.2 Having regard to the preamble to the Act and the primary purpose of the Act, it would be necessary to remand the matter back to the High Court for further remand to the appropriate officer to determine whether there was any area which was leased exclusively for sugarcane crop.
If it is held on such enquiry that the entire area was for sugarcane crop, then the order of the Tribunal cannot be interfered with.
If, on the other hand, there are areas which were leased out separately and independently of the leasing out for sugarcane and demarcated separately, then in respect of the same no exemption can be given in derogation of the ' rights of the Agricultural tenants in those leased areas and the appellant would be entitled to succeed.
[924D F] 915 2.1 In a lease for composite purposes, if there was any area where sugarcane was only cultivated, that area would be exempt from the ambit of the provisions of the Act and would be exempted.
If, however, along with cultivation of sugar cane, other crops were cultivated in the area, such an area would not be entitled to exemption.
[924F G] 2.2 It is not necessary that the purpose of the lease must be specifically mentioned either in the instrument of the lease or that the lease must be for cultivation of sugarcane etc.
in the entire field.
It would be for the courts to reach a conclusion on the evidence whether the lease was for cultivation of any particular crop or not.
Nothing would turn on whether the agreement was to grow that crop in the entire field or not.
[922G H; 923A B] In the instant case, the area which is in dispute com prised of areas leased for raising sugarcane crop as also for other crops.
The area was covered by lease for multiple purposes.
Some areas were leased out for sugarcane where along with sugarcane other crops were grown.
These however, should be included as areas leased for sugarcane as ancil lary crops or for better utilisation of the land in ques tion.
The leases covered areas other than the areas contem plated by sugarcane which could be demarcated in terms of the Kabulayat.
[924B D]
