Section 481(1) of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 empowers the Corporation to make additional bye laws to the existing ones.
Under the power so conferred the Corpora tion introduced Byelaw No.3(i) in the Cycle Rickshaw Bye laws, 1960, under which only an owner of the cycle rickshaw can obtain a licence to keep a cycle rickshaw or to ply for hire and only one such licence would be issued to a person.
By necessary implication it excludes persons who own a number of cycle rickshaws from applying for licences and prohibits the hiring out of the cycle rickshaw by the owner in favour of a rickshaw puller against payment of considera tion.
The Writ Petitioners are owners of cycle rickshaws.
Some of them own two or more cycle rickshaws which are hired out by them to rickshaw pullen under a contract under which the rickshaw pullen have to pay some amount to the owners of the cycle rickshaws at the end of the day out of their earnings during the day.
Being aggrieved by the introduction of Bye law No.3(i), they have moved the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution that the said Bye law is opposed to Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution and also outside the scope of section 481 (1)L(5) of the Delhi Municipal Corpora tion Act, 1957.
Dismissing the petitions, the Court, 906 HELD: 1.1 On a consideration of the language of clause (5) in section 481(1) L of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, it is clear that Bye law 3(1) falls within the scope of the power conferred on the Corporation to frame bye laws for the issue of licences in respect of cycle rickshaws which are kept or used for plying in the Delhi Municipal Corporation area.
While framing bye laws under the above statutory provision it is permissible for the Corpora tion to restrict the issue of licences only to the owners of the rickshaws who themselves act as rickshaw pullers.
This is apparently done to prevent exploitation of the rickshaw pullen by the owners of the cycle rickshaws.
A licensing authority may impose any condition while issuing a licence which is in the interest of the general public unless it is either expressly or by necessary implication prohibited from imposing such a condition by the law which confers the power of licensing.
The restriction imposed by the Corporation in the present case is in the interest of the general public.
[910C E] 1.2 The Bye law No.3(1) cannot therefore be said to be either outside the scope of section 481 of the Corporation Act or opposed to the provisions of the Constitution.
[911D] Azad Rickshaw Pullers Union (Regd) Ch.
Town Hall, Amrit sar & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors., [1981] 1 SCR366 and Nanhu & Ors. etc.
vs Delhi Administration & Ors., ; , referred to.
Man Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors., , followed.
(The Court approved the two schemes of financial assist ance, put forward, at its instance, by the Bank of Baroda and the State Bank of India and the willingness of the Credit Guarantee Corporation of India (Small LOans) to guarantee the repayment of the loans advanced to the rick shaw pullers and directed, accordingly, the several branches of the Punjab National Bank, the Bank of Baroda and the State Bank of India operating in Delhi to give financial assistance to rickshaw pullers who wish to oWn cycle rick shaws and ply them under licences issued by the Corporation subject to their producing the necessary eligibility certif icate issued by the Corporation and satisfying the other terms of the Schemes, namely (i) the scheme for financial to cycle rickshaw pullers; and (ii) self employment programme for urban poor (SEPUP).
The court also directed the Delhi Administration to comply with the directions issued in Nanhu
