The empowers by cl.(d) of s.48 the Board of Trustees, constituted under that Art, to impose rates in respea of wharfage, storage or demurrage of goods at the port.
Section 53 of the Act empowers and Board in special cases to exempt either wholly or partially any ' goods from payment of any rate or of any charge leviable in respect thereof or remit the whole or any portion of such rate or charge so levied.
The Port Trust had in consultation with the Customs authorities provided for grant of conces sion in the matter of payment of demurrage charges on the issue of detention certificate by the latter.
Paragraph 2(a) of the Bombay Customs House Public Notice No. 111 dated 29th July, 1985 provides for a regular deten tion certificate to be issued where the goods are detained by the Customs House for the bona fide operation of import control formalities.
A dispute arose between the 1st respondent and the Customs authorities with regard to the basic customs duty payable on the goods imported by the former.
By an interim order passed in a writ petition filed by the respondent, the High Court directed the Customs authorities to allow clear ance of the consignments on respondent furnishing a bank guarantee in respect of the disputed amount of duty payable, in favour of the Collector of Customs.
The respondent, however, failed to clear the goods from the Port.
Since the consignments were incurring demurrage the respondent filed another writ petition seeking a direction to the Customs authorities 933 to issue detention certificates, which was allowed by the Court on the 1st respondent giving an undertaking that it would pay the demurrage amount if it failed in the earlier writ petition.
The Customs authorities were, thus, obliged to issue the detention certificates.
The Port Trust was not made party to any of the writ petitions.
It refused to honour the detention certificates and to grant remission of demurrage unless the respondent gave a bank guarantee to the extent of 80 per cent of the fees claimed.
The High Court, however, by an interim order, in the writ petition filed against the Port Trust, directed the clearance of goods without payment of demurrage and without insisting on the bank guarantee.
The appeals filed against the aforesaid orders were summarily dismissed by the High Court.
In the appeals by special leave, it was contended for the appellantPort Trust, that the High Court should not have directed the Customs authorities to issue detention certifi cates without the Port Trust being made a party to the writ petition and in any event without passing an order duly providing for the payment of the wharfage and demurrage charges due to the Port Trust in the event of the first respondent failing in its contention, and that the High Court had committed an error in directing the first respond ent to give a bank guarantee only in respect of the customs duty payable and not making a similar order with regard to wharfage and demurrage charges payable to the Port Trust.
Disposing of the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The power of the Port Trust to fix rates of demurrage and to recover the same from an importer and to show concession as regards demurrage charges in certain specified cases has been recognised.
[942F G] Trustees of the Port of Madras vs M/s. Aminchand Pyare lal & Others; , and The Board of trustees of the Port of Bombay vs Indian Goods Supplying Co., ; , referred to.
2.1 The orders passed by the High Court in the proceed ings to which the Port Trust was not a party, were not binding on the Port Trust in view of the violation of the principles of natural justice.
[943G H] 2.2 The Port Trust being a body corporate constituted under was entitled to he heard by the Court 934 before any order which affected its interests prejudicially was passed.
The High Court, therefore, before compelling the Customs authorities to issue a detention certificate should have issued notice to the Port Trust.
This was necessary because on the production of that certificate the Port Trust was under on obligation to permit the clearance of the goods without payment of full demurrage charges.
If ultimately the party concerned was found to he at fault and become liable to pay the full demurrage charges the Port Trust in the absence of a bank guarantee would not be in a position to recover full demurrage charges from the party concerned since it would have no longer any lien as provided by s.59 of the Act on the goods which were already cleared.
[943D F] 3.
The orders of the High Court in the proceedings to which the Port Trust was a party were contrary to the public notice issued by the Customs authorities as well as the rules of the Port Trust.
It erred in not imposing any condi tion on the first respondent for protecting the interests of the Port Trust.
It should have directed the first respondent to furnish bank guarantee in respect of the demurrage charges payable to the Port Trust in the event of the first respondent being held to be in default ultimately, rather than merely directing an undertaking to be given in favour of the High Court.
[943B D] 4.
The goods having already been cleared, to protect the interests of the Port Trust the order passed on December I6, 1986 directing the first respondent to furnish bank guaran tee in favour of the appellant with regard to the balance of wharfage and demurrage charges and in default thereof to pay the amount in cash would be the final order in the matter.
The customs authorities to complete the adjudication pro ceedings expeditiously and within March 16, 1987.
[944B E]
