The appellant was convicted for murder on the basis inter alia of the dying declaration of the deceased.
The Sessions Court rejected it on the ground that though the deceased gave the narrative of events in Punjabi the statement was taken down in Urdu.
Held, that in view of the fact that in the Punjab the lan guage used in the subordinate courts and by the Police for recording statements has always been Urdu, the recording of dying declarations in Urdu cannot be a ground for saying that the statement does not correctly reproduce what was stated by the declarant.
Accordingly, the dying declaration should not have been rejected.
The dying declaration in the instant case was a long docu ment containing a narrative of a large number of incidents which happened before the actual assault, which was more in the nature of the First Information Report : Held, that the object of a dying declaration being to get from the person making the statement the cause of his death or the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, persons who record such declaration should not include in that statement details which are not relevant under section 32(1) of the , unless they are necessary to make the statement coherent or complete.
It is desirable that rules should be framed for the guidance of persons recording dying declarations, and included in the Rules and Orders made by the High Court.
Where a person who was stated in the dying declaration to have witnessed the occurrence was not examined by the prose cution at the trial on the ground that he had been won over and it was contended that this was a serious omission and an adverse inference should be drawn: Held, that there was no obligation on the part of the prose cution to examine this witness and that the court would not interfere with the discretion of the prosecutor, 410 Abdul Mohammad vs Attorney General of Palestine, A.I.R. , Stephen Servaraine vs The King, A. 1.
R. ,and Habeeb Mohammed vs The State of Hydera bad; , , referred to.
