The respondent, wife of a protagonist of Khalistan residing abroad, during her visit to India was found meeting extremist leaders in Punjab.
Her passport was impounded by the Regional Passport Officer under section 10(3)(c) of the Passport Act, 1967 in view of the grave nature of her activ ities and serious implications in terms of sovereignty, integrity and security of the country.
The reasons for the order were however, not furnished to her in view of the provisions of section 10(5) of the Act.
The order was confirmed on appeal by the Chief Passport Officer.
The High Court took the view that there was no danger in presenti from respondent 's activities, and quashed the order on the ground that there was no material for the conclusion of the Passport Officer that impounding of the passport was necessary.
In this appeal by Special Leave by the Union of India it was contended that there was information before the Regional Passport Officer justifying the order and it was not open to the Court to assess the sufficiency or otherwise of such information.
On behalf of the respondent it was urged that there was no material whatsoever to indicate that the re spondent was involved in any sort of political or prejudi cial activity and that her passport had been impounded merely because she was the wife of a protagonist of Khalis tan.
Allowing the Appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The order impounding the respondent 's passport was based on relevant material.
The fact that she was the wife of an extremist leader residing abroad was not an irrelevant circumstance though singly, by itself it may appear innocu ous.
That circumstance has to be viewed in conjunction with other circumstances.
The respondent had chosen to visit Punjab in troubled days and to call on Sant 1081 Bhindranwala, the acknowledged leader of the militant Sikh movement, in the company of Balbir Singh Sandhu, self styled Secretary General of the National Council of Khalistan.
She was reported to have come to India in the month of October, 1983 to see her mother who was said to be seriously iII.
She tried to leave India on August 18, 1984.
The authorities were, therefore, justified in suspecting the respondent of being an emissary or a contact person between the extremist leader stationed abroad and the sikh militants in India.
[1084C G] 1.2 If in the circumstances then existing and the mate rial available with him the Regional Passport Officer though that the respondent was likely to indulge in a manner detri mental to the sovereignty, integrity and the security of India, it could not be said that he was acting on no materi al.
[1084G] 2.
The High Court was wrong in assuming that the Bhin dranwala factor was extinguished with his death.
Movements don 't die with individuals.
It could not also be said that there was no present danger on the date of the impounding of the passport because that was two months after Bhimiranwa la 's death.
There was no justification for treating such a recent event as an incident of the ancient past.
[1084G H; 1085A B] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR, 621, referred to
