A drilling contract was entered into by the appellant and the respondent which provided that in the case of dif ferences arising out of the aforesaid contract, the matter shall be referred to arbitration, that the arbitration proceedings shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the Indian , and that the validity and interpretation thereof shall be governed by the laws of India.
The agreed venue for hearing was London.
A dispute arose between the parties and it was referred to Arbitration.
Consequent upon the inability of the two Arbitrators to agree on the matters outstanding in the reference, the Umpire entered upon the arbitration and straight away rendered his interim award, without affording any hearing to the parties and the same was lodged in the 1025 High Court at the instance of the respondent.
Subsequently, the Umpire rendered a final award relating to costs.
About a mouth after the lodging of the award in the High Court, the respondent filed a plaint in the U.S. District Court seeking an order confirming the interim and final awards and a judgment against the appellant for the payment of a sum of $ 256,815.45 by way of interest until the date of judgment and costs etc.
The appellant, however, instituted a Petition under Sections 30 and 33 of the for setting aside the aforesaid awards and for an interim order restraining the respondent from proceeding further with the action instituted in the U.S. Court.
A Single Judge of the High Court granted exparte interim restraint order but vacated the same after hearing the parties.
The High Court held that the action to enforce the award as a foreign award in the U.S. Court was quite in order and that the mere fact that a petition to set aside the award had already been instituted in the Indian Court and was pending at the time of the institution of the action in the U.S. Court was a matter of no consequence for the purposes of consideration of the question as to whether or not the respondent should be restrained from proceeding further with the action in the U.S. Court, that it was open to the respondent to enforce the award in the U.S. Court and, therefore, it would not be appropriate to grant the injunction restraining enforcement, and that it was open to the appellant to contend before the U.S. Court that the petition for setting aside the award cannot be said to be vexatious or oppressive.
In the appeal to this Court it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the award sought to be enforced in the U.S. Court may itself be set aside by the Indian Court and in that event, an extremely anomalous situation would be created, that since the validity of the award in question and its enforceability have to be determined by an Indian Court which alone has jurisdiction under the Indian Arbitra tion Act of 1940, the American Court would have no jurisdic tion in this behalf, that the enforceability of the award must be determined in the context of the Indian Law as the Arbitration proceedings are subject to the Indian Law and are governed by the Indian of 1940, and that if the award in question is permitted to be enforced in U.S. Court without its being confirmed by a court in India or U.S. Court it would not be in conformity with law, justice or equity.
1026 On behalf of the respondent it was contended that the action in the U.S.A. Court could not be considered as being oppressive to the appellant and that even if it is so, the High Court has no jurisdiction to grant such a restraint order, and that the appellant had suppressed the fact that it had appeared in the USA Court and succeed in pursuading the USA Court to vacate the seizure order obtained by the respondent and thereby disentitled itself to seek any equi table order.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. I Under the Indian law, an arbitral award is unenforceable until it is made a rule of the Court, and a judgment and consequential decree are passed ' in terms of the award.
Till an award is transformed into a judgment and decree under Section 17 of the Indian , it is altogether lifeless, from the point of enforceability.
Life is infused into the award in the sense of its becoming enforceable only after it is made a rule of the Court upon the judgment and decree in terms of the award being passed.
[1042D E] 1.2 In the instant case, the arbitration proceedings are governed by the Indian of 1940 and a pro ceeding under the Act for affirming the award and making it a rule of the Court or for setting it aside can be institut ed only in an Indian Court.
The expression "Court" as de fined by Section 2(e) of the Act leaves no room for doubt on this score and the Indian Court alone has the jurisdiction to pronounce on the validity or enforceability of the award.
[1038A B] 2.1 Article V(1)(e) of the New York Convention provides that recognition and enforcement of the award will be re fused if the award "has not yet become binding on the par ties or has been set aside or suspended by a competent authority of the country in which or under the law of which that award was made." [1043A B] 2.2 The significance of the expression "not yet become binding on the parties" employed in Article V(1)(e) cannot be lost sight of.
The expression postulates that the Conven tion has visualised a time later than the making of the award.
[1044A B] 2.3 The award which is sought to be enforced as foreign award will have to be tested with reference to the key words contained in Article V(1)(e) of the Convention and the question will have to be answered whether the award has become binding on the parties or has not yet become binding on the parties.
The test has to be applied in the 1027 context of the law of the country governing the arbitration proceedings or the country.
under the law of which the award has been made.
[1044C D] 2.4 The enforceability must be determined as per the law applicable to the award.
French, German and Italian Courts have taken the view that the enforceability as per the law of the country which governs the award is the essential pre condition for asserting that it has become binding under Article V(1)(e).
[1047B C] 2.5 India has acceded to the New York Convention.
One of the Objects of the New York Convention was to evolve consen sus amongst the covenanting nations in regard to the execu tion of foreign arbitral awards in the concerned Nations.
The necessity for such a consensus was felt with the end in view to facilitate international trade and commerce by removing technical and legal bottle necks which directly or indirectly impede the smooth flow of the river of interna tional commerce.
Since India has acceded to this Convention it would be reasonable to assume that India also subscribes to the philosophy and ideology of the New York Convention as regards the necessity for evolving a suitable formula to overcome this problem.
The Court dealing with the matters arising out of arbitration agreements of the nature envi sioned by the New York Convention must, therefore, adopt an approach informed by the spirit underlying the Convention.
[1050G H; 1051A B] 3.
Section 41 (b) of the Specific Relief Act will be attracted only in a fact situation where an injunction is sought to restrain a party from instituting or prosecuting any action in a Court in India which is either of co ordi nate jurisdiction or is higher to the Court from which the injunction is sought in the hierarchy of Courts in India.
[1049B C] 4.1 There cannot be any doubt that the respondent can institute an action in the U.S. Court for the enforcement of the award in question notwithstanding the fact that the application for setting aside the award had already been instituted and was already pending before the Indian Court and that the appellant can approach the U.S. Court for seeking a stay of the proceedings initiated by the respond ent for procuring a judgment in terms of the award in ques tion.
Merely on this ground the relief claimed by the appel lant cannot be refused.
[1035B D] 4.2 As per the contract, while the parties are governed by the Indian and the Indian Courts have the exclusive jurisdiction to affirm or set aside the award under the said act, the respondent is seeking to violate the very arbitration clause on the basis of 1028 which the award has been obtained by seeking confirmation of the award in the New York Court under the American Law.
This amounts to an improper use of the forum in American in violation of the stipulation to be governed by the Indian law which by necessary implication means a stipulation to exclude the USA Court to seek an affirmation and to seek it only under the Indian from an Indian Court.
If the restraint order is not granted, serious prejudice would be occasioned and a party violating the very arbitra tion clause on the basis of which the award has come into existence will have secured an order enforcing the order from a foreign court in violation of the very clause.
[1038D G] 5.1 The respondent has prayed for confirmation of award.
The American Court may still proceed to confirm the award, and in doing so it would take into account the American law and not the Indian law or the Indian of 1940.
The American Court will be doing so at the behest and at the instance of the respondent which has in terms agreed that the arbitration proceedings will be governed by the Indian of 1940.
Not only the matter will be decided by a court other than the court agreed upon between the parties but it will be decided by a court under a law other than the law agreed upon.
Such an unesthetic situation should not be allowed.
Even though it was conceded by the respondent that the American Court has no jurisdiction to confirm the award in view of the New York Convention, in the event of the award rendered by the Umpire, the validity of which is not tested either by an American Court or an Indian Court, being enforced by an American Court, it will be an extremely uphill task to pursuade the Court to hold that a foreign award can be enforced on the mere making of it without it being open to challenge in either the country of its origin or the country where it was sought to be enforced.
[1041H; 1042A, B C] 5.2 In the event of the award rendered by the Umpire being set aside by the Indian Court, an extremely anomolous situation would arise inasmuch as the successful party may well have recovered the amount awarded as per the award from the assets of the losing party in the USA after procuring a judgment in terms of the award from the USA Court, which would result in an irreversible the damage being done to the losing party for the Court in USA would have enforced a non existing award under which nothing could have been recovered.
It would also result in the valuable court time in the USA being invested in a nonissue and the said Court would have acted on and enforced an award which did not exist in the eye of law.
The USA Court would have done something which could not have been done if the respondent company 1029 had waited during the pendency of the proceedings in the Indian Court.
The losing party in that event would be obliged to initiate fresh proceedings in the USA Court for the amount already recovered from it, pursuant to the judg ment rendered by the USA Court in enforcing the award which is set aside by the Indian Court.
All this would happen if the restraint order as prayed by the losing party is not granted and this can be avoided if it is granted.
[1037D H] 5.3 The American Court would have enforced an award which is a lifeless award in the country of its origin and under the law of the country of its origin which law governs the award by choice and consent.
[1042E F] 6.
I It would neither be just nor fair on the part of the Indian Court to deny relief to the appellant when it is likely to be placed in such an awkward situation if the relief is refused.
It would be difficult to conceive of a more appropriate case for granting such relief.
[1042G H] 6.2 The facts of this case are eminently suitable for granting a restraint order.
No doubt, this Court sparingly exercises the jurisdiction to restrain a party from proceed ing further with an action in a foreign court.
However, the question is whether on the facts and circumstances of this case it would not be unjust and unreasonable not to restrain the respondent from proceeding further with the action in the American Court.
This is one of those rare cases where the Court would be failing in its duty if it hesitated in granting the restraint order, for, to oblige the appellant to face the aforesaid proceedings in the American Court would be oppressive in the facts and circumstances of the case.
[1048C F] 6.3 It would be unfair to refuse the restraint order in a case like the present one for the action in the foreign court would be oppressive in the facts and circumstances of the case and in such a situation the courts have undoubted jurisdiction to grant such a restraint order, whenever the circumstances of the case make it necessary or expedient to do so or the ends of justice so require.
[1049D E] 6.4 There was no deliberate suppression by the appel lant, and it would, therefore, not be proper to refuse relief to the appellant on this account.
[1050B C] 6.5 While this Court is inclined to grant the restraint order, fairness demands that it should not be unconditional.
There are good and valid reasons for making the restraint order conditional in the sense 1030 that the appellant should be required to pay the charges payable in respect of the user of rig belonging to the respondent Company at the undisputed rate regardless of the outcome of the petition instituted by it the High Court for setting aside the award rendered by the Umpire.
[1050E G].
6.6 It is no doubt true that if the arbitral award is set aside by the Indian Court no amount would be recoverable under the said award.
That, however, does not mean that the liability to pay the undisputed amount which has already been incurred by the appellant disappears.
It would not be fair on the part of the appellant to withhold the amount which in any case is admittedly due and payable.
The re spondent can accept the amount without prejudice to its rights and contentious, to claim a larger amount.
No preju dice will he occasioned to the appellant by making the payment of the admitted amount regardless of the fact that the respondent is claiming a larger amount.
In any case the appellant which seeks an equitable relief cannot be heard to say that it is not prepared to act in a manner just and equitable regardless of the niceties and nuances Of legal arguments.
[1051B E] [The order passed by the High Court on April 3, 1986 set aside, and the earlier order passed by it on January 20, 1986 restored subject to certain conditions imposed by the Court.] Cotton Corporation of India vs United Industrial Bank, ; ;V/O Tractoroexport, Moscow vs M/s Tarapore England Vol.
24 page 579 para 1039 referred to.
