The appellant and the respondent, who were already related as lint cousins being the issues of two sisters, were married on 11.5.1973.
The marriage lasted only for 17 months, since the respondent divorced the appellant on 16.10.1974.
When the parties were in wedlock, the appellant delivered a female child on 5.12.1973.
After the Respondent effected the divorce in October, 1974, the appellant tiled a Petition under section 125 Criminal Procedure Code in the Court of the Special Judicial Magistrate No. 1, Ramput for grant of maintenance of Rs.50 p.m. to the child.
The respondent refuted his liability to provide mainte nance to the child on the ground that he was not the father of the child and that the child had been conceived even before marriage and the appellant had suppressed the fact of her being enceinte at the time of the marriage.
The Trial Magistrate after taking into consideration the evidence adduced in the case and the conduct of the parties held that since the child had been born when the parents were in wedlock and since the respondent had not discarded the wife or disowned the child forthwith but had waited for about 10 months to divorce the appellant, it would be rea sonable to hold that the child should have been conceived to the 1087 respondent and as such he is by law obligated to provide maintenance to the child.
He accordingly awarded maintenance to the child Rs.30 p.m. as against the claim of Rs. 50 p.m.
A Revision Petition preferred against the order of the Magistrate to the Sessions Judge, Rampur proved of no avail and hence the respondent filed Criminal Misc.
Petition No. 1816 of 1978 to the High Court of Calcutta under section 482 Cr.
P.C. for quashing the order of maintenance.
A Single Judge of the High Court allowed the petition and quashed the order of maintenance in favour of the child, by taking the view that since the child had been born in about 7 months ' time from the date of marriage and since the child was not claimed to be prematurely born it has to be necessarily held that the appellant should have conceived even before she married the respondent and consequently the respondent cannot be held to be the father of the child and called upon to pay maintenance to it.
However the High Court granted a certificate under Article 134 (1)(c) read with Article I34A of the Constitution to the appellant to prefer an appeal for consideration of a question of law formulated as "Whether, in an application under Section 482 Cr.
P.C. the High Court can interfere with concurrent findings rendered by the courts below. ' ' Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD 1.1 Proceedings under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure are of a summary nature and are intended to enable destitute wives and children, the latter whether they are legitimate or illegitimate, to get maintenance in a speedy manner.
In the instant case, the order of the High Court of Calcutta quashing the order of maintenance in favour of the child by setting aside the concurrent findings rendered by the Courts below is not in order.
[1094E F] 1.2 The proper course for the High Court, even if enti tled to interfere with the concurrent findings of the courts below in exercise of its powers under Section 482 Cr.
P.C., should have been to sustain the order of maintenance and direct the respondent to seek an appropriate declaration in the Civil Court, after a full fledged trial, that the child was not born to him and as such he is not legally liable to maintainit.
[1094D E] 1 .3
The facts of the case and the conduct of the par ties and the attendant circumstances reveal a preponderance of materials to support the case of the appellant rather than that of the respondent.
[1093E] 1088 If the appellant was pregnant even at the time of the marriage she could not have concealed that fact for long and in any event the respondent would have come to know of it within two or three months of the marriage and thereupon he would have immediately protested and either discarded the appellant or reported the matter to the village elders and relatives and sought for a divorce.
On the contrary the respondent had Continued tO lead life with the appellant in a normal manner till the birth of the child.
Even the con finement appears to have taken place in his house as other wise the child 's birth would not have been registered in his village.
The respondent had not disowned the child immedi ately after its birth or sent away the appellant to her parents ' house.
Such would not have been his conduct if he had any doubt about the paternity of the child.
Moreover, there is an entry in the birth register (Exhibit Kha I) setting out the respondent as the father of the child.
Though the respondent has attempted to neutralise the entry in Exhibit Kha I by examining D.W.2 and making it appear that the entry had been made on the basis of the information given by a third party, the lower courts have refused to give credence to the vague and uncorrobarated testimony of D.W.2.
Further, the respondent had allowed eleven months to pass before effecting a divorce.
By his inaction for such a long period the respondent has given room for inference that the divorce may have been effected for other reasons and not on account of the appellant giving birth to a child con ceived through someone else.
Lastly, even if the child had been born alter a full term pregnancy it has to be borne in mind that the possibility of the respondent having had access to the appellant before marriage cannot be ruled out because they were closely related and would therefore have been moving on close terms.
AH these factors negate the plea of the respondent that the minor child was not lathered by him.
Giving birth to a viable child after 28 weeks ' duration of pregnancy, according to medical science is not biologi cally an improbable or impossible event.
[1093F H; 1094A D] 2.
Section 112 of the Indian Evidence Act lays down that if a person was born during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man or within two hun dred and eighty days after its dissolution and the mother remains unmarried, it shall be taken as conclusive proof that he is the legitimate son of that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each other at any time when he could have been begotten.
This rule of law based on the dictates of justice has always made the courts incline towards upholding the legitimacy of a child unless the facts are so compulsive and clinching as to necessarily warrant a finding that the child could not at all have been begotten to the father and as such a legitima tion of the 1089 child would result in rank injustice to the father.
Courts have always desisted from lightly or hastily rendering a verdict and that too, on the basis of slender materials, which will have the effect of branding a child as a bastard and its mother an unchaste woman.
[1092D F] Mahbub Ali vs Taj Khan, AIR 1915 Lahore 77(2); Kahan Singh vs Natha Singh, AIR 1925 Lahore 414; Sibt Mohamed vs Md. Maneed, AIR 1926 Allahabad 589 and Ponnamal vs Addi Aivan, AIR 1953 TRACO 434 (Vol. 40, C.N. 169), approved.
