The Peerless General Insurance and Investment Co. Ltd. was incorporated in 1932.
After the nationalisation of the business of life insurance, the name of the company was changed to "the Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd." For over a quarter of a century now, the business of the company has been that of finance and investment.
The company offers three schemes, the principal of which is the Endowment Certificate Scheme.
Under this scheme, a subscrib er is required to pay a fixed annual subscription for a fixed number of years varying between the minimum of 10 years and the maximum of 30 years.
On the expiry of the period, the subscriber will be paid by the company a sum of money called the Endowment Sum which is the face value of the Certificate.
The subscriber is also entitled to be paid a guaranteed fixed bonus.
If any instalment, that is, any amount of annual subscription is not paid within the stipu lated period and period of grace, the Certificate lapses unless it has acquired a surrender value.
A Certificate acquires surrender value after the expiry of three years from the date of commencement of the subscription for two full years has 2 been paid.
A Certificate which has not acquired surrender value lapses on non payment of instalments and the amounts paid become forfeit to the company.
A lapsed certificate may, however, be revived at any time before the expiry date of maturity on payment of all dues together with interest at one paisa per rupee per month.
There is also provision in the scheme for conversion of the Certificate into a paid up Certificate, the paid up amount to be paid at the end of the period, but without bonus.
A person purchasing a Certificate automatically becomes entitled to a free accident insurance policy under a group insurance scheme.
A noticeable feature of the scheme is the remarkably low yield to subscriber on his investment.
Not only that, the subscriber is always at the losing end.
Despite the same, the message of Peerless is made to penetrate the rural areas to tap the small savings of the poor ignorant villagers through a special structure of agents, special agents, suborganizers, special organizers and so on chosen from amongst those noted for their social political or official connections.
The agents ' Commission was 30% (now 35%) of the first year 's subscription and 5% only of subsequent years ' subscription.
The incentive of 30% of the collection of the subscription of the first year automatically operates as a disincentive for collecting subscriptions of subsequent years resulting in heavy default in payment and forfeiture of subscriptions earlier paid.
The first subscription is literally shared between the company and its agents under the method of accountancy adopted by the company treating the entire amount as income and not liability of the compa ny.
The company adopted the "actuarial system" of accountan cy followed by the Life Insurance Corporation, though the company itself does not and cannot do insurance business.
However, the company has now deleted the "forfeiture clause" and everyone is entitled to payment after the maturity period of the certificate.
Section 45K of the Reserve Bank of India Act empowers the Reserve Bank to collect information from Non Banking Institutions as to deposits and to give directions in the public interest, in particular "in respect of any matters relating to or connected with the receipt of deposits, including the rates of interest payable on such deposits, and the periods for which deposits may be received.
" Section 45L empowers the Reserve Bank to call for information from financial institutions and to give directions, in particular directions relating to the conduct of business by them, etc.
Taking advantage of the 1970 Report of the Banking Commis sion 's Study Group headed by Dr. Bhabatosh Dutta on the role of various non banking financial institutions, the Reserve Bank purporting to exercise its powers under Sections 45L and 45K of 3 the Reserve Bank of India Act gave certain directions called "Miscellaneous Non Banking Companies (Reserve Bank) Direc tions 1973".
Para 4(a) prescribed six months as the minimum period for which a Miscellaneous Non Banking Company could accept a deposit, but no maximum period was prescribed.
Paragraph 4(b)(ii) prescribed a ceiling of 25% of the aggre gate of the paid up capital and free reserve of the company in the case of deposits accepted by Miscellaneous NonBanking Companies.
Paragraph 13 enabled the Reserve Bank to exempt any company or class of companies from, all or any of the provisions of the directions either generally or for a specified period, if it considered necessary for avoiding any hardship or for any other just and sufficient reason.
On September 14, 1973 the Peerless Company addressed a letter to the Reserve Bank of India explaining the nature of their business and claiming that their business was outside the scope of the directions issued by the Reserve Bank, while pointing out that their business was a special type, that it was carried on scientific lines and actuarial prin ciples, that over 90% of the concerned public fund was invested in Government securities and in nationalised Banks.
The Reserve Bank of India by their order dated December 3, 1973 exempted the company from the provisions of paragraph 4 of the notification in so far as those provisions restricted the acceptance of subscriptions under the scheme upto 25% of the paid up capital and free reserve fund.
Certain condi tions were, however, imposed.
The company was directed to transfer every year to the reserve fund a sum not less than 50% of the profit after taxes.
The company was directed not to declare any dividend at rates higher than 6% and 7% on ordinary and preferential shares till the free reserve became equal to the paid up capital.
The company was also required to maintain not less than 75% of its total assets in the form of investments and Government Trustee securi ties, etc.
The company was directed to submit every year a certificate from their Auditors in regard to compliance with the conditions imposed.
The exemption was to be reviewed every two years.
The said exemption was granted, having regard to the satisfactory financial position of the Peer less and the fact that it was a well established one and having regard to the certificate furnished by the actuarial consultant of the Peerless supported by data.
In the year 1974, there was yet another Study Group headed by Dr. J.S. Raj appointed this time by the Reserve Bank.
In para 6.21 the Study Group made its recommendations for a total ban on the conduct of prize chits of the kind described by them in paragraph 6.3.
Simple Recurring Depos its Schemes were not contemplated.
4 Thereafter, as a follow up of the recommendations of the Raj Committee, in 1977 two sets of directions were issued by the Reserve.
Bank, called the Miscellaneous Non Banking Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1977 and the Non Bank ing Financial Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions.
Paragraph 5 of the Miscellaneous Non Banking Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1977 which corresponded to para graph 4 of the 1973 directions, however, made a radical departure from the earlier provision.
For the first time, a ceiling was fixed on the period for which deposits could be accepted.
It was provided that the period of a deposit could not be more than thirty six months.
Paragraph 14 also vasted in the Reserve Bank the power to grant exemption in suitable cases.
Paragraph 5(1) of the Miscellaneous Non Banking Financial Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1977 dealt with period of deposits for hire purchase finance, loan and investment companies and provided that the period of depos its shall not be less than six months or more than thirty six months.
Paragraph 19 made the directions applicable to a loan company also applicable to every company which was a "financial institution" but not belonging to any of the categories of companies mentioned in paragraph 2(1) or which was not a miscellaneous non banking company within the meaning of the Miscellaneous Non Banking Companies Direc tions, 1977.
Thereafter in 1978 the Prize Chits and Money Circula tion Schemes (Banning) Act 1978 was enacted "to ban the promotion or conduct of prize chits and money circulations schemes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Section 2(a) defines "Conventional Chits" on practically the same lines as the type of business covered by the second part of paragraph 2 of the Miscellaneous Non Banking Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions 1973 and the Miscellaneous Non Banking Companies (Reserve Bank) Direc tions, 1977.
Section 3, banned not merely promoting or conducting any prize chit or money circulation but also on participation in the Scheme of any kind contravention of which carried penal action.
Section 11 exempts from the operation of the Act prize chits or money circulation schemes promoted by a State Government or any office or authority on its behalf, a company wholly owned by a State Government which does not carry on any business other than the conducting of a prize chit or money circulation scheme, a banking institution notified by the Central Government under Section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, the State Bank of India or a subsidiary bank of the State Bank of India or a corresponding new bank, a Regional Rural Bank, a co operative bank and any charitable or educational institu tion notified in that behalf by the State Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India.
5 There is no general provision which empowers the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of India to exempt any other prize chit or money circulation scheme from the applicabili ty of the Act.
In exercise of its powers under Section 13 of the Act the Government of West Bengal has made the Prize Chits and Money Circulation Scheme (Banning) (West Bengal) Rules, 1979.
The Miscellaneous Non Banking Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions 1977 and the Non Banking Financial Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions came into force on July 1, 1977.
On March 3, 1978 the Reserve Bank informed the Peerless Company that under the Miscellaneous Non Banking Companies Directions which applied to the Company, the Company was prohibited from accepting deposits for more than 36 months and since the deposits accepted by the Company were for periods exceeding 36 months, the Reserve Bank wanted to know what action the Company proposed to take to comply with the requirement stipulating the maximum period for which depos its might be accepted.
In reply, the Company, by its letter dated 31st March, 1978, pointed out the special features of the Company which persuaded the Reserve Bank to grant exemp tion to the Company from the 1973 directions.
The Company invited the attention of the Reserve Bank of the various elements of the scheme which made it impracticable to comply with the stipulation regarding the maximum period of 36 months as that would make the scheme wholly unviable.
The Company requested that further exemption may be granted in the public interest.
The alternative, it was said, would be to close the business and that would mean loss of employment to several thousands of employees and financial loss to millions of depositors.
The Company suggested that the Reserve Bank might recommend to the Central Government to convert the undertaking into a joint sector enterprise.
The letter ended with an appeal to the Reserve Bank to grant exemption from the restrictions relating to maximum period.
By its letter dated July 23, 1979, the Reserve Bank pointed out to the company that the schemes conducted by the Company were covered by the provisions of the which had come into force with effect from December 12, 1978.
As the Company was banned from doing fresh business and was required to wind up its existing business under the Act, there was no question of granting any exemption to the company.
Nevertheless the Reserve Bank stated that they had considered the claim for exemption on merits and found that it was necessary to cancel the exemption already granted.
The reasons for the proposed cancellation were set out and the Company was asked to show cause why the exemption should not be cancelled.
On August 30, 1979 6 the Company replied at great length stating how necessary it was in the public interest to grant exemption to the Compa ny.
On August 10, 1979, the Government of West Bengal ad dressed a communication to the Peerless Company pointing out that the Prize Chits/Money Circulation Schemes conducted by the Company came within the purview of the and, there fore, the Company was under an obligation to submit a wind ing up plan under Rule 4 of the Prize Chits and Money Circu lation Schemes (Banning) (West Bengal) Rules, 1979.
On September 3, 1979, the Company filed a writ petition in the Calcutta High Court for a declaration that the did not apply to the business carried on by the company.
A Rule was issued and an Interim Order was made in favour of the company, first for a limited period and, later, till the disposal of the writ petition.
A similar writ petition was filed questioning a notice issued by the Madhya Pradesh Government on the same lines as that issued by the West Bengal Government.
A Rule and Interim Order were issued.
During the pendency of the writ petition exemption was refused by the Reserve Bank on 19.3.
Appeals preferred by the company under the Letters Patent against the judgment of the Single Judge were al lowed.
It was declared that the business carried on by the company did not come within the mischief of the .
Against the judgment of the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court the Reserve Bank of India, the Union of India and the State of West Bengal have preferred Civil Appeal Nos.3562, 3563, 3564, 3565 and 4459 of 1986.
In the course of the judgment, the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court had observed that the company was a financial institution within the meaning of paragraph 11 of the Non Banking Financial Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1977 and therefore, the Directions contained therein applied to the business carried on by the company.
Against this observation of the Division Bench, the Company has also preferred Civil Appeal Nos.
3566 and 3567 of 1986.
After the judgment of the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court, the Company, pursuant to the observations of the Division Bench that it was a financial institution within the meaning of paragraph 11 of the Non Banking Financial Companies Directions, applied afresh to the Reserve Bank of India for exemption from complying with the Directions.
The Reserve Bank of India by its order dated August 22, 1986 refused to grant the exemption sought.
The company has filed another writ petition in the Calcutta High Court against the said refusal by the 7 Reserve Bank to grant exemption.
Therefore, the court pre ferred to apply "Non liquet" on the question whether the company is a financial Institution within the meaning of para 11 of the Non Banking Financial Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions.
Dismissing the appeals of Reserve Bank of India.
Union of India and the State of West Bangal, the Court.
HELD: Per Chinnappa Reddy, J. 1. 1 Legislatures resort to inclusive definitions (i) to enlarge the meaning of words or phrases so as to take in the ordinary, popular and natural sense of the words and also the sense which the statute wishes to attribute to it; (ii) to include meanings about which there might be some dispute; or (iii) to bring under one nomenclature all transactions possessing certain similar features but going under differ ent names.
Depending on the context, in the process of enlarging, the definition may even become exhaustive.
By using the word, the Legislature did not intend to so expand the meaning of prize chit as to take in every scheme involv ing subscribing and refunding of money.
The word "includes", the context shows, was intended not to expand the meaning of "prize chit" but to cover all transactions or arrangements of the nature of prize chits but under different names.
The expression "Prize chit" had nowhere been statutorily defined before.
The Bhahatosh Datta Study Group and the Raj Study Group had indentified the schemes popularly called "Prize Chits".
The Study Group also recognised that "Prize Chits" were also variously called benefit/savings schemes and lucky draws and that the basic common features of the schemes were the giving of a prize and the ultimate refund of the amount of subscriptions (vide para 6.3 of the report of the Raj Study Group).
It was recommended that prize chits and the like by whatever name called should be banned.
Since prize chits were called differently, "prize chits" benefit/ sav ings schemes, "lucky draws", etc.
it became necessary for the Parliament to resort to an inclusive definitions so as to bring in all transactions or arrangements containing those two elements.
In defining the expression "prize chit" the Parliament did not intend to depart from the meaning which the expression had come to acquire in the world of finance, the meaning which the Datta and the Raj Study Groups had given it.
[42D H;43A B] 1.2 Interpretation must depend on the text and the context.
They are the bases of interpretation.
One may well say if the text is the texture, context is what gives the colour.
Neither can be ignored.
Both 8 are important.
That interpretation is best which makes the textual interpretation match the contextual.
A statute is best interpreted when the object and purpose of its enact ment is known.
With this knowledge, the statute must be read, first as a whole and then section by section, clause by clause, phrase by phrase and word by word.
If a statute is looked at, in the context of its enactment, with the glasses of the statute maker, provided by such context its scheme, the sections, clauses, phrases and words may take colour and appear different than when the statute is looked at without the glasses provided by the context.
With these glasses the court must look at the Act as a whole and dis cover what each section, each clause, each phrase and each word is meant and designed to say as to fit into the scheme of the entire Act.
No part of a statute and no word of a statute can be construed in isolation.
Statutes have to be construed so that every word has a place and everything is in its place.
It is by looking at the definition as a whole in the setting of the entire Act and by reference to what preceded the enactment and the reasons for it that the court construed the expression "Prize Chit" in Srinivasa.
[43B F] 1.3 Therefore, the two requirements mentioned in the two clauses (i) and (ii) of the definition are not to be read disjunctively; they are two distinct attributes of "Prize Chits", each of which has to be satisfied.
The Conventional Chit satisfies both the requirements of the definition of "Prize Chit", since it involves both the "certain" and the "chance" elements, the certain element being the refund of the amount of subscriptions less the deductions and the chance element being the time of such payment, dependent on the result of the draw or auction.
Yet the definition of "Prize Chit" expressly excludes the Conventional Chit obvi ously for the reason that the "chance" element is overshad owed by the "certain element".
If so, no construction may be placed on the definition so as to bring in all Recurring Deposit Schemes, even if they do not involve a chance ele ment.
Such a construction would reduce the definition to a near absurdity and render the reference to the giving or awarding of a prize or girl, a meaningless superfluity.
If a conventional chit is not a "Prize Chit" by definition there appears to be no logic in construing the definition to include a Recurring Deposit Scheme.
[43H;44A D] 2.
The argument that the two clauses (i) and (ii) are to be read disjunctively and that they should not be read as if they are joined by the conjunction "and" cannot be accepted.
There is no need to introduce the word "or" either.
How clauses (i) and (ii) of s.2(e) have to be read depends on the context.
The context requires the definition to be read as if both clauses are satisfied.
There is nothing in the text which 9 makes it imperative that it be read otherwise.
Each of the clauses (i) and (ii) contains a number of alternatives and it is to those several alternatives that the expression "all or any of the following purposes" refers and not to (i) or (ii) which are not alternatives at all.
In fact, a prize chit, by whatever name it may be called, does not contem plate the exhaustion of the entire fund by the giving of prizes; it invariably provides for a refund of the amount of subscription, less the deductions, to all the subscribers or to those who have not won prizes, depending on the nature of the scheme.
Clauses (i) and (ii) refer to the twin at tributes of a prize chit or like scheme and not to two alternate attributes.
[44D G] 2.2 While it is possible to say that Parliament desired to root out prize chits and schemes of like nature involving the vicious element of gambling, it is inconceivable that Parliament intended to visit even subscribers to Recurring Deposit Schemes involving no such vice with such dire conse quence.
Therefore, section 2(e) of the Act does not contem plate a scheme without a prize, and therefore, the endowment certificate scheme of the Peerless Company is outside the Prize Chits and Money Circulation Scheme (Banning) Act, 1978.
[45A B;E] Srinivasa Enterprise vs Union of India, ; ; Ardeshir Bhiwandiwala vs State of Bombay, ; C.I.T. Andhra Pradesh vs Taj Mahal Hotel, ; and S.K. Gupta vs
K.P. Jain, , referred to.
Despite Articles 38, 39, 41 and 43 of the Constitu tion the Life Insurance Corporation of India, an instrumen tality of the State, which is given the monopoly of Life Insurance business in the country has taken no steps to offer proper security and protection to the needy, poor, rural folk.
If the Life Insurance Corporation is really interested in the treating the poorer policy holders less harshly and more liberally the time has come for the Life Insurance Corporation to revise its terms and conditions and to think in the direct/on of deleting the forfeiture clause altogether as has now been done by the Peerless Company or to delete it at least from life policies for small amounts.
Perhaps the Life Insurance Corporation may think of short term, small amount policies with no forfeiture clause and with some incentive such as a reduced premium for continuing to pay premiums regularly.
It is hoped, with the management expertise at its command, the Life Insurance Corporation of India can devise a myriad ways of serving the poorer sec tions of the people of our country, as also to tap the huge untapped Savings resources, the existence of which has been brought home by companies like the Peerless however wrong headed their business methods might 10 be.
It is a matter of common knowledge that the return to a policyholder who survives the period of the policy is very poor.
It may be true that the Life Insurance Corporation is paying higher bonus year after year but the bonus comes out of the amounts of the forfeited policies and it means that it is really the poor class of policy holders whose policies are forfeited that are paying bonus to the class of policy holders who are better off.
This surely is not what is contemplated by article 38(2) of the Constitution which talks of minimising the inequalities in income, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people and article 39(c) which requires the State to secure that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.
[18F H; 19A D] Per Khalid, J. A close study of the definition makes the conclusion inescapable that the Peerless scheme does not come within it.
Any attempt to bring the activities of the Peerless within the definition has only to fail.
It would not be proper to refer to the observations in the judgment, in Srinivasa 's case, on section 2(e) of the Act either as obiter or per incuriurn.
[11G] When the activities of the Peerless and the Life Insur ance Corporation are considered juxtaposed, one is tempted to observe that Peerless is less harsh than the Life Insur ance Corporation.
The Life Insurance Corporation enjoys many privileges.
It has a duty to be above suspicion.
It has a duty to serve people in the right manner.
The Life Insurance Corporation should at least in future be liberal and gener ous when claims are made by those unfortunate few, who when robbed of their bread earners claim for the insured amount and who are invariably met on technical pleas of concealment of ailment and the like.
The Life Insurance Corporation does not come out with glory when some of its dealings are con sidered.
[12B D]
