The appellant, who was a Patwari, had been demanding money for supply of copies from the revenue record to the complainant who needed them in connection with the execution of a sale deed.
The bargain was settled for Rs.200.
Rs.50 were paid in advance and therefore copies were given, but the appellant was to receive the balance of Rs. 150 for which the complainant had promised to pay it on the date of registration and accordingly on the date of registration it was fixed up that the appellant will be available at the tea stall near the Tehsil where this amount will be paid.
The complainant brought the conduct of the appellant to the notice of the Sub Divisional Officer who sent a complaint to the Police Station, on the basis of which first information report was lodged.
As the concerned Police Officers were not available, the Sub Divisional Officer himself laid a trap.
The complainant handed over the currency notes initialled by the Sub Divi sional Officer to the appellant.
On receiving a signal, the Sub Divisional Officer and the witnesses reached there and on personal search currency notes of Rs. 150 were recovered from the person of the appellant.
The appellant was prosecuted and convicted under s.5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for two years and fine of Rs. 150 and also under section 161 of the Indian Penal Code to rigorous imprisonment for one year and a fine of Rs. 100.
The plea of the appellant that the Government wanted to collect money from the land holders for small savings scheme and the Patwaris were instructed to collect this amount was rejected by the Special Judge.
116 The appeal of the appellant was dismissed by the High Court.
In further appeal to this Court, on behalf of the appel lant it was contended that the copies of the revenue record which were needed by the complainant had already been sup plied to him and the sale deed was registered before the trap and that the appellant had received the money for depositing the same under the small savings scheme on behalf of the complainant.
Partly allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The conviction of the appellant under s.5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and section 161 of the Indian Penal Code is maintained.
However, his sentence as regards sentence of imprisonment is reduced to the sentence already undergone but the sentence of fine is maintained, [120D E] 2.
The explanation given by the appellant was that he had received the amount to be deposited in the small savings scheme on behalf of the complainant.
He had neither made any note of this fact nor given any receipt to the complainant.
The Sub Divisional Officer was a Revenue Officer and the appellant being a Patwari was his subordinate.
The normal conduct of the appellant would have been to tell him as soon as he arrived for search that in fact he had received this amount for depositing it under the small savings scheme.
The conduct of the appellant in not coming out with this expla nation instantaneously goes a long way to make his explana tion just an after thought specially when Sub Divisional Officer conducted the search and recovered the amount from his person.
The Courts below were right in discarding this explanation of the appellant.
[119G H;120A B] 3.
Where the receipt of the amount and Rs recovery is not disputed it is not necessary for this Court to go through the evidence and examine it afresh.
[119E]
