The appellant Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad con structed houses under "Low Income Housing Scheme" and allot ted them to the respondents on hire purchase.
The agreements executed by the respondents in favour of the appellant provided (1) that the houses would remain, till the payment of the last instalment and execution of a conveyance in favour of the respondents, as the property of the Corpora tion; and (ii) that all Municipal taxes, water taxes and electricity charges would be borne by the allottees.
The appellant served demand notices on the respondents to pay house tax in respect of their houses.
By that time, the instalments had not been fully paid.
The respondents challenged 'the levy of tax on the ground that s.202(1) of the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act prohibits the levy of general tax in respect of the aforesaid houses, since they had not yet vested unto the allottees under the hire purchase agreement.
A Single Judge negatived the plea of the respondents allottees and upheld the validity of tax but the Division Bench in a Letters Patent Appeal took a contrary view.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: (1) In order to attract s.202(1)(c) of the Hydera bad Municipal Corporation Act, a property must satisfy a dual test.
The property must not only owned by the Corpora tion, it must also be in the occupation of the Corporation itself.
It is in this sense that the word 'vesting ' has been used.
The expression 'vest ' employed in s.202(1)(c) under the circumstances must of necessity be construed as vesting both in title as well as in possession.
[113G H] Fruit & Vegetable Merchants Union vs Delhi Improvement Trust, 108 A.I.R. 1954 S.C.p. 344 and Richardson vs Robertson, [1862] 6 L.T.p. 75, relied upon.
(2) The scheme underlying sections 197, 199, 200 and 204 of the Act has to be read and construed in a meaningful, pur poseful and rational manner.
Section 197(1)(i) casts a legal obligation on the Municipal Corporation to levy taxes on lands and buildings.
Section 199(1) makes it obligatory subject to the exceptions, limitations and conditions to levy a general tax, water tax, drainage tax, lighting tax/conservancy tax on the buildings and lands in the City of Hyderabad.
Whilst the legislature makes it obligatory on the Corporation to levy the aforesaid taxes, in so far as general tax is concerned an exception is carved out under s.202(1) and the Municipal Corporation is relieved from the obligation of imposing taxes in respect of buildings which are specified in clauses(a) to (d).
The exception is made on policy and principle.
Not arbitrarily.
Essentially the properties which are used for public purposes or for pur poses of the community are exempted.
Clause(d) makes it abundantly clear that the exemption will not be extended to properties belonging to the Central Government and State Government if the same are used for purposes of profit and not a public purpose.
The user for the purposes of the community is the rationale of the thread of principle which runs through all these three clauses viz. clauses (a), (b) and (d) for granting exemption.
So far as clause(c), which has given rise to the present controversy is concerned, a different principle is at the bottom, different but no less rational.
The philosophy underlying the exemption is rooted in pragmatism.
In so far as buildings and lands which are the properties of the Corporation and are used for its own purposes it would be an exercise in futility to collect taxes from itself in order to augment its own resources.
Surely the resources would not stand augmented when the Municipal Corporation collects the taxes from itself.
[111D; 112A F] 3.
Section 204(1) which is a part of the packet of sections relating to this subject matter clinches the issue in favour of the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad.
It, in terms, provides that property taxes shall be leviable pri marily from the actual occupier of the premises upon which the said taxes are assessed, if such occupier holds the said premises immediately from the Government or from the Corpo ration.
If the property taxes were not to be levied in respect of the property belonging to the Corporation which is used and occupied by allottees or other occupiers, there would be no point or purpose in making the provision in the aforesaid manner.
The provision in terms applies to a situa tion where the buildings or the premises are in actual occupation of 109 a person or body other than the Municipal Corporation it self.
In such an event, the property taxes would be leviable primarily from the said occupier as if the said occupier holds the property from the Corporation itself.
This leaves no room for doubt that the Corporation is entitled to impose taxes on the buildings which may be owned by itself but which may be in occupation of others.
Otherwise, the provi sion contained in section 204(1) would be rendered aimless and otiose.
[113B F]
