The Order of detention of the petitioner under s.3 of the was made on 25.9.
1986 and the grounds of detention were prepared on the same date.
The petitioner was detained and served with the detention order on 29.9.1986 at 10.15 P.M.
In a habeas corpus petition filed on behalf of the petitioner on 30.9.
1986 the High Court passed an order at 7.30 P.M. staying the detention order.
However, the stay order could not be served on the detaining officer as the plane carrying the petitioner left Bombay for Delhi at 8.30 P.M.
The detaining officers were informed of the order of the High Court on 1. 10.1986 at 5 P.M.
On the same day a petition was filed in this Court and at 3.30 P.M. this Court passed an order directing that the petitioner shall not be taken out of Delhi.
On 2.10.
1986 the petition er was released on bail by the Chief Metropolitan Magis trate, Delhi.
On 14.10.
1986 the petitioner was served with grounds of detention.
On behalf of the petitioner it was contended that the delay caused in serving the grounds of detention from 2.10. 196 to 14.10.
1986 clearly violates the mandatory require ments, contained in s.8(1) of the Act and, therefore, the order of detention was liable to be quashed.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended: (1) that the petitioner made all efforts of the police officer to serve the grounds of detention futile by taking advantage of the orders of the High Court and this Court, and (2) that the delay in communicating the grounds of detention caused in this case should be condoned and rigour of the section relaxed since the detenu had been released on 2.10.1986, and hence not in detention.
Allowing the petition, 78 79 HELD: (1) Section 8(1) of the Act shows that it is obligatory on the detaining officer to communicate to the detenu, the grounds on which the order of detention has been made.
This has to be done as soon as possible and ordinarily not later than 5 days.
The limitation of 5 days can be exceeded in exceptional circumstances.
The grounds of deten tion under exceptional circumstances can be communicated to the detenu within a period not later than 15 days from the date of detention but when the detaining authority takes time longer than 5 days he has to record reasons why the grounds of detention could not be communicated within 5 days.
(2) The mandate enacted in the section is a safety valve for a citizen who is robbed of his liberty from manipulating the grounds of detention.
The section has to be interpreted literally.
No relaxation is permissible.
If the original time of 5 days is to be extended, such extension must be supported by an order recording reasons.
If reasons are not so recorded the order of detention will automatically fail.
Even if reasons are recorded they have to inspire confidence in the Court and are subject to legal scrutiny.
If the reasons are unsatisfactory, Courts will still quash the order of detention.
(3) In the instant case, the grounds of detention were communicated to the petitioner long after 10 days.
There is to record evidencing any reason for this long delay.
The contention that the delay in communicating the grounds of detention caused in this case has to be condoned and the rigour of the section relaxed since the detenu had been released on 2.10.
1986, and hence not in detention, is a specious plea which cannot stand legal scrutiny.
If this contention is to be extended to its logical conclusion it would be clothing the authorities with powers to delay communication of the grounds of detention indefinitely, whenever a detenu secures from a Court of law either ball or parole.
To accept this contention would be to destroy the effect of the mandate of the section.
(4) In the case there is no acceptable or satisfactory explanation as to what the officer or the officers did after 6.10. 1986.
This inaction after 6.10.1986 till 14.10.
1986, by itself is sufficient to hold that s.8(1) has been violat ed by the officer concerned.
The order of detention is bad and, therefore, quashed.
(5) It is not necessary in all cases to call upon per sons placed in high positions to controvert allegations made against them by filing 80 affidavits unless the allegations are specific, pointed and necessary to be controverted.
