More than a quarter of a century ago, in the Standard Vacuum Refining Company vs Its Workmen, ; the Supreme Court affirmed the direction of the Industrial Tribunal for the abolition of the contract system of labour.
As a result thereof, the Contract Labour (Abolition and Regulation) Act came to be passed, "to regulate the employ ment of contract labour in certain establishments and to provide for its abolition in certain circumstances and for matters connected therewith".
The Central Government, in exercise of its powers conferred by section 35 of the Act, has made the Contract Labour (Abolition and Regulation) Central Rules, 1971 Section 10 of the Act empowers the appropriate Government to prohibit by notification in the Official Gazette, employment of contract labour in any process, Operation or other work in any establishment sub ject to the fulfilment of the conditions in sub section (2) thereof and after consulting the Central Board or the State Board as the case may be.
Rule 25 prescribes the forms, terms and condition of licence including the payment of minimum wages under the holiday, hours of work etc.
The Writ Petitioners, alleged that in spite of the Report of the Parliamentary Committee of Petitions under the Chairmanship of Shri K.P. Tiwari dated 30.4.
1984 and their representations the Southern Railway persisted in employing contract labour for cleaning its catering establishments and pantry cars by paying a pittance averaging Rs.2.00 to Rs.2.50 per day.
Most of the other Railways had abolished the 165 system of employing labour through a contractor.
Therefore, they sought relief for the abolition of the Contract Labour system by the issuance of a writ of mandamus under Article 32 of the Constitution and for a direction to treat them as regular employees.
Issuing an appropriate writ in the nature of a direc tion, the Court, HELD: 1.1 It is clear that, on the facts presented and on the report of the Parliamentary Committee of Petitions, the work of cleaning catering establishments and pantry cars is necessary and incidental to the industry or business of the Southern Railway and so requirement (a) of S.10(2) is satisfied, that it is of a perennial nature and so require ment (b) is satisfied, that the work is done through regular workmen in most Railways in the country and so requirement (c) is satisfied and that the work requires the employment of sufficient number of whole time workmen and so require ment (d) is also satisfied.
Thus all the relevant factors mentioned in section 10(2) of the Contract Labour (Abolition and Regulation) Act are satisfactorily accounted for.
In addi tion there is the factor of profitability of the catering establishments.
[177F H; 178A] Despite this, the Supreme Court will not issue of writ of mandamus to the Railway unless and until the Government of India fails or refuses to exercise the power vested in it under section 10 of the Act.
Under section 10 Parliament has vested in the appropriate Government the power to prohibit the employment of Contract Labour in any process operation or other work in any establishment.
The appropriate Govern ment is required to consult the Central Board or the State Board as the case may be before arriving at its decision.
The decision, of course, will be subject to judicial review.
In the circumstances the appropriate order to make in the present case is to direct the Central Government to take appropriate action under section 10 of the Contract Labour (Abolition and Regulation) Act in the matter of prohibiting the employment of contract labour in the work of cleaning catering establishments and pantry cars in the Southern Railway within a period of six months.
[178B D] (The Court further directed that (i) without waiting for the decision of the Central Government the administration of the Southern Railway will be free, of its own motion to abolish the Contract labour system and to regularise the services of those employed in the work of cleaning catering establishments and pantry cars in the Southern 166 Railway.
In any case, the administration of the Southern Railway will refrain, until the decision of the Central Government under section 10, from employing Contract labour; (ii) The work of cleaning catering establishments and pantry cars will be done departmentally by employing those workmen who were previously employed by the Contractor on the same wages and conditions of work as are applicable to those engaged in similar work by the Western Railway.
If there is any dispute whether an individual workman was or was not employed by the Contractor such dispute shall be decided by the Deputy Labour Commissioner, Madras; (iii) Any further directions may be sought, if necessary from the Madras High Court; (iv) If the Central Government does not finally decide the ques tion within six months the Southern Railway administration will within three months thereafter absorb the workmen into their service and regularise their services.
[178D G]
