An usufructuary mortgage in favour of the appellant 's predecessor in interest was sought to be annulled by the Official Receiver as having been executed within two years of the adjudication of the mortgagors as insolvents, under section 35(iii) of the Travancore Regulation VIII of 1090 (=1915) as not having been entered into in good faith and for valuable consideration.
By an issue framed in the case the burden of proving affirmatively that the transfer was supported by good faith and valuable consideration was thrown on the transferee.
There was also a preliminary objection by the Receiver that the usufructuary mortgage having been found to be an act of insolvency in the insolvency proceedings, that finding was res judicata between him and the transferee.
The trial judge found in favour of the Receiver.
On appeal by the transferee, the High Court affirmed the order of the trial judge allowing the Receiver 's application for annulment solely on the ground that the appellant had failed to prove his bona fides in the sense that he had entered into the transaction without due care and attention within the meaning of section 2(6) of the Travancore and Cochin General Clauses Act.
Held: that the courts below had erred in placing the onus on the transferee and their orders must be set aside.
It is the settled law in insolvency proceedings that the burden of proving that a particular transaction is not supported by good faith and valuable consideration lies on the Official Receiver who challenges the transaction.
Official Assignee vs Khoo Saw Cheow, , Official Receiver vs P.L.K.M.R.M. Chettyar Firm, (1930) L.R. 58 I.A. 115 and Pope vs Official Assignee, Rangoon, (1933) L.R. 60 I.A. 362, relied on.
Held further, that there was no scope for the application of the principle of res judicata in the instant case as the matter that directly arose for determination in it was whether the impugned transaction was not bona fide or for valuable consideration so far as the transferee was concerned and that was not in issue in the 33 258 insolvency proceedings, nor had he been found in such pro ceedings to be privy to any act of insolvency intended to defeat or delay the creditors.
Mahomed Siddique Yousuf vs official Assignee of Calcutta, (1943) L.R. 70 I.A. 93, considered.
The crucial question for decision in such a case would be whether the transferee was wanting in bona fides in respect of the transfer sought to be annulled and the correct test would be the one of honesty as laid down by section 2(22) Of the Indian General Clauses Act and not that of due care and attention as contemplated by section 2(6) of the Travancore and Cochin General Clauses Act.
