The appellant landlord first let out a shop cum flat to the second respondent (tenant) and subsequently leased out the adjoining two flats to him.
The second respondent sub let the two flats to the first respondent (sub tenant) prior to the coming into force of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 in the area where the property is situate.
The landlord filed a suit seeking eviction of both the respondents, inter alia, on the ground of unauthorised sub letting, who contested the petition.
However, there was a compromise between the appellant and the second respondent the appellant giving up his claim for eviction of the second respondent from the shop cum flat in his occupation and the second respondent conceding that he has sub let the two flats to the first respondent without the consent of the appellant landlord.
The Rent Controller passed an order of eviction of the first respondent from the two flats sub leased to him.
An appeal to the Appellate Authority having failed, the first respondent filed a revision under section 15(5) of the Act.
The High Court allowed the revision, set aside the order of eviction and held that no order of eviction can be passed under section 13(2) as the sub tenancy had been created before the Act came into force in the area where the proper ty is situate.
In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant it was contended; (i) that when the second respondent had admitted the factum of the unauthorised sub lease and when the Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority had acted on his admission, the High Court was in error in interfering with the order of eviction concurrently passed by 191 the Courts below; (ii) that even without reference to section 13(2) the sublease was not lawful because the lease deed entered into between the parties contained a clause inter dicting any sub lease without the written consent of the landlord; (iii) that the sub lease was not lawful even under section 108(J) of the Transfer of Property Act because the lease deed contained a prohibition; (iv) that even if it is taken that there was no lease deed prohibiting the creation of a sub lease, the sub tenancy had become unlawful from the date when the second respondent was served a notice of termina tion of tenancy by the appellant; (v) that a subtenant does not have rights independent of the tenant and as such when the second respondent suffered an order of eviction, the first respondent was equally bound by the order; (vi) that when there was a surrender of tenancy rights restricted to the two flats in question, the first respondent is bound by the surrender and cannot claim the sub tenancy rights any further; (vii) and that the Act gives protection only to tenants and not to sub tenants against unreasonable eviction and hence the first respondent cannot claim protection under the Act from eviction.
Dismissing the Appeal, HELD: 1.1 An order of eviction cannot be passed under section 13(2) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 if the sub letting was prior to the Act coming into force in the area concerned.
[194F] Surjit Singh vs Rattan Lal, AIR 1980P & H 319, approved.
Gurcharan Singh vs
V.K. Kaushal; , , relied upon.
L2 In the instant case, the sub lease had been effected before the notice of termination of tenancy was issued.
The notice of termination of tenancy subsequently issued would not make the sub lease created earlier unlawful in any manner.
[195C] 2.
Against a common decree of ejectment passed against a tenant and the sub tenant, the sub tenant alone can appeal in his own right against the decree and have the same set aside even though the tenant decides not to file an appeal.
[195F] Devaraja Bhatt vs
V.S. Rala & Ors., AIR 1953 Madras 356 (Vol.
40, C.N. 122), Express Estates Ltd. vs Modern Furnish ing House, AIR 1953 Madras 414 and G.L. Kapoor vs Ramesh Chander Nijhawan & Ors., All India Rent Control Journal , referred to.
192 Karam Singh vs Pratap Chand, AIR 1964 S.C. 1305, followed.
3.1 A lease is a transfer of a right to enjoy the property.
It creates an interest in the property by virtue of the contract of lease which may be either oral or writ ten.
The interest created in the property can be put an end to by terminating the contract.
The contract however, cannot be terminated in part.
[195H;196A] 3.2 In this case though the two items of property were given on lease at different times, the parties had treated the lease as a composite one and that was why a common notice had been issued for terminating the tenancy of both the items and furthermore a single petition had been filed under section 13(2) to seek an order of eviction in respect of both the items of the lease property.
[196A B] 4.
In this case the lease deed has not been filed in Court and marked as an Exhibit in evidence.
The explanation given by the appellant that the lease deed was shown to the Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority but it was not filed as an Exhibit because proceedings under the Act are not conducted in meticulous observance of the provisions of Civil Procedure Code cannot be accepted and the Court cannot act on the basis that a valid lease deed had been executed and it contained a contract to the contrary in so far as the tenants ' right to sub lease is concerned.
[194G;195A B] 5.
The lessee has a right to transfer by sub lease even a part of his interest in the property as provided in section 108(J) of the Transfer of Property Act.
A transferee from the lessee has a right to claim the benefit of contract to the lessee 's interest, vis a vis the landlord.
Thus a sub lease who has obtained a part of the interest of the head tenant will be entitled to claim the benefit of the contract vis a vis the lessor, as the lessee cannot surrender the lease in part.
Section 111(e) contemplates a surrender of the entire interest under the lease and not a part of the interest alone.
Moreover, a lease can be determined only by restoring possession in respect of the entire property which was taken on lease (see.) 108(m).
[196B D] 6.
Section 115 of the Transfer of Property Act provides that the surrender of a lease does not prejudice an under lease of the property or in part thereof previously granted by the lessee.
The lessee, having parted with a part of the interest in the property in favour of the sub lessee, cannot surrender that part of the property which is in the posses sion of the sub lessee for he cannot restore possession of the same 193 to the lessor apart from the fact that he can terminate the contract of lease only as a whole and not in respect of a part of it.
[196D F]
