Section 11 of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activi ties Act, 1985 stipulates that in every case where a deten tion order has been made under the Act, the State Government shall, within three weeks from the date of detention of a person under the order, place before the Advisory Board constituted under section 10 the grounds on which the order has been made the representation if any made by the detenu and the report if any of the authorised officer.
Under section 15(2), the expiry or revocation of an earlier detention order shall not bar the making of a subsequent detention order under the Act against the same person, subject to the proviso that if there were no fresh facts, the maximum period for which a person may be detained shall not extend beyond the expiry of a period of 12 months from the date of detention under the earlier detention order.
While the appellant was in Jail from November 12, 1985 onwards awaiting trial on a charge of murder he was acquit ted on May 26, 1986.
He was due for release from prison on June 23, 1986.
On that day, however, an order for his deten tion was made under the provisions of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activities Act, 1985.
The period of three weeks stipulated by section 11 of the Act expired on July 14, 1986.
Since there was no Advisory Board in existence, the appellant was entitled to be released on July 14, 1986 itself.
But he was not so released.
However, during the pendency of the writ petition challenging the said detention order in the High Court, the order of detention dated 23rd June, 1986 was revoked on 7th August, 1986 and a fresh order of detention was made on the same facts on the same day with the result the earlier writ petition was withdrawn and a fresh write petition came be filed.
An Advisory Board was, however constituted on August 18, 1986.
A reference under section 11 was made to the Advisory Board on 204 August 20, 1986 and the Advisory Board made its report on September 6, 1986.
The report of the Advisory Board was more than three weeks after the detention which commenced on the making of the order of detention though it was within three months from the second order of the detention.
The appellant contended, in the writ petition, that there has been a contravention of the constitutional protection afforded to him by Article 22(4).
The writ petition having been dis missed, the Appellant has come in appeal by Special Leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
No law can be made providing for successive orders for detention in a manner so as to render the protec tion of Article 22(4) of the Constitution ineffective.
Section 15 of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activi ties Act, 1985 which provides for the making of successive orders of detention must be read down so as to bring it in conformity with Article 22(4) of the Constitution.
If there is to be a collision between Article 22(4) of the Constitu tion and section 15 of the Act, section 15 has to yield.
But by read ing down the provision, the collision may be avoided and section 15 may be sustained.
So, avoiding the collision course, It must be held that if the report of the Advisory Board is not made within three months of the date of detention, the detention becomes illegal notwithstanding that it is within three months from the date of he second order of detention.
[207C F] Shibapada Mukherjee vs State of West Bengal, ; A.K. Roy vs Union of India, ; and Talib Hussain vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, , distinguished.
In a Habeas Corpus proceeding, it is not a sufficient answer to say that the procedural requirements of the Con stitution and the Statute have been complied with before the date of hearing and therefore, the detention should be upheld.
The procedural requirements are the only safeguards available to a detenu since the court is not ,expected to go behind the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authori ty.
The procedural requirements are, therefore, to be strictly complied with if any value is to be attached to the liberty of the subject and the constitutional rights guaran teed to him in that regard.
If a reference to an Advisory Board is to be made within three weeks, it is no answer to say that the reference, though not made within three weeks, was made before the hearing of the case.
If the report of the Advisory Board is to be obtained within three months, it is no answer to say that the report, though not obtained within three months, was obtained before the hearing of the . 205 case.
If the representation made by the detenu is required to be disposed of within a stipulated period, it is no answer to say that the representation, though not disposed of within three months, was disposed of before the hearing of the case.
[209B F] OBSERVATION An order of detention should not have been made, knowing full well that there was no Advisory Board in existence to whom a reference could be made under the Act, and whose report could be obtained as required by the Constitution.
Such a casual and indifferent approach betrays a disregard for the rights of citizens.]
