These two petitions challenged the constitutional validity of the Punjab Special Powers (Press) Act, 1956 (No. 38 of 1956) passed by the State Legislature in the wake of the serious communal tension that had arisen between the Hindus and the Akali Sikhs over the question of the partition of the State on a linguistic and communal basis.
The petitioners were the editors, printers and publishers, respectively, of the two daily newspapers, Pratap and Vir Arjun, printed and published simultaneously from jullundur and New Delhi, whose admitted policy was to support the "Save Hindi agitation".
Two notifications under section 2(1)(a) of the impugned Act were issued against the editor, printer and publisher of the two papers published from Jullundur by the Home Secretary prohibiting him from printing and publishing any matter relating to the 'Save Hindi agitation ' in the two papers for a period of two months.
Two other notifications in identical terms were issued under section 3(1) of the impugned Act against the other petitioner, the editor, printer and publisher of the two papers in New Delhi prohibiting him from bringing into the Punjab the newspapers printed and published in.
New Delhi from the date of the publication of the notifications.
Unlike section 2(1) of the impugned Act which provided a time limit for the operation of an order made thereunder as also for a representation to be made by the aggrieved person, section 3 of the Act made no such provision.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that both the sections were ultra vires the State Legislature inasmuch as they infringed articles 19(1)(a) and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution and were not saved by articles 19(2) and 19(6) of the Constitution.
It was urged that the sections imposed not merely restrictions but a total prohibition against the exercise of the said fundamental rights by prohibiting the publication of all matters relating to the 'Save Hindi agitation ' under section 2(1)(a) and by a complete prohibition of the entry of the two papers into the whole of the Punjab under section 3(1) of the Act, that even supposing 309 that the sections merely imposed restrictions and not a total prohibition, the restrictions were not reasonable, that the sections gave unfettered and uncontrolled discretion to the State Government and its delegate, that the Act did not provide for any safeguard against an abuse of the power, that the language of the sections being wide enough to cover restrictions both within and cutside the limits of constitutionally permissible legislative action they were ultra vires the Constitution and that the notification under section 2(1)(a) of the Act as made would prevent even the publication of anything against the 'Save Hindi agitation ' and should have been restricted to such matters alone as were likely to prejudicially affect the public order.
Held, that the restrictions imposed by section 2(1)(a) of the impugned Act were reasonable restrictions within the meaning of article 19(2) of the Constitution and the petition directed against the notifications issued thereunder must fail, but since section 3 Of the Act did not provide for any time limit for the operation of an order made thereunder nor for a representation by the aggrieved party to the State Government, the restrictions imposed by it were not reasonable restrictions under article 19(6) of the Constitution and the petition directed against the notifications made thereunder must succeed.
Held further, that there can be no doubt that the right of freedom of speech and expression carries with it the right to propagate one 's views and the several rights of freedom guaranteed by article 19(1) of the Constitution are exercisable throughout India but whether or not any restrictions put on those rights amount to a total prohibition of the exercise of such rights must be judged by reference to their ambit.
So judged, the restrictions imposed in the instant cases with regard to the publications relating to only one topic and the circulation of the papers only in a particular territory could not amount to a total prohibition of the exercise of the fundamental rights.
The expression "in the interest of" in articles 19(2) and 19(6) of the Constitution makes the protection they afford very wide and although free propagation and interchange of views are ordinarily in social interest, circumstances may arise when social interest in public order is greater and the imposition of reasonable restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression and on the freedom of carrying on trade or business becomes imperative.
Regard being had to the surrounding circumstances in which the impugned Act was passed, its object, the extent and urgency of the evil it sought to remedy, and the enormous power wielded by the Press, with modern facilities of quick circulation, and the consequence that any abuse of it might lead to, the restrictions imposed by the impugned Act must be held to be reasonable restrictions under the Articles.
The State of Madras vs V. G. Row, ; , followed.
310 It was only in the fitness of things that the State Legislature should have left the wide preventive powers under the sections to the discretion of the State Government, charged with the maintenance of law and order, or to its delegate, to be exercised on their subjective satisfaction.
To make the exercise of these powers justiciable and subject to judicial scrutiny would be to defeat the purpose of the enactment.
Dr. N. B. Khare vs The State of Delhi, ; , referred to.
But such discretion was by no means unfettered and uncontrolled.
The two sections laid down the principle that the State Government or its delegate could exercise such powers only if they were satisfied that such exercise was necessary for the purpose mentioned in the sections and not otherwise.
Where there was any abuse of such powers, therefore, what could be struck down was the abuse itself but not the statute.
Dwaraka Prasad Laxmi Nayain vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , held inapplicable.
Harishankar Bagla vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, , relied on.
In view of the amended provisions of article 19(2) of the Constitution and the language of the two sections limiting the exercise of the powers to the purposes specifically mentioned therein, the principles enunciated by this Court in Ramesh Thappay 's case and applied to Chintaman Rao 's case could have no application to the instant cases.
Ramesh Thappay vs The State of Madras, ; and Chintaman Rao vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, (1950) S.C. R. 759, held inapplicable.
The two provisos to section 2(1)(a) and cl.
(b) of section 2(1) clearly show that the restrictions imposed by section 2 are reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the rights guaranteed by articles 19(1)(a) and 19(1)(g) and are, therefore, protected by articles 9(2) and 19(6) of the Constitution.
There could be no basis for the grievance that the notifica tion under section 2(1)(a) prevented the publication even of matters against the 'Save Hindi agitation '.
If there was a change in the policy of the papers, the time limit provided for the operation of the notifications and the right to make a representation provided ample remedies for the petitioner.
To introduce into the notifications the suggested qualification would be to make the exercise of the powers conferred by the section dependent on an objective test subject to judicial scrutiny and defeat the very purpose of the section.
