Out of 390 candidates who appeared at the test held in 1983 84 for selection to the Haryana Civil Service (Judicial Branch), 54 candidates belonging to the general category, four candidates belonging to the backward classes, four candidates belonging to scheduled castes and two candidates belonging to the category of ex servicemen, qualified for appointment by securing the prescribed minimum of 55 per cent.
The petitioner was ranked No. 24.
There were 54 vacancies altogether but the Public Service Commission recommended 26 candidates only and they included 17 from the general category.
In a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution, the petitioner contended (i) that if the rules relating to the appointment of Subordinate Judges in Haryana had been adhered to, she would have been selected for appointment; and (ii) that 32 candidates in order of merit from the general category should have been selected for appointment and that the Service Commission illegally withheld the names of all the successful candidates from the Government and the High Court.
Allowing the writ petition, ^ HELD: 1.1 The scheme of the rules relating to the appointment of Subordinate Judges in Haryana appears to be that the Public Service Commission should hold first a written test in subjects chosen by the High Court and next a Viva voce test.
The result of the examination is required to be published in the Haryana Gazette and the selection for appointment is to be made strictly in the order in which the candidates 786 have been placed by the Service Commission in the list of candidates qualified under rule 8 of Part C. [790 B D] 1.2 Under the "Rules relating to the appointment of Subordinate Judges in Haryana", the Public Service Commission is not concerned with the number of vacancies at all.
Nor is it expected to withhold the full list of successful candidates on the ground that only a limited number of vacancies are available.
The duty of the Public Service Commission is confined to holding the written examination, holding the Viva voce test and arranging the order of merit according to marks among that candidates who have qualified as a result of the written and the Viva voce tests.
Thereafter the Public Service Commission is required to publish the result in the Gazette and, apparently to make the result available to the Government.
The Public Service Commission is not required to make any further selection from the qualified candidates and is, therefore, not expected to withhold the names of any qualified candidates.
The duty of the Public Service Commission is to make available to the Government a complete list of qualified candidates arranged in order of merit.
Thereafter the Government is to make the selection strictly in the order in which they have been placed by the Commission as a result of the examination.
The names of the selected candidates are then to be entered in the Register maintained by the High Court strictly in that order and appointments made from the names entered in that Register also strictly in the same order.
It is, of course, open to the Government not to fill up all the vacancies for a valid reason.
[790 E H; 791 A] 2.
The selection cannot arbitrarily be restricted to a few candidates, notwithstanding the number of vacancies and the availability of qualified candidates.
There must be a conscious application of the mind of the Government and the High Court before the number of persons selected for appointment is restricted.
Any other interpretation would make rule 8 of Part of the Rules relating to the appointment of Subordinate Judges in Haryana meaningless.
[791 D E] In the instant case, the reason given by the Public Service Commission for not communicating the entire list of qualified candidates to the Government is that they were originally informed that there were only 28 vacancies.
That is not a sound reason at all.
The net result is that qualified candidates, though available, were not selected and were not appointed.
The petitioner is one of them.
Therefore, she is entitled to be selected for appointment as Subordinate Judge in the Haryana Civil Service (Judicial Branch).
