The appellants are owners of arable land Lying on the outskirts of Meerut City.
The land was sought to be acquired by the Meerut Development Authority for its scheme to provide housing accommodation to the residents of the city.
The Collector, recommended the acquisition of the said land on December 13, 1979, stating that in view of the acute shortage of houses in the city it was necessary that the State Government invoke section 17(1) and (4) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
The notification under section 4(1) of the Act dated April 29, 1980 was published in the Gazette on July 12, 1980, stating that the provisions of sub section
(1) of section 17 of the Act were applicable to the said land and that section 5 A shall not apply to the proposed acquisition.
After publication of the notification the Collector noticed some errors in it which needed to be corrected by a corrigendum.
The corrigendum and the declaration under section 6 of the Act were issued on May 1, 1981.
The possession of the land was taken and handed over to the Authority in July 1982.
The appellants filed writ petitions in the High Court questioning the notification under section 4 and declaration under section 6 of the Act alleging that the action of the Government in invoking section 17(1) and dispensing with the inquiry under section 5A were not called for since the case of urgency put forward by the State Government had been belied by the delay of nearly one year that had ensued between the date of notifica 744 tion under section 4 and the declaration under section 6 of the Act.
It was also contended that in the large extent of the land acquired there were some buildings here and there and so the acquisition was not justified since these portions were not either waste or arable lands which could be dealt with under section 17(1).
The High Court being of the view that the failure to issue the declaration under s.6 of the Act immediately after the notification under section 4 was fatal, held that the notification dated April 29, 1980 under section 4 which contained a direction under section 17(4) dispensing with the inquiry under section 5A of the Act was invalid and, therefore, both the notification under section 4 and the subsequent declaration made under section 6 were liable to be quashed.
In the appeals by special leave to this Court on the question: Whether in the circumstances of the case it could be said that on ac count of mere delay of nearly one year in the publication of the declaration it could be said that the order made by the State Government dispensing with compliance with section 5A at the time of publication of the notification under section 4(1) would stand vitiated in the absence of any other material.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.1 Having regard to the enormous growth of population in the country the provision of housing accommodation in these days has become a matter of national urgency.
The schemes relating to development of residential areas in the urban centres are so urgent that it is necessary to invoke section 17(1) of the Act to dispense with the inquiry under section 5A. [749 F G] 1.2 In the instant case, there is no allegation of any kind of mala fides on the part of either the Government or any of the officers, nor do the respondents contend that there was no urgent necessity for providing housing accommodation to a large number of people of the city during the relevant time.
[749 E] 1.3 The mere fact that on account of some error on the part of the officials processing the case at the level of the Secretariat there was a post notification delay of nearly one year in issuing declaration under section 6 is, therefore, not by itself sufficient to hold that the decision taken by the State Government under section 17(1) and (4) of the Act at the time of the issue of the notification under section 4(1) of the Act was either improper or illegal.
[751 A B] 745 Deepak Pahwa etc.
vs Lt. Governor of Delhi & Ors., ; referred to.
Narayan Govind Gavate etc.
vs State of Maharashtra, distinguished.
2.1 Where a large extent of land is being acquired for planned development of an urban area it would not be proper to leave small portions, over which some super structures have been constructed, out of the development scheme.
In a situation where there is real urgency it would be difficult to apply section 5 A of the Act in the case of few bits of land on which some structures are standing and to exempt the rest of the property from its application.
[751 D E] 2.2 Whether the land in question is waste or arable land has to be judged by looking at the general nature and condition of land.
[751 E F] 3.1 Whenever power under section 17(1) is invoked, the Government automatically becomes entitled to take possession of land, other than waste and arable, by virtue of sub section
(1 A) of section 17 without further declaration where the acquisition is for sanitary improvement or planned development.
[752 B C] 3.2 In the instant case, the acquisition was for planned development.
The mere omission to refer expressly to section 17(1 A) of the Act in the notification cannot be considered to be fatal in this case.
[752 B] 4.1 It may be that many of the persons from whom lands have been acquired are also persons without houses or shop sites and if they are to be thrown out of their lands they would be exposed to serious prejudice.
Since the land is being acquired for providing residential accommodation to the people of Meerut those who are being expropriated on account of the acquisition proceedings would also be eligible for some relief at the hands of the concerned Development Authority.
[752 D E] 4.2 Although section 21(2) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 which provides for such relief is not in terms applicable to the present acquisition proceedings, the provision nonetheless contains a wholesome principle which should be followed by all Development Authorities throughout the country when they acquire large tracts of land for the purposes of land development in urban areas.
[753 B C] The Meerut Development Authority, for whose benefit the land in 746 question has been acquired, it is hoped, will as far as practicable, provide a house site or shop site of reasonable size on reasonable terms to each of the expropriated persons who have no houses or shop buildings in the urban area in question.
[753 C D]
