The All India Radio (Recruitment of Director General, All India Radio) Rules, 1963 provided that the post of Director General, All India Radio be filled up either by promotion or by re employment or by transfer on deputation, or by direct recruitment, and (i) 50% of the vacancies be filled up by promotion failing which by transfer on deputa tion, and failing both by direct recruitment, and (ii) 50% by reemployment or transfer on deputation or direct recruit ment, the exact method of recruitment to be decided in consultation with the Union Public Service Commission on each occasion.
The Additional Director General in the All India Radio who had served as such for three years was also eligible under the Rules for promotion to the post of Direc tor General.
The post of the Director General fell vacant on February 14, 1985.
The authorities took recourse to make appointment to the post by transfer on deputation as there was no body eligible for promotion, including the first respondent from the grade of Additional Director General.
The second re spondent, who was an officer of the rank of the Additional Secretary to the Government of India, was appointed by transfer on deputation initially for a period of six months, and before the expiry of 340 this period, his continuation for a further period of two years was recommended as nobody was eligible for promotion even at that time and after approval of the competent au thority the second respondent 's continuation was notified on December 10, 1985.
The aforesaid order of continuation was assailed before the Central Administrative Tribunal by the first respondent, who was working as the Additional Director General, on the ground that though he fulfilled all the requisite qualifica tions provided in the Rules for being considered for promo tion to the post of the Director General, his case was not considered and the impugned order continuing the appointment of the second respondent upto March 3, 1987 was made.
The Central Administrative Tribunal held that the ap pointment of the second respondent was not made in accord ance with the Rules, that he had not the requisite qualifi cation for being appointed to the post and though the first respondent fulfilled the eligibility qualification, was not considered at all, and quashed the appointment of the second respondent.
It also directed that the post be filled up in accordance with the rules and that the first respondent be considered for the post In the appeal to this Court, the findings recorded by the Central Administrative Tribunal that the appointment of the second respondent was bad on the ground that it was not in accordance with the rules and that he was not qualified to be appointed to the post, were challenged.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 There were only three modes of making recruit ment viz. (1) by promotion, failing which (2) by deputation; and failing which (3) by direct recruitment.
[346B C] 1.2 Since the appointment by promotion was not at all possible, and such an important and sensitive post could not be kept vacant, the appointment of the second respondent was made by transfer on deputation which was the next mode of appointment in the order of preference.
Thus, the initial appointment of the second respondent is unexceptionable.
[346D G] 1.3 The appointment to such a sensitive post by the very nature of things has to be considered in advance and if when the proceedings were initiated, the first respondent had not yet qualified for being appointed 341 to the post, his name could not have been considered.
Fail ure to consider his name in anticipation that he would have qualified by the date on which the initial appointment came to an end, does not constitute any illegality which vitiates the appointment.
[347B C] 1.4 The mere fact that the original appointment of the second respondent, which was rightly made initially, was extended for a further period by reason of the fact that when the proposal was mooted for consideration nobody else was eligible for promotion cannot vitiate the appointment of the second respondent by transfer on deputation which was the approved mode for appointment as per the relevant rules.
[347C D] 1.5 The very fact that the extension was made only till March 3, 1987 shows that there was anxiety to fill up the vacancy ultimately by promotion which was the first prefer ential mode of appointment, if possible.
If it was other wise, the initial appointment itself could have been made without restricting the appointment by a time limit.
[347D E] 1.6 Merely by reason of the fact that it was not brought to the notice of the Appointments Committee that the second respondent would qualify for being considered for promotion shortly would not justify characterising or quashing the appointment as illegal under the Rules.
[347F] 2.1 The criteria for appointment has been projected in Column 7 of the Schedule of Rules.
The second respondent fulfils the first part of the criteria as he is holding the post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India.
[347G H] 2.2 It would not be legal or proper to bodily lift and transplant clause (ii) literally and word by word as the requisite criteria for appointment by transfer on deputa tion.
[348A B] 2.3 Due importance must be attached to the expression "possessing experience of the type mentioned in clause (ii) of column 7".
The emphasis in substance, is on possession of experience of the general nature mentioned in clause (ii).
It would, therefore, not be right to inject into the eligi bility criteria the requirement of "18 years ' experience in a supervisory capacity in educational, cultural, publicity or professional institution/organisation" as the requisite criteria for appointment on transfer by deputation.
If the rule making authority was so minded, it could have expressly transplanted all the requirements of 342 clause (ii) of column 7.
If such were the intention, the rule making authority would not have referred to experience of the 'type ' mentioned in clause (ii) of column 7.
[348B D] 2.4 On a true, fair and reasonable reading of the eligibility criteria, it cannot be said that it requires either experience of '18 years ' or experience in a 'supervi sory capacity ' in any of the institutions mentioned in clause (ii) of column 7.
All that is required is experience of that type viz., experience in the sphere of education, culture, publicity etc.
along with adequate general adminis trative experience with capacity for organisation.
The criteria is being specified in the context of officers belonging to the All India Services of Central Services Group A.
By the very nature of things, therefore, they could not have 18 years experience in professional or supervisory capacity in any educational institution.
[348D F] 2.5 The second respondent was duly qualified having regard to the fact that he had to his credit 29 years of administrative experience and had held senior positions including the post of Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and was holding.
the post of Additional Secretary with effect from October, 1983.
The very fact that he had worked as Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting itself, coupled with his other experience, would satisfy the requirement of the eligibility criteria for being appointed to the post of Director General, All India Radio.
[349H; 350A B] 3.
The Tribunal was, therefore, in error in taking the view that the extension of the term of appointment of the second respondent which is due to expire on March 3, 1987 was invalid and that he was not qualified for being appoint ed by transfer on deputation to the said post as per the Rules.
[350C D]
