The appellants in Civil Appeal No. 179 of 1985 carry on business of exporting iron ore to various countries.
Previ ously iron ore used to be brought to the harbour from var ious mines by barges and unloaded in the harbour.
Thereaf ter, the iron ore could be loaded on board ocean going ore carriers.
Alternately, they could be directly unloaded in stream into the ocean going ore carriers.
Shallow draught of the harbour prevented large ocean going ore carrying vessels from entering the harbour or from having iron ore loaded to full capacity on such vessels within the harbour and consid erable time was wasted in the loading process resulting in substantial increase of the transporting cost.
The appellant Company, therefore, conceived the idea of acquiring a "Transhipper" into which barges could unload iron are and from which large quantities thereof could be loaded into large vessels in open anchorages, a process described as "topping up".
The appellant Company after obtaining neces sary permission from the Government of India for purchasing a second hand vessel for use as a topping up vessel at Mormngao harbour for iron ore exports, acquired a second hand tanker, had it converted as a transhipper and obtained ' 'A certificate of Condition.
" On the arrival of the vessel in the harbour the Deputy Conservator of the harbour was informed that "this is an old 72 Tanker converted and equipped to do the work of topping up of the bulk carriers after they are loaded at the mechanic plant to the permissi ble draught." The appellant Company then applied to the Government of India for the issue of "General Licence" under s.406 of the stating that the general licence was sought to ply the vessel 'for topping purposes in stream at Mormugao harbour '.
Licence was granted by the Government of India "(a) for topping up purposes in stream at any Indian port; (b) 352 for trading on coast; and (c) for a period of 5 years from March 5, 1970 to March 4, 1975".
The appellant Company also informed the Assistant Collector of Customs about the acqui sition of the vessel 'Maratha Transhipper ' for "the purpose of uptopping large size bulk carrier in stream" stating that they would be operating the ship within the port limits, that she would serve as a sea barge, that normally she would take cargo coming by barges with the help of her own equip ment and storing in her own hatches and thereafter she would go along side bulk carriers and transfer the ore from her holds into the bulk carriers.
Subsequently, it was also informed that transhipper was registered as a "home trade vessel" and it was capable of three types of operations namely, (a) load herseft in stream in river barges; (b) up top another vessel by using the cargo from her own hatches; and (c) up top another vessel by using the cargo from barges which go along side Maratha Transhipper.
Thus, "the Maratha Transhipper" possessed all the certificates prescribed by the and other Maritime Laws to enable her to ply the oceans.
The Assistant Collector of Customs asked the appellant Company to file a Bill of Entry for stores on board the vessel and for dearance of the vessel for home consumption.
On query being made by the appellant Company as to under what provisions of the law they were required to file the Bill of Entry, the Assistant Collector replied stating: "the function of the vessel 'S.S. Maratha Transhipper ' is in the nature of sea barge operating within the .port limits.
Such operations are reserved to the yessics imported for home consumption." The Assistant Collector of Customs issued a mice to the appellant Company to show cause why the Bill of Entry was not filed.
After the reply to the notice was sent and a personal hearing was granted to the Company, the Assistant Collector made an order requiring the company to file a Bill of Entry for home consumption.
This order was confirmed by the Appellate Collector.
The orders of the Assistant Collector and the Appellate Collector were ques tioned in a writ petition.
A Single Judge allowed the peti tion but on appeal a Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge and dismissed the petition holding that a vessel was 'goods ' within the meaning of s.46 of the Customs Act.
The vessel in C.A. No. 4427 of 1985 was an ocean going merchant vessel engaged in foreign and coastal trade in India and various foreign countries.
The appellant acquired the vessel from the previous owner and obtained the permis sion of the Government to have it converted as a Tranship per.
After the vessel arrived at Mormugao Port, the Customs Authorities demanded that a Bill of Entry should be filed.
Thereafter the 353 same story followed as in the other case.
In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant it was contended: (1) that the scheme of the Customs Act show that a vessel was not 'goods ' within the meaning of s.46(1) of the Act and therefore, it was not necessary to file a Bill of Entry; (2) that it was also the case of the Government of India that an ocean going vessel was not required to file a Bill of Entry and that the vessels in question were ocean going vessels notwithstanding that their main purpose was topping up bulk carriers; (3) that the Division Bench was wrong in refusing to go into the question whether or not the vessels were ocean going vessels when that was the very basis of the orders of the Customs Author ities as well as the judgment of the Single Judge, and (4) that notwithstanding the definition, the scheme of Chapters VI and VII of the Customs Act and the context in which the expression 'goods ' is used in s.46 of the Act require the expression to be interpreted for the purpose of s.46(1) as excluding the vessel, aircrafts or vehicles.
On behalf of the respondent Union, it was contended that the definition of the word 'goods ' in the Customs Act unam biguously included a vessel, and that in any case the ves sels in question in both the cases were Transhippers used for topping up operations in Indian territorial waters and could not claim to be classified as ocean going vessels.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.
Section 46(1) of the require the importer of goods for home consumption or warehousing to present to the appropriate officer a Bill of Entry in the prescribed manner.
The question is whether the vessels in the instant cases are goods brought into India for home consumption and whether a transhipper is an ocean going vessel? By definition a vessel, aircraft or vehicle is included among goods vide s.2(22).
[364E G] 2.
If a vessel, aircraft and vehicle are required to be excluded from the meaning of the expression 'goods ' in s.46(1), then what other purpose was to be served by the inclusive definition of the expression which expressly brought within its shadow 'vessel, aircraft and vehicle '.
There is no provision in the Act into which the inclusive definition could be read.
The Court cannot attribute redun dance to the legislature particularly in the case of a definition in a taxing statute.
The Court must proceed on the basis that such a definition is designed to achieve results.
[364H; 365A B] 354 3.
Under s.12 of the what are dutiable are goods imported into or exported from India and if goods are defined to include vessels, aircrafts and vehicles, it must be taken that the object of the inclusive definition was to bring within the net of taxation vessels, aircrafts and vehicles which are imported into India.
Section 46(1) is a prelude to the levy of duty or a rust step in that direc tion.
It must, therefore, follow us a necessary sequitur that vessels, aircrafts and vehicles are 'goods ' for the purpose of s.46(1).
Any other interpretation may lead to most anomalous results.
[365B C] 4.
Under s.15 of the Act the rate of duty and tariff valuation in the case of goods entered for home consumption under s.46 shall be as on the date when the Bill of Entry is presented, in the case of goods cleared from a warehouse under s.68 as on the date on which the goods are actually removed from the warehouse and in the case of any other goods as on the date of payment of duty.
[365D E] 5.
Goods which are entered for home consumption under s.46 and goods which are warehoused are naturally goods which are openly imported into India without concealment.
The expression 'other goods ' mentioned in s.15(c) is obvi ously meant to cover other imported goods such us goods imported clandestinely and goods which have otherwise es caped duty.
[365E] 6.
It may be that in s.46(2) and elsewhere the word 'goods ' is used in such a way as not to include and as contradistinguished from the conveyances in which the goods are carried, depending upon the context.
But that does not mean that despite the definition, the word is never to be understood as defined and that it should always be inter preted as never to include vessels, aircrafts and vehicles even when there is nothing in the context justifying from exclusion.
Therefore, there is no justification for holding that a vessel is not 'goods ' for the purposes of s.46(1).
[366B D] 7.
In both the instant cases, undoubtedly the vessels are not only capable of being used but are used as cargo ships to carry cargo from one Indian port to another or sometimes to foreign ports, necessarily going out on the high seas.
They are structurally and technically competent to go on the high seas and they have been certified to be so competent by appropriate maritime authorities.
When because of inclement monsoon weather topping up operations cannot be done the vessels do go out into the open sea sometimes from one Indian port to another and at other times to foreign ports.
Even in the come of topping up operations during the fair season, the transhippers go into the open sea to reach the bulk 355 carriers.
But these operations do not make these vessels ocean going vessels when their primary purpose is to conduct topping up operations in Indian territorial waters.
[366F H; 367A B] 8.
It is clear from the material placed before the Court that both the vessels, were originally ocean going vessels, that they were converted as transhippers for the purpose of topping up iron ore at Mormugao harbour and that they tra versed the open sea to reach Mormugao.
At the time they entered the territorial waters at Mormugao it was distinctly understood and intended that the vessels were to be primari ly used for topping up operations at Mormugao.
If ocean journeys were to be undertaken either they were incidental to the primary purpose of topping up bulk carriers at Mormu gao or they were occasionally undertaken when topping up operations were not possible during the inclement monsoon season.
[367D F] 9.
For the purpose of levy of Customs Duty, in order to determine whether any imported goods are 'goods for home consumption ' it has to he found out what the primary intend ed use of the goods was when the goods are brought to Indian territorial waters.
If the goods are intended to be primari ly used in India they are "goods for home consumption" notwithstanding that they may also be used for the same or other purposes outside India.
The vessels, in these two cases were brought to India to be used primarily as tran shippers at Mormugao, though used incidentally or occasion ally to go into the open sea.
They are, therefore, "goods for home consumption" and not ocean going vessels for the purpose of .
After their conversion they were no longer ocean going vessels, in the full sense of the term that is in the sense that their predominant purpose was use as ships traversing open seas.
It was, therefore, necessary to present Bills of Entry in respect of both the vessels.
[367G H; 368A C]
