The appellant is one of the State Transport Undertak ings.
On June 30, 1976 an approved scheme was published under s.68 D of the in respect of the route Madurai to Kumuli authorising the appellant to run its stage carriages and proposing to exclude completely all other persons from operating their stage carriage services under permits covering the entire route except those persons mentioned in Annexure 11 to the scheme, who were existing operators on the different sectors of the notified route on the date of the publication of the scheme.
The respondent 's name was not mentioned in Annexure I1 as he was operating on a non scheme route.
On February 28, 1981 the respondent secured the variation of his permit from the Regional Transport Authority enabling him to operate on a sector of the notified routes.
The appeal against the said order was dismissed and no revision petition was filed against that order.
On December 23, 1982 the respondent obtained from the Regional Transport Authority a second variation of his permit which authorised him to operate his stage carriage service on the route which was also a part of the notified route.
An appeal filed against that order was dismissed by the State Transport Appellate Tribunal.
The High Court dismissed the revision petition taking the view that s.68 F(I D) of the Act could not be considered as a bar for entertaining an application for the variation of a permit since such an application was neither an appli cation for a permit nor for its renewal.
In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant it was 392 contended that a draft scheme published under s.68 C of the Act on June 4, 1976, which was still in force was a bar to the grant of variation of the permit authorising the re spondent to operate his stage carriage on a sector of the route in respect of which the scheme had been published.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that on a true construction of the scheme only persons who were oper ating their stage carriages under permits issued in respect of the entire route from Madurai to Kumuli alone have been excluded under the approved scheme and not those who were operating between any two $aces on the notified route or between any place lying outside the notified route and a place on the notified route even though they might be oper ating on a portion of the notified route.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
In the context in which s.68 F(I D) of the appears it is difficult to hold that the application for variation of a permit by including the whole or any part of route in respect of which a scheme is published under s.68 C of the Act can be treated as failing outside the mischief of s.68 F(I D) of the Act.
There is no justification to limit the application of s.68 F(I D) to only applications for fresh permits or their renewal and to leave out their application for variation of a permit by the exclusion of the route or a portion of the route in respect of which a scheme is published.
The fact that the applicant is the holder of a permit to operate a stage carriage on another route whose variation he is seek ing by the inclusion of a route or a part whereof in respect of which a scheme is published under s.68 C ought not to make any difference.
The principle underlying s.68 F(I D) is that the number of services on such a route should be frozen on the publication of a scheme under s.68 C. [395E H] 2.
The approved scheme excludes the operation by others of stage carriage service on the said route except those whose names are mentioned in Annexure II attached thereto.
The respondent is not protected by any provision under the approved scheme itself.
He cannot be permitted to operate on any sector of the notified route in question in view of the provisions contained in s.68 C, 68 D and 68 FF.
[396B C] Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, Bangalore vs
B.A. Jayaram and Others, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 768 & Adarsh Travels Bus Service and Another vs State of U.P. and Others, ; , referred to. 393
