Article 470(b) of the U.P. Civil Service Regulations provides for reduction in pension amount by the sanctioning authority in cases where the service of a Government servant has not been thoroughly satisfactory.
A number of charges framed against the first respondent were found proved in a departmental inquiry.
He was dis missed from service by order dated November 10, 1972.
The U.P. Public Service Tribunal upheld the dismissal.
In a writ petition filed by him the High Court quashed the said order on August 10, 1984 on the ground that he had not been af forded reasonable opportunity of defence inasmuch as the recommendation of the inquiry officer relating to the quan tum of punishment had not been communicated to him.
Since the respondent had already retired from service during the pendency of the petition only consequential reliefs were granted.
The State Government issued a notice to him on January 29, 1986 calling upon him to show cause as to why orders for forfeiture of his pension and gratuity be not issued in accordance with Article 470(b) of the Civil Service Regula tions as his services have not been wholly satis 445 factory.
It contained allegations of misconduct.
The re spondent thereupon filed on application in the writ petition which had already been disposed of on August 10, 1984.
The High Court held that since departmental proceedings taken against the respondent had already been quashed, it was not open to the State Government to issue show cause notice for imposing reduction in the respondent 's pension on the same set of charges.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD:1.
When a show cause notice is issued to a Govern ment servant under a statutory provision he must place his case before the authority concerned by showing cause.
The courts should be reluctant to interfere with the notice at that stage unless it is shown to have been issued palpably without any authority of law.
The purpose of issuing show cause notice is to afford opportunity of hearing to the Government servant and once cause is shown it is open to the Government to consider the matter in the light of the facts and submissions placed by the Government servant and only thereafter a final decision in the matter could be taken.
Interference by the Court before that stage would be prema ture.
The High Court, therefore, ought not to have inter fered with the show cause notice in the instant case.
[452H; 453A C] 2.1 When proceedings stand terminated by final disposal of a writ petition it is not open to the Court to reopen them by means of miscellaneous application in respect of a matter which provided a fresh cause of action.
[453F] 2.2 In the instant case Respondent 's writ petition challenging the order of dismissal having been finally disposed of on August 10, 1984 no miscellaneous application could be filed in the writ petition to revive those proceed ings.
If the respondent was aggrieved by the notice dated January 29, 1986 he could have filed a separate petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, as it provided a separate cause of action.
The High Court, therefore, commit ted an error in entertaining his application.
[453D E] 3.
After the decision of the writ petition it was open to the State Government to have taken up proceedings against the respondent from the stage at which it was found to be vitiated.
Had the respondent not retired from service the State Government could have passed orders awarding punish ment to him after issuing a fresh show cause notice.
[449D] 446 4.
Merely because a Government servant retires from service an attaining the age of superannuation he cannot escape the liability of misconduct and negligence or finan cial irregularities.
There were serious allegations of misconduct against the respondent which had been proceeded against him during inquiry.
Those charges remained alive even after quashing of the dismissal order.
Since no disci plinary proceedings could be taken as he had retired from service, the Government proceeded to take action against him under the Civil Service Regulations.
[451C; 449F] 5.1 Pension is not bounty, instead it is a right to property earned by the Government servant on his rendering satisfactory service to the State.
Article 470(b) of the Civil Service Regulations vests power in the appointing authority to take action for imposing reduction in pension.
As the State Government is the appointment authority in the instant case it was competent to issue show cause notice to the respondent.
[450F; 452G] 5.2 If disciplinary proceedings against an employee of the Government are initiated in respect of misconduct com mitted by him and if he retires from service before the completion of the proceedings, it is open to the State Government to direct reduction in his pension on the proof of the allegations made against him.
If the charges are not established during the disciplinary proceedings or if the disciplinary proceedings are quashed it is not permissible to the State Government to direct reduction in the pension on the same allegations, but if the disciplinary proceedings could not be completed and if the charges of serious allega tions are established, which may have bearing on the ques tion of rendering efficient and satisfactory service, it would be open to the Government to take proceedings against the Government servant and to withhold or reduce the amount of pension in accordance with the statutory rules.
If the Government incurs pecuniary loss on account of misconduct or negligence of a Government servant and if he retires from service before any departmental proceedings are taken against him, it is open to the State Government to initiate departmental proceedings, and if in those proceedings he is found guilty of misconduct, negligence or any other such act or commission as a result of which Government is put to pecuniary loss, the State Government is entitled to with hold, reduce or recover the loss suffered by it by forfei ture or reduction of pension.
[449H; 450 A B; D F] 5.3 article 311(2) of the Constitution is not attracted, nonetheless the Government servant is entitled to opportuni ty of hearing before order for reduction in pension is issued, as it would affect his right to receive full pen sion.
[452B] 447 5.4 It would be open to the State Government to consider the respondent 's reply to the show cause notice and proceed with the matter in accordance with law.
[453G] State of Punjab vs K.R. Erry and Sobhag Rai, Mehta, ; ; Deokinandan Prasad vs State of Bihar & Ors.
, ; D.S. Nakara and Ors., vs Union of India, ; ; M. Narasimhachar vs State of Mysore, [1960] 1 SCR 981 and State of Punjab & Anr.
vs Iqbal Singh, ; , referred to.
