All the provisions of the were extended with effect from 26.10.1975, to certain classes of establishments and areas in the State of Rajas than, by virtue of a Notification dated September 20, 1975 issued under sub section (5) of section 1 of the Act.
Item 3(iii) in the Schedule to the said Notification brought within the purview of the Act shops in which 20 or more persons had been employed for wages on any day of the pre ceding 12 months.
M/s Hindu Jea Band, Jaipur had employed 23 persons on wages during the relevant period, but did not comply with the provisions of the Act.
The demand made by the authori ties of the Employees ' State Insurance Corporation to make contributions as required under the Act with effect from 26.10.1975 was questioned by M/s Hindu Jea Band by a peti tion under section 75 of the Act before the Employees State Insurance Court on two grounds; (i) that the place where it was carrying on business was not a shop; and (ii) that its business being one of the intermittent or seasonal character of the Act could not be extended to its business.
Having lost the case before the E.S.I. Court and in appeal 378 before the High Court, the petitioner has come in appeal before the Supreme Court.
The petitioner also filed a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution challenging the Notification as violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution, and section 1(5) of the Act itself as suffering from the vice of excessive delegation of legis lative powers.
Dismissing the petitions, the Court HELD:1.
The place, where the petitioner has been carry ing on business of making available on payment of the stipu lated price the services of the members of the group of musicians employed by it on wages is a shop, to which the Act is applicable by virtue of the Notification dated 20.9.1975 issued under section 1(5) of the Act which is a beneficient legislation.
Though the word 'shop ' has not been defined in the Act.
a shop is no doubt an establishment (other than a factory) to which the Act can be extended under section 1(5) of the Act provided other requirements are satisfied.
[380D E] 2.
The fact that the services are rendered by the em ployees ' engaged by the petitioner intermittently or during marriages does not entitle the petitioner to claim any exemption from the operation of the Act.
as much as the place of business of the petitioner is a "shop" and not a "factory" as defined in section 2(12) and section 1(4) refers only to the factories.
Further, the services of the employees of the petitioner are not confined only to mar riages which now a days take place throughout the year but also to provide music at several other social functions also which may take place during all seasons.
[380G H; 381A] The definition of an "employee" under the Act has a wider meaning.
The employees who worked outside the business premises but those whose duties are connected with the business are also 'employees ' within the meaning of section 2(9)(i) of the Act.
Even these employees who are paid daily wages or those who are part time employees are employees for purposes of the Act.
[381B] Nagpur Electric Light & Power Ltd. vs Regional Director Employees State Insurance Corporation etc., , referred to.
The power conferred upon the State under section 1(5) does not suffer from the vice of excessive delegation of essential legislative powers.
Nor does the application of the Act to businesses like the one which is being carried on by the petitioner cannot be said to be violative of Articles 14 or 19(1 )(g) or section 21 of the Constitution.
[381D E] 379
