The first appellant, widow of one Dr. Ramachandra, a tenant since 1932 of one room used as a medical shop was recognised as tenant on the death of her husband in or about 1960 by Babu Lal, the original landlord.
The rent was fixed at Rs.416 per month.
Over the years the rent came to be increased from Rs.16 to 60 per month, i.e. both when Dr. Ramachandra was alive and also later.
Babulal died on 14.11.1973 and the respondent became the Karta of the family as the senior most male member of the joint family.
The respondent issued a notice on 12.6.1974 terminating the tenancy with effect from 30.6.1974 and called upon the first appellant wife to surrender possesssion of the leased shop from 1.7.74.
As the appellants (wife and son of Dr. Rama chandra) failed tO deliver possession a salt for eviction was filed under the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Evic tion) Control Act on two grounds: (a) default of rent and (b) bonafide requirements of the junior members of the Joint family.
The trial court allowed the eviction petition.
In appeal, the appellate court reversed the findings of the Trial Court and applying the principle of unjust enrichment contrary to statutory law, held that the appellants were entitled to have the excess payment adjusted towards arrears of rent as well as future payments of rent since 1943.
However, in the Second Appeal, the Full Bench of the Patna High Court held that the rule of "in pari delicto" would squarely apply to tenants who pay enhanced rents in contra vention of the terms of the Rent Restriction Acts and there fore the appellants cannot claim adjustment of excess rent paid and seek avoidance of their eviction.
The High Court also reversed the finding of the appellate court on the question of bona 535 fide requirement as being vitiated by misreading of facts and misapplication of law.
Hence the tenant 's appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
In Mohd Salimuddin vs Misrilal & Anr.
, ; , the Supreme Court have taken care to set out that the doctrine of "in pari delicto" will not be attracted when there is no element of compulsion or exploitation and both parties have by consensus contravened the provisions of law for their mutual advantage.
[539D E] 2.
It is true that in a second appeal a finding on fact even if erroneous will generally not be disturbed but where it is found that the finding is vitiated by application of wrong tests or on the basis of conjectures and assumptions then a High Court will be well within its rights in setting aside in a second appeal a patently erroneous finding in order to render justice to the party affected by the errone ous finding.
[540F G]
