Section 17 of the Andhra Pradesh Excise Act 1968, as it stood at the relevant time, provided for the grant of lease for the manufacture or sale of an intoxicant.
It also pro vided that a lease shall not take effect until a licence under the Act was also issued.
Section 23 provided that the sum accepted in consideration for the grant of any lease under s.17 was to be the excise duty payable in respect of that excisable article.
Rule 3 of the Andhra Pradesh (Lease of Right to Sell Liquor in Retail) Rules, 1969 prescribes that every lease of right to sell liquor in retail shall be granted by auction.
Rule 7 of the Andhra Pradesh (Arrack Retail Vend Special Conditions of Licences) Rules, 1969 requires the licences to purchase arrack from the distillery, warehouse or depot allotted by the Government and to pay 'issue price ' as notified.
Rule 15 provides for the purchase of a specified minimum guaranteed quantity of arrack every month and for the adjustment of the issue price in case of any short fail in the purchase of the minimum guaranteed quantity of liq uor.
A question arose as to whether under the Excise Law prevailing in the State, the Government was entitled to claim from the excise contractors, who failed to lift the minimum guaranteed quantity of liquor, the amount said to represent the excise duty component in the issue price of liquor relating to such unlifted quantity of liquor.
A Full Bench of three Judges of the High Court in V. Narasimha Rao vs Superintendent of Excise, (AIR held in favour of the Government.
It took the view that three items, namely, duty, cost 514 and sales tax constituted the issue price.
This view, howev er, was overruled by the Full Bench of Five Judges of the same High Court in Atluri Brahmanandam vs Tahsildar of Gannavaram, (AIR wherein it was held that the Government could not do so.
It treated the excise duty as a severable element of issue price.
That judgment was assailed in the appeals and petitions filed by the Government.
To nullify the effect of that judgment and to validate the demands raised by the Government the State Legislature enacted the Andhra Pradesh Excise (Amendment) Act X of 1984.
The amended s.17 provides for grant of lease or licence for exclusive privilege of manufacture, supply by wholesale or sale of any liquor or other intoxicants.
The new s.23 empow ers the competent officer to accept payment of a sum in consideration of the grant of lease or licence or both for the exclusive privilege in respect of the liquor or any other intoxicant under s.17.
Section 4 of the Amending Act, provides for the validation of earlier demands made in respect of issue price of short drawn minimum guaranteed quantity of liquor.
Demands raised pursuant to the Amending Act were upheld by the High Court by a later judgment.
The aggrieved excise contractors filed appeals to this court.
Some of the contractors who had originally succeeded because of the decision of Five Judges Bench and were again called upon to make good the deficit after the Amending Act was passed, having failed in the High Court filed special leave petitions to this Court.
It was contended for the aggrieved contractors that what was sought to be recovered from them was excise duty on unlifted quantity of liquor which was not authorised by the provisions of the Act, as the excise duty being a part of the issue price it could only ;elate to liquor drawn by them and not pertain to undrawn liquor, that without amending ss.21 and 22 of the Excise Act the amendment of s.23 affect ed by the Legislature led nowhere towards achieving the result aimed at by the Legislature and that the Legislature could not validate the demands earlier made and struck down by the Courts, merely by enacting that the demands were to be deemed to be valid without removing the vices and the defects.
Disposing of the appeals and the special leave petitions, the Court, HELD: 1.1 Once 'issue price ' is determined its compo nents, such as excise duty, cost price, transport charges etc.
cease to retain their individual character.
They cannot then be severed from the issue 515 price and dealt with separately.
The Five Judges Bench of the High Court was, therefore, wrong in holding that excise duty was a severable element of issue price.
[526H; 527A B] 1.2 Issue price is the sum total of whatever has gone into the price of liquor at the time it is issued and it is a single pre determined definite sum per bulk litre and not the total of separate sums representing to many specified components.
The 'issue price ' is that which is notified as issued price and not its components, if any.
These compo nents which have come together to become 'issue price ' are rendered incapable of being separated again.
Excise duty loses its identity, as it were, and becomes an inseparable part of 'issue price '.
[525H; 526A] A lessee licensee, therefore, was not entitled to claim deduction from the issue price payable by him in respect of short drawn quantity of arrack the amount attributable to the excise duty.
[528F] V. Narasimha Rao vs Superintendent of Excise, AIR 1974 AP 157, distinguished.
Atluri Brahamanandam vs Tahsildar of Gannavaram, AIR 1977 AP 196, overruled.
2.1 The issue price is no more and no less than the price which the contractor agrees to pay for the grant of the privilege to sell liquor, drawn or undrawn.
The minimum guaranteed quantity of liquor as well as the issue price are both fixed well in advance of the auction in regard to each shop and it is with full knowledge of the issue price and the minimum guaranteed quantity that every bidder partici pates in the auction.
1527D; 526C D] 2.2 There can be no question that issue price must generally relate to liquor which is drawn by the contractor but it does not follow therefrom that issue price cannot be adopted by agreement between the parties as a measure of compensation to be paid in the case of undrawn liquor.
[527C D] Panna Lal vs State of Rajasthan, , referred to.
3.1 Even prior to the 1984 amendment, the amount which each of the contractors was required to pay or to have adjusted was not excise duty on undrawn liquor, but was part of the price which he had agreed to pay for the grant of the privilege to sell liquor.
[527D] 516 3.2 All rights in regard to manufacture and sale of intoxicants vest in the State.
It is open to the State to part with those rights for a consideration.
The considera tion for parting with the privilege of the State is neither excise duty nor licence fee but it is the price of the privilege.
[S27E F] 3.3 Reading sections 17 and 23 of the Andhra Pradesh Excise Act 1968 together with the Andhra Pradesh Excise (Lease of Right to Sell Liquor in Retail) Rules 1969 and Andhra Pradesh (Arrack Retail Vend Special Conditions of Licences) Rules 1969, makes it evident that the privilege of selling liquor, which includes the lease of the shop for an area and the licence to sell liquor therein may be granted by the State by public auction subject to: (1) payment of rental being the highest bid at the auction, (2) the re quirement that the licensee shall purchase arrack at the issue price, and (3) the further requirement that the licen see shah purchase a minimum guaranteed quantity of arrack, which he has to make good in case of short fail.
The consid eration for the grant of the privilege to sell liquor is not merely the rental to be paid by the lessee but also the issue price of the arrack supplied or treated as supplied in case of short fail, which is also to be paid by the lessee licensee.
There is no question of the lessee licensee having to pay the excise duty though it may be that the issue price is arrived at after taking into account the excise duty payable.
[S28B E] Panna Lal vs State of Rajasthan, ; ; State of Haryana vs Jage Ram, ; and Har Shankar & Ors.
vs The Dy.
Excise & Taxation Commr.
& Ors.
, ; , referred to.
Bimal Chandra Banerjee vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; Madhya Pradesh vs Firm Cappulal etc.
; , and Excise Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh vs Ram Kumar, 1976 (Suppl) SCR 532, distinguished.
The new s.17 of the Excise Act makes it clear that what is proposed to be granted is the exclusive previlege to manufacture or sell liquor in the shape of a lease or li cence or both.
The explanation makes it clear that the lease shall not take effect unless a licence is issued.
Having regard to the vital amendment of section 17, no further amendment of s.21 and 22 was necessary.
In the new s.23 it is now specified that the payment in consideration of the grant of lease or licence or both for the exclusive privilege is to be instead of or in addition to any excise duty or fees leviable in ss.21 and 22.
The amendments effected to ss.17 and 23, 517 therefore, have fulfilled the object of removing the vices or defects in the Act if indeed there were any.
[533C F]
