Under Rule 3 of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, the appropriate authority has the absolute right to retire an employee prematurely, in public interest after giving three months notice in writing on his completion of 25 years of qualifying service or 50 years of age.
The rule does not contain any criteria, or guidelines for the exercise of power, although public interest is specified in the rule, which means power has to be exercised in the public interest only.
The State Government issued a Government Order on September 26, 1975 laying down the guidelines and the procedure necessary to be followed in exercising powers under Rule 3 for premature retirement of a Government employee.
The order stated that the appropriate authority should utilise the power under Rule 3 in a judi cious manner to retire a government employee on formulating its opinion by scrutiny of the confidential reports of the employee and by taking into consideration any other substan tial material, it may have before it.
The order further stated that it was not feasible to lay down any absolute terms as to how many adverse entries about inefficiency or lack of integrity would justify the premature retirement but it laid stress that the service record as a whole would determine the merit of each case.
Paragraph 6 of the letter further stated that remoteness of an adverse entry, the scrutiny of the service record of the employee concerned such as crossing of efficiency bar, confirmation and promo tion to a higher post or any other meritorious service rendered by the employee, would have their relative impor tance.
The order emphasizes that the appropriate authority may consider premature retirement of a government employee if it has reasonable cause to believe that the employee concerned was lacking in 584 integrity irrespective of the assessment of ability and efficiency in work.
It further provides that the appropriate authority should review the cases of employees on their completing 25 years of qualifying service or their attaining 50 years of age.
The government issued another order on August 4, 1978 pointing out that while exercising power under Rule 3 the service of an employee as a whole would determine the merit of each case but if there was a single entry describing the employee concerned having doubtful integrity, that would justify the premature retirement under the rules.
Realising that premature retirement of an employ ee on the basis of entire service record which may include stale entry would be unreasonable the government issued yet another order on 22nd June, 1981 directing that under the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 it would not be desirable to scrutinize the entire service record of an employee and premature retirement should not be ordered if during the last 5 years the work and conduct of the employee have been good.
The appellant who was appointed as Superintendent Quali ty Marking Centre (Scientific Instruments) of the Government of Punjab in 1953 was promoted to the post of Deputy Direc tor (Technical) in 1963 and later in 1968 to the post of Joint Director (Industries) which post he continued to hold till he was prematurely retired by Government Order dated 19th March, 1980 issued in exercise of power under Rule 3 of the Punjab Civil Service (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975.
The appellant made a representation against the order of premature retirement to the government but the same was rejected, whereupon the appellant challenged the validity of the government order by means of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court of Allahabad which was dismissed in limine, on August 5, 1981.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the court, HELD: 1.
The purpose and object of premature or compul sory retirement of government employee is to weed out the inefficient, corrupt, dishonest of dead wood from the gov ernment service.
This right of the government is well estab lished which is generally exercised in accordance with relevant service Rules.
The scope and ambit of exercise of this absolute power depends on the provisions of Rules and it is always subject to Constitutional limitations.
[588A C] 2.1 The Public interest in relation to public adminis tration envisages retention of honest and efficient employ ees in service and dispens 585 ing the services of those who are inefficient, dead wood or corrupt and dishonest.
Therefore, Rule 3 of Punjab Civil Service (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 contemplates premature retirement of the inefficient, corrupt or dead wood which would subserve the public interest.
[589D] 2.2 The executive instructions issued as contained in the three government orders provide sufficient guidance for the exercise of power under Rule 3.
According to these instructions the service record of an employee has neces sarily to be considered while taking decision for the prema ture retirement of an employee and if there was a single entry casting doubt on the integrity of an employee, the premature retirement of such an employee would be in public interest.
In the absence of any details by which the ques tion of public interest would be determined in the Rules it was open to the State Government to issue executive instruc tions for the guidance of the appropriate authority to exercise the power of premature retirement and the instruc tions so issued as contained in the government orders have binding character.
[590B D] 3.1 It is now well settled that adverse entries if any awarded to an employee lose their significance on or after his promotion to a higher post.
It is also well settled that while considering the question of premature retirement it may be desirable to make an overall assessment of the gov ernment servant 's record, but while doing that, more value should be attached to the confidential reports pertaining to the years immediately preceding such consideration.
It is possible that a new entrant to a service may have committed mistakes and for that reason he may have earned adverse entries and if those entries of early years of service are taken into consideration for prematurely retiring a govern ment employee then perhaps no employee would be safe even though he may have brilliant record of service in later years.
It would be unreasonable and unjust to consider adverse entries of remote past and to ignore the good en tries of recent past.
If entries for a period of more than 10 years past are taken into account it would be an act of digging out past to get some material to make an order against the employee.
[591A E] 3.2 In the instant case adverse entries awarded to the appellant prior to 1968 could not be taken into considera tion for the reason that adverse entries for the years 1960 61, 1963 64 and 1964 65 are legally non est on account of the promotion except two entries awarded to him for the years 1971 72, 1972 73 the appellant has not earned any adverse entry reflection upon his work and conduct.
[591H; 592A] Baldev Raj Chadha vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; 586 Brij Bihari Lal Aggarwal vs High Court of A.P. & Ors., ; ; Amar Kant Chowdhary vs State of Bihar & ors.
; , and J.D. Srivastava vs State of M.P. 4.1 There is no doubt that whenever an adverse entry is awarded to a government servant it must be communicated to him.
The object and purpose underlying the communication is to afford an opportunity to the employee to improve his work and conduct and to make representation to the authority concerned against those entries.
If such a representation is made it is imperative that the authority should consider the representation with a view to determine as to whether the contents of the adverse entries are justified or not.
Right to make representation is a valuable right to a government employee and if the representation is not considered, it is bound to affect him in his service career, as in government service grant of increment, promotion and ultimately prema ture retirement all depend on the scrutiny of the service records.
[592D F] Gurdial Singh Biji vs State of Punjab & Ors., , applied.
