The respondent entered into an agreement to sell the house in dispute to the appellant on May 5, 1958.
Earlier he had made an application to the Collector under Section 4 of the U.P.
Encumbered Estates Act (U.P. Act No. XXB of 1934), which had been transmitted to the Special Judge under Sec tion 6 of the Act and pursuant to his application under Section 24 of the Act, the house in dispute had been exempt ed from sale in the proceedings under the Act on March 26, 1943.
Subsequent to the agreement, he made an application for including this house also in the property to be sold under the proceedings of the Act.
The appellant objected to it.
By his order dated 23rd June, 1961, the Collector re jected this request on the ground that since the house in dispute had already been exempted by the order dated March 26, 1943, that order could not be re opened.
There was a mortgage of this property by the predeces sors of the respondent, which was also considered as a claim under Section 14 of the Act and a decree in favour of the mortgagee was passed by the Special Judge under clause (7) of Section 14 of the Act.
In view of Section 18 the decree remained only as a money decree and the rights of the mort gagee came to an end.
The appellant filed a suit against the respondent for specific performance of the contract of sale of the house in dispute.
The trial court decreed the suit and on appeal, the first appellate court also maintained the decree but on second appeal, the High Court held that as permission to sell was refused under Section 7, the contract of sale would be hit by Section 23 of the Contract Act and set aside the decree passed in favour of the appellant.
543 In the appeals, it was submitted by the appellant that although permission for sale of the house under Section 7 was rejected on June 14, 1945, the prohibition under Section 7 will not apply to an agreement for sale, that as the proceedings before Special Judge had come to an end, the objection pertaining to Section 7 for passing of a decree under Specific Relief Act for specific performance will not be available, that if the debts remained to be satisfied still the sale proceeds could be kept in deposit for being distributed to the creditors, and, therefore, it could not be said that a decree for specific performance could not be passed, that the agreement to sell is not covered by anyone of the restrictions specified in sub clauses (2) and (3) of Section 7 and, therefore, the agreement which was entered into in 1958 could not be said to be bad in law.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that as the order dated May 7, 1976 of the Collector was after the judgment of the High Court, it could not be said that no proceedings were pending under the Act, as the last order passed was on July, 7, 1975, that the language of Section 7 sub clause (4) was wide enough and even an agreement to sell would be affected by the provisions of Section 7, and a transfer under decree could also be void if it was in con travention of this Section, that the rights of a mortgagee survived inspire of an order passed under Section 24 or inspire of an order under clause (7) of Section 14 having been passed, and that though the rights of the mortgagee may be extinguished but so long as the proceedings were pending they were not completely extinguished.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: [PER OZA, J] 1.
U.P. Encumbered Estates Act, 1934 was brought in to give relief to a class of debtors , particularly land hold ers and the Act provides for settlement of debts without filing of an insolvency petition.
Once an application under Section 4 is made, the proceedings are said to have com menced under the provisions of the Act.
[550E] In the instant case, on the day when the agreement was entered into, an application under Section 4 had been made, the order under Section 6 had been passed and the provisions of Section 7 were attracted and the limitations put on the power of the landlord under Section 7 544 became applicable to the respondent landlord.
[552C D] A plain reading of the provisions contained in sub clauses (2) and (3) clearly shows that an agreement to sell has not been included in the restrictions which have been imposed on the right of debtor.
The terms used clearly show that the prohibition pertains to the transfer (where rights in immovable property are transferred.) An agreement to sell is not a transfer of any rights is immovable property and, therefore, it could not be held to be bad in law.
[552F H] 2.1 Once an order exempting property under Section 24 is passed by the Collector, the house and furniture about which such an order is made is free from any mortgage or charge and the mortgage which was in existence before the proceed ings under the Act commenced ceased to be effective.
[554F G] 2.2 Once the claim of a creditor even if he is secured is determined by the Special Judge under Section 14 sub clause (7) and a money decree passed, the rights of the creditors, even if it was under mortgage, come to an end.
[556D] 2.3 So long as the rights of the mortgagee are not revived, they came to an end and in view of Section 24, sub clause (7) of Section 14 read with Section 18, the house in dispute, at the time when the suit was filed for specific performance of the contract, was free from the encumbrances and there was no mortgage or charge against the property.
[556E F] 3.
The language of Section 7 is clear enough that it is effective only during the pendency of the proceedings under the Act.
The Order dated 7.5.1976 filed in this Court clear ly goes to show that no proceedings were pending and the case had been consigned to the record.
There is nothing to indicate that any proceedings are pending nor any claim of any creditor still remains to be settled.
In the absence of any proceedings pending the effect of clause (4) of Section 7 will be of no avail, and therefore, a decree for specific performance could be passed.
[557F H] [PER KHALID, J.] It comes with little grace from the respondent to con tend that the agreement to sell, even granting that it would come within the mischief of Section 7, cannot be accepted.
Since the mortgage had been extinguished by its merger into a decree, the charge under it has disappeared 545 and in the proceeding under the Act only a simple decree can be passed.
A perusal of the order produced in this Court shows that no proceedings are pending under the Act at present.
In view of the finality of the matter, it is not necessary to go into the question of law regarding public policy Section 7 contemplates and the authorities bearing on it.
[546B D] The respondent has to be compensated in some measure by way of equity.
The appellant is, therefore, directed to pay a sum of Rs.20,000 to the respondent.
[546E] Mrs. Chandnee Widya Wati Madden vs Dr. C.L. Katial and Others, ; ; Behram Khurshed Pesikaka vs The State of Bombay, ; Basheshar Nath vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi & Rajasthan & Another, [1959] Supp.
1 SCR 528; Murlidhar Aggarwal and Another vs State of Uttar Pradesh and Another, ; Lachoo Mal vs Radhey Shyam, ; and Raj Narian Jain vs Finn Sukha Nand Ram Narain and others, , referred to.
