Section 6 of the Taxes on Entry of Goods into Calcutta Metropulitan Area Act, 1970 provides for imposition of levy and collection of taxes on the entry of every specified goods into Calcutta Metropolitan Area (for consump tion, use or sale therein) from any place outside that area at such rate not exceeding the rates specified in the corresponding entry in Column 3 of the Schedule as the State Government may by notification specify.
CIasa specifies articles liable to tax grouped under the caption of food and drink.
Item 4(t) specifies "nuts excluding beetal nuts" as one of the items on which the rate of entry tax has been specifically mentioned therein.
Under the said Class l in item No.4(u) "oilman stores (except edible oils)" has been men tioned and in Class 3 under heading (b), item No. 22 refers to oil seeds of inedible oils as one of the specified items for imposition of tax.
The respondents who are licensed dealers under the West Bengal Edible Oil Seed Dealers Licensing Order, 1963 challenged the imposi tion of entry tax on groundnuts imported into Calcutta Metropolitan Area for the purpose of manufacture of groundnut oil under the provi sions of the Taxes on Entry of Goods into Calcutta Metropolitan Area Act, 1970 on the ground that such importation of groundnuts as oil seeds is not subject to any levy under the provisions of the said Entry Tax Act in as much as there is no specific provision for levy on groundnuts as oil seeds for manufac turing edible oil.
The respondents prayed for a mandate directing the appellants not to impose any entry tax on the ground that they are edible nuts failing under specific entry 01 edibles provided in the Schedule to the said Act, and with a further prayer for refund of the taxes already imposed and collected by the 622 respondents.
A learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court issued a writ of mandamus as prayed for.
The State appeal against the judgment and order was dismissed and the judgment and order of the learned Single Judge was affirmed.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
On a plain reading of the provi sions of the Taxes on Entry of Goods into Calcutta Metropolitan Area Act, 1970, it is clear and evident that groundnuts which answer the description of nuts is excisable to entry tax under the said Act.
Once the goods answer the description of the item exigible to tax, under Item 4(t) the importer of such goods cannot escape liability depending on the use to which he puts.
No question of speculating about intention of the legislature arises when "nuts" are in term specified as goods which are exigible to tax and "groundnuts" fall under the description of "nuts".
That ground nuts are nuts is not disputed nor disputable that it is not so.
Groundnuts are "nuts" whether the same are consumed as they are or whether they are crushed for extracting oil they do not cease to be nuts.
[626E H; 627A B] 2.
The legislative intent to tax nuts being very clear there is no room for consid ering whether groundnut is also oil seed used for manufacturing edible oil, "why" it is imported and whether it is exempt from entry tax on that account.
Undoubtedly, nuts include groundnut also.
Though the 1970 Act was re placed by the Taxes on Entry of Goods into Calcutta Metropolitan Area, 1972 making iden tical provisions for the imposition of entry tax on specified goods entering into Calcutta Metropolitan Area, West Bengal Act XIX of 1974 specifically mentioned in SI.No.4 item No. (u) for the words "nuts excluding betel nuts" the words "nuts including groundnuts, cashewnuts and walnuts but excluding betel nuts" shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been substituted.
[627B G] 3.
The words "nuts including groundnuts, cashewnuts and Walnuts but excluding betel nuts" has been substituted retrospectively for the words "nuts excluding betel nuts" in item No. 4(u).
This amendment is clarificatory in nature and makes explicit what was implicit out of abundant caution, and clearly puts an end to all controversies as to whether ground nuts imported into Calcutta Metropolitan Area from outside is liable to imposition of entry tax.
It makes patently clear that groundnuts as one of the "nuts" was always subject to the imposition of entry tax under the said Entry Tax Act.
Therefore, the contention that groundnut imported into Calcutta Metropolitan 623 Area for the purpose of manufacture of ground nut oil which is one of the edible oils and which is exempted from the imposition of levy of entry tax cannot be sustained any longer in view of the express provisions of the Act.
[627G H; 628A B] Avadh Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Sales Tax Offi cer & Anr., [1973] (Vol. 31) STC 469 (SC), distinguished.
