Section 6(4) of the Tehri Garhwal Bhumi Sambandhi Adhi kar Niyam provides that brother or 'sapida ' (brother, nephew etc.) of the deceased sub tenant will be entitled to be recognised as a 'khaikari ' if he was jointly living with the deceased during his life time in the manner of a member of a joint family.
The appellant, a 'sapinda ' of the original 'Khaikari ' (sub tenant) had started living with the deceased from the age of 12 or 13 years as a member of the latter 's family.
He has been sharing food and shelter with the deceased and was engaged in cultivating the land along with the deceased during his lifetime.
At the time of the death of the later the obsequies were also performed by him.
The trial court came to the conclusion that the appel lant fulfilled the conditions prescribed by s.6(4) of the Act and was thus entitled to become 'khaikari ' (sub tenant) of the respondent head tenant.
The lower appellant court and the High Court took the view that s.6(4) was applicable not only to Hindus but also to Muslims and Christians, and, therefore, it was not sufficient for the appellant to have shared the food and shelter and carried on the agricultural operations with the deceased and that it must be shown that he was in fact a member of the joint family.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: The High Court was in error in holding that only a member of an undivided family could claim the benefit of s.6(4) of the Tehri Garhwal Bhumi Sambandhi Adhikar Nayam.
[620C D] Section 6(4) of the Act is designed to apply only to Hindus.
The expression 'sapinda ' employed in that provision is peculiar to traditional 617 Hindu Law and it would be altogether inapposite in the context of citizens of Muslim or Christian faith.
[619C] The expression "Jeevit Samay Men Abibhakt Kul Ki Reeti Se Uske Shareek Raha Ho" used in s.6(4) clearly provides a clue to the intention of the legislature to benefit such a 'sapinda ' who had, lived with the issueless 'khaikar ' and shared with him food, shelter, laying as also joys and sorrows along with him 'as if ' he was a member of the joint family without in fact being one.
Even if a separate brother or newhew were to live with an issueless tiller during his lifetime just as a member of the Undivided Hindu Family would be expected to 40, the benefit of becoming a sub tenant of the head tenant is made available to him.
[620A C; 619G]
