Balwant Singh was a displaced person from West Pakistan.
He owned in all 67 standard acres of land distributed in various villages.
On 8.11.1960 when proceedings under the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1930 were initiated, the Special Collector, Punjab, declared 29 standard acres belonging to him as surplus area.
While doing so, the trans fers made by him were ignored.
He had an option to choose the property which fell to his share.
He opted for the entire land belonging to him and situated in village Semani as his permissible area and did not opt for any area in Mohamad Pera, District Ferozepure.
The Special Collector reserved for him about 18 standard acres out of his holding in village Dhav Kharial in order to make up his permissible area of 50 standard acres.
This part of the order of the Special Collector became final.
On 1.11.1966, the came into force and as a result thereof, the original properties that belonged to Balwant Singh fell within the new State of Punjab and the new State of Haryana.
In December 1966, Balwant Sigh, his wife and his minor son filed a writ peti tion for the issuance of necessary directions to the States of Punjab and Haryana restraining them from utillsing the surplus area declared by the Special Collector by his order dated 8.11.1960.
A learned Single Judge repelled all the following three contentions; (1) that after the States Reorganisation, persons owning lands both in the State of Punjab and Haryana could claim that they should be allowed 692 permissible area in both the States separately; (2) that orders passed regarding surplus area prior to 1st November, 1966, and which area had not been utilised till then, should be deemed to have no effect; and (3) that the proceedings declaring surplus land were bad for want of notice to the transferees.
When the matter was taken up in appeal, the Division Bench felt that an important question was involved and therefore referred the appeal to a Full Bench.
The Full Bench considered the matter in detail and held that the order declaring the area to be surplus passed before Ist November, 1966, would continue to have effect after that date, even if that order had not been implemented and per sons owning land in the newly created States is not, in law, entitled for a separate allotment under the Act.
Hence the appeal by certificate.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1 Under the scheme of the Punjab Security of Land Tenure Act, 1930, It is the entire holding of a person on 15th April, 1953, that is to be taken into consideration for determining his surplus area.
The Government acquires the right to utilize the surplus area of a person against whom an order of declaration has been made for the resettle ment of tenants ejected or to be ejected.
[696D E] 1.2 It is true that alongwith the order declaring the land of an owner as surplus, a corresponding right and duty accrues to the Government to utilise the surplus area for the re settlement of tenants.
In other words, the rights on the land declared as surplus get vested in the Government to be distributed amongst the tenants for re settlement.
This is an indefeasible right that the Government secures.
There fore, the appellant cannot get back the land, if the surplus land had not been utilised.
[697A C] 1.3 There is nothing in the Act which imposes any time limit for the government to utilise the land for the purpose mentioned in the Act.
Nor is there any provision enabling the owner of the land to claim back the land and to get it restored to him if utilization is not made by the government within a specified period.
All that the Act contains by way of exception is what is seen in section 10A(b).
If at the time of the commencement of the Act, the land is acquired by the government under the relevant acquisition laws or when it is a case of inheritance, the owner could claim exclusion of such land from his land for fixation of his ceiling under the Act.
The second exception itself is further lettered 693 by the provision in section lOB that where succession had opened after the surplus area or any part thereof had been utilised under section 10A(a), the saving specified in favour of an heir by inheritance would not apply in respect of the area so utilised.
To put it short, the government had under the Act an unfettered right without time limit to utilise the land for re settlement of tenants subject to the two exceptions.
Though it is desirable that re settlement should be done as expeditiously as possible, inaction on the part of the government to resettle the tenants will not clothe the owner with a power for restoration of the land.
[697B F] 2.1 The appellant is not entitled to have the best of the two worlds; in other words to have his quota of full 50 acres in Punjab and another 50 acres in Haryana, this is so because Section 88 of the makes the provisions of the Act which was applicable to the old State of Punjab would continue to apply to the new State.
In other words, the order passed before 1.11.1966, which became final, declaring the surplus area would be given effect to and the order would be implemented uninflu enced by the division of the State.
[697F G; 698B] 2.2 A combined reading of clauses 10 and 11 of the Haryana Adaptation of Laws (States and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968 also makes it clear that any order made or anything done or any liability incurred or a right accrued before the 1st November, 1966 would not be affected by the coming into force of the order.
[698G H] 2.3 Clauses 10 and 11 show unambiguously that the re spective State Governments would be entitled to give effect to orders passed before 1st November, 1966, declaring the surplus area by utilising them for the re settlement of the tenants, despite the re organisation of the State of Punjab.
The orders passed will be respected by both the States.
The fact that the land belonging to a particular owner, under fortuitous circumstances, fail in the two newly formed States, will not in any way affect the operation of the orders which had become final prior to 1st November, 1966.
To accept the appellant 's contention would create anomalies.
Persons against whom proceedings under the Act were taken and became final prior to 1st November, 1966, would be entitled to claim lands in both the States wile those whose petitions are pending on the date the States Re organisation Act came into force would be in a disadvantageous position.
This is not the object of the Act.
Nor the scheme behind it.
The States re organisation was a historical accident.
The land owners cannot take advantage of this accident, to the detriment of ejected tenants or tenants in need of re set tlement.
[698H; 699A C] 694
