The respondent accused, a rail passenger, was found by the Customs Officer wearing a waistchain weighing 820 gms., made of pure gold and coated with mercury so as to give an appearance of being made of silver.
The goldsmith who was summoned to the railway station to test the article on the spot certified that it was made of pure gold.
The article was seized and he was charged for offences under section 85 of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 and section 135(1) read with section III of the .
The trial court held that what was seized was an 'ornament ' and not 'primary gold ' and acquit ted the accused respondent of the charge under section 85 of the Gold (Control) Act.
Disregarding the evidence of the gold smith it took the view that the presumption under section 123 of the could not be raised as the Customs official who had made the seizure could not have entertained a rea sonable belief that the article in question was made of smuggled gold.
It also found fault in regard to the proof of report of the Mint Master that the article in question was made of pure gold of the specified fineness.
The High Court confirmed the acquittal and rejected the request made by the prosecution for adducing additional evidence under section 391 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in order to remove the alleged formal defect in the proof of the Mint Master.
678 Allowing the appeal by the State, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The view taken by the High Court that the presumption under section 123 of the that the seized article was smuggled gold could not be raised was altogether unreasonable and cannot be sustained.
[681E F] 1.2 Whether or not the official concerned had seized the article in the "reasonable belief ' that the goods were smuggled goods was not a question on which the Court could sit in appeal.
If prima facie there were grounds to justify the belief the Courts have to accept the officer 's belief regardless of the fact whether the Court of its own might or might not have entertained the same belief.
Section 123 of the does not admit of any other construction.
[682A C] Pukhran vs D.R. Kholi, [1962] 3 Supp.
S.C.R. 866, applied.
In the instant case, the conduct of respondent No.1 in coating the article of pure gold with mercury to make it appear as if it was of silver was itself a conduct which could have provided the basis for entertaining a reasonable belief that the article was a smuggled article.
This was an extremely unusual circumstance which would have aroused the suspicion of anyone.
When the goldsmith was summoned at the railway station to test the article on the spot, and he expressed the opinion that it was made of pure gold, there was no scope for taking any other view.
The acceptance of this evidence would, in view of the provisions of section 123 of the , result in the burden of proof being shifted on the person from whom the article was seized to establish that it was not smuggled gold, which would justify raising the presumption that the article in question was made of smuggled gold.
[683C; 681E] lsardas Daulat Ram & Ors.
vs The Union of India & Ors., [1962] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 358, referred to. 2.
The High Court was altogether unjustified in reject ing the application of the prosecution invoking the powers of the Court under section 391 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for reception of additional evidence.
The prayer was reject ed by the High Court on the ground that it did not consider it 'expedient in the interests of justice to open a new vista of evidence ' in view of the fact that the offence had taken place six years back.
The mere fact that six years had elapsed, for which time lag the prosecution was in no way responsible was no good ground for refusing to act in order to promote the ends of justice in an age when 679 delays in the Court have become very common.
The opinion of the Mint Master, which had admittedly been placed on record, though had not been formally proved, completely supported the case of the prosecution that the gold was of the speci fied purity.
To deny the opportunity to remove the formal defect was to abort a case against an alleged economic offender.
The matter remitted to the High Court.
An appro priate direction shall be issued for recording of the evi dence to prove the report of the Mint Master.
[683F H; 684A; E F] Ends of justice are not satisfied only when the accused in a criminal case is acquitted.
The Community acting through the State and the Public Prosecutor is also entitled to justice.
The cause of the Community deserves equal treat ment at the hands of the court in the discharge of its judicial functions.
The entire Community is aggrieved if the economic offenders who ruin the economy of the State are not brought to book.
[684A B]
