The petitioner, who was employed as Deputy Chief Air Hostess in Air India, flied this petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, alleging that while the employees of Indian origin have to retire at 35 years with extension till 45, those of foreign origin can go beyond 45 years, which is discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
Accordingly, prayer was made to quash the letter sent to her retiring her on 28.2.1987, to declare Regulation 46(1)(c) of the Service Regulations ultra vires, to direct reconsideration of the decision in Air India vs Nargesh Meerza; , and to declare that the petitioner will retire only on her attaining the age of 58 years.
In the. counter affidavit it was alleged that Air India has not fixed any higher retirement age for Air Hostesses who are recruited outside India, that Air India has appoint ed a few Air Hostesses abroad who belong to different na tionalities and speak different European languages with a view to deal with passengers conversant only with 728 these languages, that Air India has been encouraging its Indian Air Hostesses to learn European languages and in view of this 'position Air India is in the process of phasing out Air Hostesses of foreign origin, that service conditions and terms of appointment of the Air Hostesses appointed abroad are different than the service conditions of Air Hostesses appointed in India and that no Air Hostess of foreign origin is promoted to the post of Deputy Chief Air Hostess, Addi tional Chief Air Hostess or Chief Air Hostess.
These promo tional avenues are available only to the Air Hostesses appointed in India.
Dismissing the Petition, HELD: (Per Khalid, J) 1.
Identical questions were raised and considered at length by this Court in Air India vs Nargesh Meerza (supra) and that decision is binding.
[730A B] 2.
Air India 's policy now is to phase out Air Hostesses recruited outside India and restore uniformity in their retirement age.
[731B C] 3.
The petitioner is an Air Hostess and does not belong to a separate class.
The duties and functions of Deputy Chief Air Hostess includes operation service as a regular line Air Hostess and she will be required to perform the same functions as that of other Air Hostesses.
[731F] 4.
Air Hostesses who are recruited outside India are not entitled to the benefits of promotion to which India Air Hostesses are entitled.
This should satisfy the petitioner in the instant case.
[731E] Per Oza, J.) 1.
Air India being a Corporation is for all purposes State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and it cannot follow a foreign Corporation in treating Indians differently and discriminate against them.
[732B C] Air India etc.
vs Nargesh Meerza & Others etc.
; , , referred to.
Air India in order to avoid committing an offence abroad cannot disregard Article 14 of the Indian Constitu tion.
An Indian citizen in such a situation should prefer to walk off from a State where he may 729 have to flout Indian Constitution to save himself from committing of an offence.
Air India should abide by the requirements of Article 14 rather than anything else.
[732F G] 3.
It has been conceded that in view of section 6(4) of the United Kingdom Sex Discrimination Act, 1975 it will not be a contravention of that law to have the same age of retirement for an Air Hostess recruited in U.K. as is provided for an Air Hostess recruited of Indian origin.
[733B C] 4.
In view of the policy of Air India that henceforth Air Hostesses recruited anywhere will be treated in the same manner as Air Hostesses recruited from India no interference is called for.
[733C D]
