The prosecution alleged that the appellants father and son, had committed the murder of five innocent persons.
The root cause of the crime was said to be that one of the daughters of the deceased had taken a Harijan as her hus band, and for that the appellants were treating them as lower caste.
The evidence showed that the appellants had assaulted and axed the wife, husband and his mother without any provocation from them.
A neighbor, who asked as to why the appellants were murdering those people, was also axed to death.
A young girl aged about 14 years, who was standing near the scene of occurrence, was also not spared.
The blood thirst of the appellants was so intense that they then knocked and tried to break open the door of the room where P.W. Nos. 1 and 2 were hiding to save themselves, and they left the place only when the door could not be broken.
The appellants were convicted under section 302, I.P.C. and sentenced to death.
The High Court observed that the case was one of the gravest killings and ghastly murders, that the act of the appellants was extremely brutal, revolting, gruesome and shocking to the judicial conscience, and that the nature of crime being so cruel and barbaric it was necessary to impose the maximum punishment under the law as a measure of social necessity to work as a deterrent to other potential offenders.
Dismissing the Appeals of the appellants, the Court, 711 HELD: There is no alternative but to confirm the death sentence.
The evidence has been considered minutely by the courts below.
It will be a mockery of justice to permit these appellants to escape the extreme penalty of law when faced with such evidence and such cruel acts.
To give the lesser punishment for them would be to render the justicing system of this country suspect.
The common man will then lose faith in courts, for in such cases he understands and appreciates the language of deferrence more than the reform ative jargon.
To say so, is not to ignore the need for a reformative approach in the sentencing process.
[713A C]
