The appellants were tried by the Court of Sessions on charges under section 302 IPC read with section 34 IPC and section 323 IPC read with section 34 IPC, and the Sessions Judge acquitted the appellants or ' all the charges laid against them on the grounds: (i) that there was no proper explanation for the inordinate delay in reporting the crime to the police; (ii) that there was also no adequate proof of any motive; (iii) that it was not a pre planned attack; and (iv) that the testimony of P.W. 2 and P.W. 6 who were exam ined as eye witnesses to prove the occurrence, could not be safely accepted and acted upon as true.
In the absence or ' any independent corroboration or ' the testimony given by them, since they had also been appearing as prosecution witnesses in a large number of police cases.
The High Court, however, in appeal by the respondent State made an independent reappraisal of the evidence and set aside the acquittal, merely on the ground that as a result of such reappreciation it was inclined to reach a conclusion different from the one recorded by the Sessions Judge.
Allowing the appeal by the appellants, this Court, HELD: 1.
The approach made by the High Court to a con sideration of the appeal was wholly vitiated by a manifest illegality inasmuch as the High Court has acted in total disregard of the principles repeatedly laid down by the Supreme Court delineating the restricted grounds on which alone interference may be made by a court of appeal with an order of acquittal passed by a lower Court.
[751D] The High Court in the instant case, has not found that the reasons given by the Sessions Judge for discarding the testimony of P.W. 2 and 748 P.W. 6 were either unreasonable or perverse.
[751B] 2.1 The mere fact that the Appellate Court is inclined on a reappreciation of the evidence to reach a conclusion which is at variance with the one recorded in the order of acquittal passed by the Court below will not constitute a valid and sufficient ground for setting aside the acquittal.
[751C] 2.2 The jurisdiction of the Appellate Court in dealing with an appeal against an order of acquittal is circum scribed by the limitation that no interference is to be made with the order of acquittal unless the approach made by the lower Court to the consideration of the evidence in the case is vitiated by some manifest illegality or the conclusion recorded by the Court below is such which could not have been possibly arrived at by any court acting reasonably and judiciously and is, therefore, liable to be characterised as perverse.
[751D E] 3.
Where two views are possible on an appraisal of the evidence adduced in the case and the Court below has taken a view which is a plausible one, the Appellate Court cannot legally interfere with an order of acquittal even if it is of the opinion that the view taken by the court below on its consideration of the evidence is erroneous.
[751E]
