The respondents who were subscribers to a Kuri (Chit Fund) in 1962, committed default after they had prized the tickets and realised the amounts.
The bonds executed by them contained a provision that in case of default they would be liable to pay all the future instalments in a lumpsum with interest at 12% without giving any credit for the dividend.
The suit filed for realisation of the principal sum with interest and the balance Kuri due was decreed by the trial court in 1965.
In appeal before the High Court it was con tended for the defendant respondents that the stipulation in the agreement that on default the Kuri foreman would be entitled to recover the entire balance amount with 12% interest in a lump sum without giving credit to the sub scribers was unconscionable and penal and hence not enforce able.
The Division Bench took the view that the Kuri trans action and the contract between the Kuri foreman and the subscribers burdened them with unconscionable interest and were unreasonable.
It, therefore, partly allowed the appeal by modifying the decree refixing the interest.
Allowing the appeal by appellants plaintiffs and dis missing the appeal by other subscribers by special leave, the Court, HELD: Where a contract provides for payment of money in instalments and contains also a stipulation that on default being committed in paying any of the instalments the whole sum shall become payable at once, the true test for deter mining whether the said condition is in the 768 nature of a penalty is to find out whether the amounts referred to in the agreement were debita in praesenti al though solvenda in futuro or whether they were to become due to the promisee on the respective dates when the instalments were payable.
[771E G] If on proper consideration of a contract it is found that the whole amount was on the date of the bond a debt due but the creditor for the convenience of the debtor allowed it to be paid by instalments then the stipulation would not be penal.
If on the other hand the court comes to the con clusion that the debt becomes due only on the respective dates fixed for the instalments, the stipulation would be in the nature of a penalty.
[771G H; 772A B] In the instant case there was nothing unconscionable about the contract.
A subscriber to a Kuri truly and really becomes a debtor for the prized amount paid to him, The facility of repayment in instalments is only a concessional facility.
The stipulation enabling the foreman to withdraw this facility on default of punctual payment of the instal ment could not, therefore, be said to be penal.
[770G H; 771A B] P.K. Achuthan vs State Bank of Travancore, Calicut, , approved.
