The New Okhla Development Area Authority (NOIDA) consti tuted under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 for the development of an indus trial and urban township and for matters connected there with, announced two schemes, called LIG EWS and MIG Schemes, and invited applications for allotment of houses constructed and proposed to be constructed.
Later on, it decided to reserve a certain percentage of houses in the first scheme for some categories of persons(1) persons whose land had been acquired for development, (2) entrepreneurs of the area and their employees, (3) employees of NOIDA Authority, U.P. State Government undertakings, U.P. State Development Au thorities and U.P. Government, (4) employees of Central Government, Government of India Public Undertakings, Inter national Organisations, (5) political sufferers, and (6) nominees of HUDCO.
For the MIG Group of houses, reservation was mentioned in the original advertisement.
Forty disappointed applicants for allotment of LIG/EWS houses filed a writ petition questioning reservation in favour of entrepreneurs.
Another group of six persons, who had applied for allotment of MIG houses, also filed writ petitions.
After interim orders were made in these two sets of petitions on March 12, 1982 several hundred more peti tions in each category were also filed.
All these petitions were heard together on April 30, 1984.
As a result of the various orders made by the Court from time to time, forty petitioners of the first category and five petitioners of the second category were accommodated in the two 793 schemes, and all those who took advantage of the order dated April 30, 1984 were also accommodated.
Disposing of the writ petitions, the Court, HELD: Keeping in view the object of the Act under which the NOIDA Authority was constituted, prima facie, the reser vation in favour of political sufferers and employees of Central government, Government of India public undertakings and international organisations was bad, while reservation in favour of persons whose land has been acquired, entrepre neurs of NOIDA and their employees, employees of NOIDA and nominees of HUDCO was sound and justifiable.
[798G H; 799A] In matters of this nature where apart from the fact that rights of other parties intervene straightaway when allot ment is made in their favour, it is not in public interest that housing schemes should be kept in abeyance or hanging fire when the need is urgent.
[799B C] If some of the petitioners have failed to act with that degree of promptitude which is expected in such matters, they are not entitled to any relief from the Court.
However, by virtue of the orders made by the Court from time to time, some of them have been benefited by allotment of houses.
Such benefits as have accrued to them will stand and no further orders are necessary.
[799C D]
