On the date of incident when the deceased was returning from the 'house of PW 2 after reciting Bhagbat, where some other villagers including the respondent were also present, and reached near the house of the respondent he was assaulted by the respondent.
On hearing a hue and cry several villagers including PWs.
2, 3, 4 and 5 ran to the place and saw the deceased lying on the ground in a pool of blood with a head injury.
The respondent along with his mother and wife were tending the deceased and wiping out blood.
The deceased told the villagers that the respondent had assaulted him.
The respondent stated that during the day time his bell metal utensils had been stolen and he was keeping a watch for the thief, he saw a person coming inside his premises and think ing him to be a thief he dealt a lathi blow but subsequently discovered that it was the deceased.
The deceased also told his wife that he had been assaulted by the respondent.
On the basis of the evidence on record the trial court convict ed and sentenced the respondent under section 304 Part Il of the IPC.
On appeal the High Court accepted the defence plea and held that the respondent had not committed any offence and was protected under section 79 of the IPC and acquitted him.
Allowing the appeal of the State, 786 HELD: 1.
The judgment of acquittal entered by the High Court was apparently erroneous and has caused manifest miscarriage of justice.
It is surprising that the High Court should have given credence to the defence plea of mistake of fact under section 79 of the IPC 1860.
[787E F] 2.
Under section 79 of the IPC although an act may not be justified by law, yet if it is done under a mistake of fact, in the belief of good faith that it is justified by law it will not be an offence.
The question of good faith must be considered with reference to the position of the accused and the circumstances under which he acted.
In view of section 52 of the IPC "good faith" requires not logical infallibility but due care and attention.
The question of good faith is always a question of fact to be determined in accordance with the proved facts and circumstances of each case.
It may be laid down as general rule that an alleged offender is deemed to have acted under that state of things which he in good faith and on reasonable grounds believed to exist when he did the act alleged to be an offence.
Section 79 is attracted where the circumstances showed that the accused acted under a bona fide belief that he was legally justified in doing the act owing to ignorance of the existence of relevant facts, or mistake as to them.
[789A E; 790A] Rattan Lal and Dhirajlal 's Law of Crimes, 23rd edn., p. 199 and Russel on crimes, vol.
1, p. 76; 79 relied upon and Emperor vs Jagmohan Thukral & Anr., AIR (1947) All. 99, Dhara Singh vs Emperor, AIR (1947) Lahore 249 and Chiranji vs State, AIR (1952) Nag. 282, distinguished.
But the present case was not the one where a person being ignorant of the existence of the relevant facts or mistaken as to them is guilty of conduct which may produce harmful result which he never intended.
There was complete absence of good faith on the part of the respondent.
Un doubtedly the deceased and the respondent were having strained relations.
From the dying declaration as well as the extrajudicial confession it is apparent that the de ceased after the recital of Bhagbat had gone near to the pond to take the bell metal utensils.
Apparently, the re spondent was waiting for an opportunity to settle the ac count when he struck the deceased with the lathi blow and there was no occasion for him in the circumstances proved to have believed that he was striking at a thief.
Even if he was a thief, that fact by itself would not justify the respondent dealing a lathi blow on the head of the deceased.
The deceased had not effected an entry into the house nor he was anywhere near it.
It appears that the respondent stealthily followed him and took the opportunity to settle score by dealing him with lathi 787 with great force on a vulnerable part of the body like the head which resulted in his death.
There is no suggestion that he wielded the lathi in the right of self defence.
The respondent, therefore, must face the consequences.
Although it cannot be said from the circumstances appearing that the respondent had any intention to kill the deceased, he must in the circumstances be attributed with knowledge when he struck the deceased on the head with a lathi that it was likely to cause his death.
Therefore, the respondent is convicted under section 304 Part I1 of the IPC and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years.
[791C G]
