The appellant alongwith others was prosecuted for caus ing the death of Sheroo Lala.
It was alleged that during the exchange of hot words between the party of the deceased and the party of the appellant, the appellant inflicted a stab wound in the stomach of Sheroo with a Rampuri knife as a result of which he died.
On trial the appellant was convict ed for an offence under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to imprisonment for life and on appeal his convic tion and sentence was maintained.
In the appeal to this Court, on behalf of the appellant it was contended; (1) that Maruti one of the accused persons had a contused lacerated wound on the head on the right occipital parietal region and the defence version was that when exchange started between Sheroo and Maruti, first Maruti was assaulted and then in exchange, one another accused took a knife and gave a blow to the deceased and thus plea of the accused was that this injury was inflicted on Sheroo in the exercise of right of private defence; and (2) that both the Courts below came to the conclusion that as soon as Sheroo and his party arrived near the hand cart of Badshah, there was a hot exchange between the two sides.
The witnesses examined by the prosecution have not clearly stated what words were uttered and the trial court felt that the language was obscene and probably the witnesses did not like to mention whereas the High Court felt that the wit nesses were not in a position to mention the exact words.
However, both the Courts did reach a conclusion that there was a hot exchange between the two groups and, therefore, in 902 such a situation it could not be doubted that the party of the accused was provocated and on such grave and sudden provocation at the heat of the moment, the appellant who was carrying a knife took it out and inflicted only one blow and did not even attempt a second blow and the findings of the both the Courts is that this happened at the spur of the moment without pre meditation and in the heat of the passion and, therefore, at best the appellant could be convicted for an offence under section 304 Part II because in these circum stances no intention of causing death could be attributed to the appellant and since he has already served for more than 7 years of sentence, no useful purpose would be served by sending him to serve a short period of sentence.
On behalf of the respondent State, it was contended that there was some previous trouble between the parties which furnish some motive and this opportunity was taken to seek vengeance.
Allowing the Appeal, HELD: 1.
The conviction of the appellant is altered from one under section 302 to section 304 Part I I.P.C. and since the appellant has already served out more than 7 years, he is sentenced to sentence already undergone.
[909C] 2.
The plea of right of private defence taken by the accused persons including the appellant has not been accept ed by the Courts below.
Both the Courts below have rejected the story that it was not the appellant but another accused who wiped out a knife and inflicted the injury on Sheroo and that first injury was caused on Maruti.
There is no evidence to indicate that there was any material sufficient to come to the conclusion that it was Maruti who was assaulted first.
On the contrary the consistent evidence indicated that on arrival of Sheroo it was Maruti who started the verbal exchange and in view of this evidence, the submission that the injury was inflicated on Sheroo in the exercise of right of private defence cannot be accepted.
[906H; 907A B] 3.
The Trial Court was right in concluding that "some thing provocative seems to have happened".
It is apparent that the prosecution witnesses did not say or give out what words were spoken.
The only inference could be that if those words were given out, it would have damaged the prosecution case.
[908B C] 4.
On the arrival of the complainants ' party some hot exchange began.
Words were spoken, the witnesses have cate gorically stated that 903 they were speaking loudly and still prosecution witnesses have chosen to give excuse for not speaking out words by saying that they could not hear those words and this clearly goes to show that the words used by the deceased and his friends were such which caused provocation.
Both the Courts came to the conclusion that there was no pre meditation.
It was at the spur of the moment and in the heat of passion and it is also not disputed that only one blow was inflicted by the present appellant and the injury ultimately caused proved to be fatal.
[908C E] 5.
The story of some earlier trouble and the motive suggested by the prosecution has not been accepted by both the Courts below and it is also clear that there was not a pre arranged plan.
Admittedly it was by chance that the party of Sheroo also chose to go to the same spot i.e. hand cart of Badshah at that odd hour at night where the appellant and his friends had already reached.
It is not as if seeing the deceased Sheroo and his friends that the appellant and his friends reached.
On the contrary, Sheroo and his friends arrived later.
In this view of the matter, both the Courts were right in coming to the conclusion that hot exchange of filthy language resulted in some kind of provocation in the heat of passion without premeditation this injury was inflicted and in the circumstances it could not be held that it was inflicted with an intention to cause death.
The only intention which could be attributed to the appellant in the circumstances of this case could be to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.
Conse quently, the appellant could only be convicted for an of fence under section 304 Part I. [908G H; 909A B]
