A departmental enquiry against the respondent, a Head Con stable, was held by the District Superintendent of Police.
During the enquiry the District Superintendent of Police himself became a witness and gave evidence at two stages against the respondent, his statement being recorded by a Deputy Superintendent of Police.
The District Superintend ent of Police then found the respondent guilty and on April 20, 1948, passed an order of dismissal against him.
The respondent went up in appeal to the Deputy Inspector General of Police but the appeal was dismissed on May 7, 1949.
The respondent then filed a revision application to the Inspec tor General of Police which was also dismissed on April 22, 1950.
Thereupon, the respondent filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court praying for the setting aside of the order of dismissal.
The High Court held that the rules of natural justice and fair play had been disregarded and accordingly, quashed the proceed ings and set aside the three several orders.
The State obtained a certificate of fitness and appealed.
Held, (percuriam) that the District Superintendent of Police who had acted both as the judge and as a witness had dis qualified himself from presiding over the enquiry.
The procedure adopted was contrary to the rules of natural justice and fair play.
Decisions and orders based on such procedure are invalid and not binding.
There is no rule with regard to certiorari, as there is with mandamus, that it will lie only where there is no other equally effective remedy.
The existence of another adequate remedy may be taken into consideration in the exercise of the discretion.
If an inferior Court or tribunal of first instance acts without jurisdiction or in excess of it or contrary to the rules of natural justice, the superior Court may quite properly issue a writ of certiorari to correct the error, even if an appeal to another inferior Court or tribu nal was available, whether recourse was or was not had to it.
This would be so all the more in the case of departmen tal tribunals composed of persons without adequate legal training and background.
76 596 Janardan Reddy vs The State of Hyderabad, ; referred to.
King vs Postmaster General, Exparte Carmichael (1928) i K.B. 291 ; Rex vs Wandsworths justices, Exparte Read, (1942) I K.B. 281; Khurshed Modi vs Rent Controller, Bombay, A. [.R. ; Assistant Collector of Customs vs Soorajmull Nagarmull, relied on.
Held, (per section R. Das, C.J., Venkatarama Ayyar, Jafer Imam and Sarkar, JJ.
Bose, J., dissenting) that article 226 of the Constitution is not retrospective and the High Court could not exercise its powers under article 226 to quash the order of dismissal passed before the commencement of the Constitu tion.
It is wrong to say that the order of dismissal passed on April 20, 1948, merged in the order in the appeal dated May 7, 1949, and the two orders merged in the order in the revision dated April 22, 1950, or that the original order of dismissal became final only on the passing of the order in revision.
The original order of dismissal was operative on its own strength.
Per Bose, J. The High Court had jurisdiction to quash all the orders, as the proceedings should be regarded as still pending till the order in revision was passed on April 22, 195o.
The District Superintendent of Police was acting in a judicial capacity and was bound to observe principles of natural justice.
These principles he ignored.
