The prosecution alleged that the deceased had some land dispute with one of the accused and his two brothers, that the deceased was done away through the instrumentality of the appellant and that his body with the throat cut was found by the road side.
The brother in law of the deceased identified the dead body and lodged information with the police.
After investigation, the appellant and the other accused were arrested.
The weapon of offence was produced by the other accused.
Both the accused were remanded to judi cial custody for the alleged murder of the deceased.
The appellant escaped and was declared as absconder.
The other accused was discharged for want of prima facie case against him.
After a long lapse of time, the appellant was apprehend ed and was committed to sessions.
On the basis of circum stantial evidence that the appellant was seen with the deceased on the evening preceding the day on which the deceased was found dead, that a dhoti and shirt, stained with human blood, were recovered from his possession when he was arrested and that an extra judicial confession was made by him when he was arrested after absconding, he was con victed under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and sen tenced to imprisonment for life.
The High Court having confirmed the conviction and sentence, the appellant ap pealed to this Court.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, 1097 HELD: 1.
It is a settled rule of circumstantial evidence that each one of the circumstances has to be established beyond doubt and all the circumstances put together must lead to the only inference and that is of the guilt of the accused.
[1101E] 2.1(a) It is not in dispute that the appellant was seen with the deceased on the evening preceding the night when the deceased is alleged to have been killed.
This fact has been established by the evidence of P.Ws. 3 and 4 and the appellant himself has admitted it, even though his caSe Was that the throat of the deceased was cut by the other ac cused.
Even the wife of the deceased has deposed that the appellant had told her that her husband was lying dead.
It is clear that only on the basis of this circumstance the appellant could not have been convicted.
[1099C D] 2.1(b) As regards recovery of a shirt and dhoti with blood stains, there is no evidence in the report of the Serologist about the blood group and, therefore, the evi dence could not positively be connected with the deceased.
The evidence of blood group is only conclusive to connect the blood stains with the deceased.
In the absence of such evidence, this could not be a circumstance on the basis of which any inference could be drawn.
[110lB D] 2.1(c) Regarding the extra judicial confession by the appellant, made after a long lapse of time, no reliance could be placed on it, especially in view of the circum stances in which the appellant was apprehended and the statement made, and also because of the denial by one of the two witnesses that the appellant had made by confession.
[1100F 1101A] 2.2 The only circumstances which could be said to have been established is of the appellant being with the deceased in the evening and on that circumstance alone the inference of guilt could not be drawn especially in the circumstances of the case where another accused person from whom an in strument of offence was recovered and who had a grudge against the deceased, had been let off.
[1101F] 3.
The conviction and sentence passed against the appel lant are set aside.
[1101G]
