The first respondent instituted a proceeding under Section 96(1) of the Gujarat Cooperative Societies Act, 1961, for setting aside the Resolution, expelling him from the membership of the appellant Society.
The said resolution had been duly approved by the Registrar of Societies under Section 36 of the Act.
The dispute was referred by the Registrar under Section 98(1) of the Act to his nominee for a decision, who dismissed the claim.
The Tribunal allowed the appeal of first respondent and remanded the matter to the Registrar 's nominee for a fresh decision.
During the trial, upon an application made by the appellant Society under sub section (2) of Section 96 that the dispute did not survive as the expulsion had already been decided in the collateral proceedings and the Registrar had accorded his approval under Section 36 of the Act, the District Registrar held that the first respondent was pre cluded from contending that the impugned Resolution was illegal since he had not preferred any appeal against the approval by the Registrar, that the doctrine of res judicata was attracted and, therefore, there was no dispute in exist ence between the parties.
This order was taken up in revision under Section 150 sub clause (9) of the Act before the Tribunal, which held that the District Registrar had no jurisdiction to re open the question as to whether or not the matter referred by first respondent was a dispute within the meaning of sub section (1) of Section 96 at the subsequent stage, and having already decided that the matter constituted a dispute under Section 96(1) at an earlier stage, the powers under sub section (2) of Section 96 were exhausted and he was not competent to review his earlier decision.
In appeal, the High Court held that the Tribunal was right in holding that the Registrar had no jurisdiction to revise or review his 895 earlier decision that the dispute raised by the first re spondent fell within the ambit of the description of dispute within the meaning of sub section (1) of Section 96, and that it had revisional jurisdiction; and also granted spe cial leave to appeal.
In appeal before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that when a dispute was referred to the Registrar, and he ultimately gave a decision on merits it was no doubt appealable but when the Registrar entertained the dispute and sent it to his nominee, that was an order against which a revision lay to the Tribunal.
Dismissing.the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. Clause (9) of Section 150 confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal to call for and examine the record of any proceeding.
The word 'proceeding ' here is qualified by the phrase, in which appeal lies to it After final disposal of these proceedings i.e. decision of the dispute by the Regis trar or by his nominee, an appeal will lie to the Tribunal and, therefore, the High Court was right in holding that the Tribunal had jurisdiction to call for and examine the record of such proceedings.
[899D E] The phrase 'any proceedings in which an appeal lies to it ' in clause (9) of Section 150 makes it clear that if the proceedings where the final order is appealable, then it could not be said that these are the proceedings where an appeal lies to the Tribunal, and it is in these proceedings that the jurisdiction has been conferred on the Tribunal to call for the record and examine the matter.
[899E G] 2.
When the respondent submitted his dispute to the Registrar and the Registrar, after examining the matter, came to the conclusion that it was a dispute which could be entertained within the scope of Section 96 and, therefore, referred it to his nominee for decision, there is no doubt that the Registrar exercised jurisdiction under Section 96 and, therefore, the High Court was right in coming to the conclusion that once the Registrar took this decision, he had no power to review his order.
[900A C] Krishnarao Bakaramji Hadge vs The State of Maharashtra, referred to.
