Sub section (1) of section 4 of the requires every establishment in public sector to notify vacancy in any employment to the employment exchange.
Sub section (2) lays down similar requirement in respect of every establish ment in private sector, while sub section
(4) lays down that nothing in sub sections
(1) and (2) shall be deemed to impose any obligation upon any employer to recruit any person through the employment exchanges to fill any vacancy merely because that vacancy has been notified.
An 'establishment ' is de fined in section 2(e) of the Act to mean any office or any place where any industry, trade, business or occupation is carried on, an 'establishment in public sector 'in section 2(f) as an establishment owned, controlled or managed by the Government or a Department of the Government, and an 'establishment in private sector ' in section 2(g) as an establishment which is not an establishment in public sector.
Instructions issued by the Government of India from time to time enjoined upon employers Central Government offices, quasiGovernment institutions and statutory organi sations and establishments in the private sector to restrict their field of choice for vacancies to which the Act applied in the first instance, to candidates sponsored by employment exchanges.
A question arose as to whether an 'establishment in the public sector ', or an 'establishment in the private sector ', as defined in the Act, could make appointments to posts to which the Act applies, of 911 persons not sponsored by the employment exchanges, and whether the Act covers Government establishments also.
The High Court held that the Act had no application to Government establishments, that it casts no obligation either on the public sector establishments or on the private sector establishments to make the appointment from among candidates sponsored by the employment exchange only, and that any insistence that candidates sponsored by the employ ment exchanges alone should be appointed would be contrary to the right guaranteed by articles 14 and 16 of the Constitu tion.
Disposing of the Appeal of the Union of India, the Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court was wrong in holding that the Act was not applicable to Government establishments.
If the definition of 'establishment ' in section 2(e).
which includes an 'office ', is read alongside the section 2(1 '), it will be clear that Government offices are also included in the expression 'establishment in public sector '.
[914E] 2.1 There is no provision in the Act which obliges an employer to employ those persons only who have been spon sored by the employment exchanges.
Section 4(4) of the Act makes it explicitly clear that the employer is under no obligation to recruit any person through the employment exchanges to fill in a vacancy merely because that vacancy has been notified under sections 4(1) and 4(2).
The compulsion extends only to notification of vacancies that may occur in the establishment before filling them up.
[915G H; 916G] 2.2 The object of the Act is not to restrict, but to enlarge the field of choice so that the employer may choose the best and the most efficient and to provide an opportuni ty to the worker to have his claim for appointment consid ered without having to knock at every door for employment.
[918B C] 3.
The Government is at perfect liberty to issue in structions to its own departments and organisations to adhere to the rule that not merely vacancies should be notified to the employment exchanges but the vacancies should also be filled by candidates sponsored by the employ ment exchanges, provided the instructions do not contravene any constitutional provision or any statute.
But these instructions cannot bind other bodies which are created by statute and which function under the authority of statute.
In the absence of any statutory presumption, the statutory authority may adopt and follow such instructions if it thinks 912 fit.
Otherwise, the Government may not compel statutory bodies appointment of persons from among candidates spon sored by employment exchanges only.
Private employers cannot be so compelled by any instructions issued by the Govern ment.
[921C E] 4.
Any restriction that employment in Government Depart ments should be through the medium of employment exchanges does not offend articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In public employment, it is necessary to eliminate arbitrari ness and favouritism and introduce uniformity of standards and orderliness.
There has to be an element of procedural fairness in the recruitment.
A public employer cannot choose to receive applications for employment where and when he pleases and to make appointments as he likes.
The insistence on recruitment through employment exchanges therefore, advances rather than restricts the rights guaranteed by articles 14 and 16.
[922E; B D]
