By a notification dated August 1, 1974 the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub rule(1) of Rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, exempted automobile tyres from excise duty leviable thereon as was in excess of fifty five per cent ad valorem.
Another notification issued on June 16, 1977 exempted all excisable goods from duty to the extent of the duty already paid on the inputs.
A further notification dated July 14, 1978 exempted tyres and tubes from so much of the duty leviable thereon (read with any relevant notification issued under the said subrule(1) of Rule 8 in force for the time being) as was in excess of eightyseven and a half per cent of such duty if produced in any factory which commenced production for the first time earlier than the 1st day of April 1976, and seventy five per cent of such duty if produced in any factory which commenced production for the first time on or after the 1st day of April, 1976.
A dispute arosse in respect of the latter two notifica tion as to which of them was first to be given effect to.
The Tribunal accepted the Department 's contention that effect had to be given in the first instance to the notifi cation dated June 16, 1977, and then to the notification dated July 14, 1978.
In this appeal, it was contended for the appellant that to give effect to the second notification and thereafter to the third notification would mean that the assessee would not be getting full credit for the entire duty paid on the inputs but only a percentage of it and that there would, therefore, be double taxation at least to that extent.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, 199 HELD: 1.
The Tribunal was right in taking the view that effect had to be given first to the notification dated June 16, 1977 and then to the notification dated July 14, 1978.
The words "read with any relevant notification issued under the said sub rule (1) of Rule 8 in force for the time being" super added by the latter notification show conclusively that the earlier notification dealing with exemption to the extent of the duty paid on the inputs which was already in force had first to be given effect to.
[201E G] Assistant Collector of Central Excise vs Madras Rubber Factory Limited, Civil Appeal No. 3195 of 1979, distin guished.
There is no general principle that there can be no 'double taxation ' in the levy of excise duty.
The Court may lean in favour of a construction which will avoid double taxation, but in the instant case there does not appear to be any lean question of construction at all.
[202B C]
