The defendant had an overdraft account with a particular branch of the plaintiff bank in the city.
A suit was insti tuted against him by that branch in 1952 for recovery of certain sums with interest.
He died on 6th November 1960.
The widow informed another branch of the bank of the death of her husband on 20th December, 1960.
The applications for impleading the legal representa tives of the defendant and for setting aside abatement were made in 1968, about 8 years after the death of the defend ant.
The delay in making these applications was sought to be explained with the plea that the concerned branch of the bank had no knowledge of the death of the defendant till it was informed by the other branch.
The High Court rejected the applications on the ground that no sufficient cause was shown for setting aside abate ment.
It held that an intimation of the death of the defend ant to the bank in the other branch could not be treated as no intimation to the branch which was the plaintiff in the suit.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: The High Court was in error in rejecting the application to set aside abatement and to condone delay.
[1095C] All branches of a bank could not be imputed with con structive knowledge of the death of a customer simply be cause one of the branches had been informed of it, for notice to one branch of a bank is no notice to the other branches.
[1092H; 1094H] 1091 In the instant case, it is not stated or proved that the branch which had filed the suit had information earlier about the death of the defendant.
It is evident from the record that even on 3rd June, 1968 the counsel for the defendant did not know about the death of the defendant.
The fact that a particular branch of the plaintiff bank had knowledge of the death was not sufficient to impute the concerned branch with constructive notice.
[1093A; 1094A, H; 1095A] (1918) The Times Law Reports, Vol.
XXXV, p. 142 referred to.
The provisions of 0. 22, R. 10 A of the Civil Procedure Code requiring a pleader appearing for a party to the suit to inform the court when he comes to know of the death of that party, whereupon the court is enjoined to give notice of such death to the other party, casts a duty only on the pleader and is not absolutely mandatory.
[1095B]
