The respondent.
along with three others, was tried for offences under sections 395,397 and 412 of the Indian Penal Code.
The prosecution alleged that the respondent had delib erately dashed his car against the car of P.W. 5 on the Delhi Jaipur Road, while the latter was traveling to Jaipur alongwith his wife, PW 6 and daughter.
Five persons, two or three of them armed with revolvers and others with daggers came out of the respondent 's car.
One of them gave a couple of knife blows in the chest of PW 5, and another.
who was armed with a pistol, fired shots in the air and scared away drivers of some trucks who were passing along that road and tried to come to the aid,of PW 5 who was crying out for help.
One of the assailants removed the ear rings, necklace and wrist watch from the person of PW 6.
and in that proc ess, one of her ear lobes was cut as under.
The wrist watch and purse of PW 5 and three attache cases on the luggage carrier of his car were also forcibly removed and taken away.
Before the culprits left the spot in their car with all the booty.
a shot was fired by one of them which hit PW 5 on the forehead.
PW 5 somehow managed to drive back his car to Gurgaon and narrated the whole incident to his part ner and thereafter he and his wife were medically examined and treated at Gurgaon Civil Hospital, for the various injuries that were found on them.
Thereafter an F.I.R. was lodged with the Gurgaon Police.
The accused were arrested after a fairly long delay and two test identification pa rades were held.
one separately for the respondent accused at his request and other for the remaining suspects.
The respondent was identified by the victims.
On the basis of the information furnished by the accused some of the arti cles of the victims were recovered.
1065 The trial court held that the charge against the re spondent under section 395 I.P.C. was proved beyond all reasonable doubt and convicted and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for four years.
The other three ac cused were acquitted on the ground that their participation in the crime was not sufficiently proved and hence they were entitled to the benefit of doubt.
The High Court, however, allowed the appeal of the respondent by extending the benefit of doubt to him and set aside his conviction and sentence.
Allowing the State 's appeal by Special leave.
HELD: 1.
A case of highway robbery, such as this, should have been dealt with much more seriousness and care than has been bestowed on it by the High Court.
Its approach to the case and the conclusion recorded by it cannot but be cha racterised as manifestly illegal and perverse.
The trial court has rightly concluded that from the evidence of the victims the participation of the respondent in the commis sion of the offence had been proved beyond all doubt.
[1069B C] 2.1 The High Court, by a most perfunctory judgment, set aside the judgment of the trial court, insofar as the trial court had convicted the respondent herein, and acquitted him.
It has dealt with the case in a very superficial and casual manner and has not even taken care to discuss the evidence adduced in the case, before it proceeded to inter fere with the well considered judgment of the trial court.
[1068G H] 2.2.
The trial court after an elaborate and analytical discussion of the whole evidence recorded the conclusion that the participation of the respondent in the commission of the crime was established beyond all doubt inasmuch as he had been identified by the both the victims, and their testimony narrating the details of the incident of robbery and assault was not shaken in cross examination and deserved to be accepted as wholly truthful, [1068D E] 2.3 Both the victims, PW 5 and 6, had clearly identified the respondent at the test identification parade as well as in the court and they had clearly and unequivocally disposed that he was one of the assailants who took part in the robbery and assault.
The trial court has given sound and convincing reasons for accepting and acting upon their testimony.
The High Court has, however.
not discussed in its judgment as to why it considered that the testimony of the victims of the crime could not_be accepted and why it could not form the foundation for the conviction of the respond ent.
[1068H; 1069A B] 1066 3.
The judgment of the High Court is set aside and that of the trial court convicting the respondent under section 395 of the Indian Penal Code and sentencing him to undergo rigorous imprisonment of four years is restored.
Necessity for awarding severe punishment in such cases of proven highway robbery stressed.
[1069F]
