Section 14(1) of the provides that any property possessed by a female Hindu, whether enquired before or after the commencement of the Act shall be held by her as full owner thereof and not as a limited owner.
The Explanation to the sub section included property acquired by a female Hindu by purchase within the expression 'property. ' The Hindu widow, in the instant case, who had acquired a limited estate from her husband by reason of his death was not in possession on the date of the enforcement of the Act, she having transferred the property in favour of an alienee, But, later the possession was restored to her upon the original alienee reconveying the property to her, reversing the transaction.
Her right to the said property was assailed by the appellant before the Madras High Court and a question arose as to whether upon the reconveyance of the very property.
which she had alienated, after the enforcement of the Act she would become full owner in respect of such a property by virtue of section 14(1) of the Act.
The High Court following its earlier view in Chinnako landai Goundan vs Thanji Gounder, (ILR 1966 I Madras 326) and that of Punjab High Court in Teja Singh vs Jagat Singh, (AIR 1964 Punjab 403), Bombay High Court in Ramgowda Auna gowda vs Bhausaheb, (ILR and Gujarat High Court in Champa vs Chandrakant (AIR 1973 Gujarat 227), held that she would become an absolute owner of such a property in the aforesaid situation.
In this appeal by certificate.
it was contended for the appellant.
relying on the view pronounced by the Orissa High Court in Ganesh Mahanta vs Sukria Bewa, (AIR 1963 Orissa 167) and Andhra Pradesh High Court in Medicherla Venkatarat nam vs Siddani Palamma, 1970 II Andhra Weekly Reporter 264), that section 14(1) of the Act does not come 1071 into play in the case of a retransfer of the property to the widow subsequent to the commencement of the Act, as the transferee or the donee, who had only a limited interest.
cannot transfer a title higher than the title that they themselves had in the property.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
A Hindu woman is entitled to become an absolute owner of the property which she had alienated, upon its reconveyance to her by the transferee after the enforcement of the by virtue ors.
14(1).
[1082G; 1075B] 2.1 The whole purpose of section 14(1) is to make a widow who has a limited interest a full owner in respect of the property in question regardless of whether the acquisition was prior to or subsequent to the commencement of the Act.
It comes into operation at the point of time when the right of the Hindu widow to the property is called into question.
All that has to be shown by her then is that she had ac quired the property and that she was possessed of the property.
Once it is shown by her that she was possessed of the property on that date in the eyes of law the property held by her would be held by her as "full owner" and not as limited owner.
[1079G; 1075GH; 1077BC] 2.2 Possession, physical or constructive or in legal sense, on the date of coming into operation of the Act is not the sine qua non for the acquisition of full ownership in property by the Hindu female.
The expression "possessed of" used in section 14(1) pertains to the acquisition of a right or interest in the property and not to physical possession acquired by force or without any legal right.
The expression "whether acquired before or after the commencement of the Act" used in section 14(1) makes it evident that any property possessed by a Hindu female whether acquired before or after the commencement of the Act, would be held by her as a full owner thereof and not as a limited owner.
If the legislature had not contemplated a Hindu widow becoming possessed of a property by virtue of an acquisition after the commencement of the Act the aforesaid expression would not have been used.
[1076FG; 1081C; 1076CD; 1081AB] 2.3 When the Hindu female in the instant case bought the property from the alienee to whom she had sold it prior to the enforcement of the Act, she had acquired the property within the meaning of the explanation to section 14(1) of the Act.
The transaction by which the vendee of the Hindu female had acquired an interest in the said property was reversed and she was restored to the position prevailing before the 1072 transaction took place.
In the eyes of law the transaction stood obliterated or effaced.
Thus, on the date on which her right to the property was called into question, she was possessed of the property which she had inherited from her husband, she having by then reacquired and regained what she had lost, and her limited right had natured into a full ownership in view of section 14(1) of the Act.
[1077C, EF; 1078C] 3.
By the reversal of the transaction no right of the reversioner was affected, for he had merely a spes succes sions in the property and nothing more.
His possible chance of succeeding upon the death of the Hindu female disappeared from the horizon as soon as what she had temporarily parted with was restored to her.
Therefore, whether a challenge was made during her life time or it was made after her death, if the question arose as to what was the nature of interest in the property held by the concerned Hindu female after the reversal of the transaction the answer would be that she had a 'full ownership ' and not a 'limited ownership '.
[1078DE; 1077H IO78A] 4.
If the transferee from the concerned Hindu female had transferred his right, title and interest in the property to a third person instead of transferring it back to her, the principle that the transferor cannot transmit a better title or a title higher than that possessed by him at the given time would have come into play.
Not otherwise.
The transac tion having been reversed the Hindu widow became re pos sessed of the property which she had possessed prior to the transfer to the original alienee or the donee and her right straightaway matured into full ownership by virtue of section 14(1).
[1078B; 1079DE] 5.
The case of the widow who had temporarily lost the right in the property by virtue of the transfer in favour of the alienee or the donee cannot be equated with that of a stranger.
The Act is intended to benefit her.
And when she becomes possessed of the property, having regained precisely that interest which she had temporarily lost during the duration of the eclipse, section 14(1) would come to her rescue which would not be the matter in the case of a stranger who cannot invoke section 14(1).
[1080F] Kotturuswamy vs Veeravva, (AIR distinguished.
Chinnakolandai Goundan vs Thanji Gounder, (ILR 1966 I Madras 326); Teja Singh vs Jagat Singh, (AIR 1964 Punjab 403); Ramgowda Aunagowda vs Bhausaheb, (ILR and Champa vs Chandrakant, (AIR 1973 Gujarat 227), approved.
1073 Ganesh Mahanta vs Sukria Bewa, (AIR 1963 Orissa 167) and Medicherla Venkataramam vs Siddani palamma, (1970 II Andhra Weekly Reporter 264), overruled.
