On suo motu enquiry conducted against the appellant with regard to the nature of the properties in question, the Deputy Charity Commissioner held that the properties were of a public trust.
The appellant 's appeal before the Charity CommissiOner was dismissed.
An application filed under section 72 of the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 was also dismissed by the City Civil Court.
The First Appeal filed in the High Court was dismissed by a Single Judge.
In the Letters Patent Appeal on behalf of the appellant it was contended: that section 72(1) speaks only of an applica tion to the Court to set aside the decision of the Charity Commissioner, and it does not speak of an appeal; that while section 70 and 71 use the word "appeal" and that the proceedings under section 72 were not in the nature of an appeal and that, therefore.
when the District Court exercised its jurisdic tion it did not exercise an appellate jurisdiction but a special jurisdiction under 'the section.
The High Court dismissed the appeal holding that it was not maintainable since the requisite certificate under clause 15 of Letters Patent Appeal was not obtained by the appellant, that though the well known word "appeal" was not used in section 72, the absence of that word cannot be regarded as determinative of the nature of the proceedings, and that the jurisdiction that the District Court is exercising under section 72 was appellate jurisdiction.
Dismissing the appeal.
1084 HELD:1.1 The power of the District Court in exercising jurisdiction under section 72 of the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950, is a plenary power.
It is true that the Commissioner is not subordinate to the District Court but the District Court has powers to correct, modify, review or set aside the order passed by the Commissioner.
All the characteristics of an appeal and all the powers of an appellate Court are available to the District Court while deciding an applica tion under section 72.
[1089D E] 1.2 The proceedings before the District Court under section 72(1) are in the nature of an appeal and that District Court exercises appellate jurisdiction while disposing of a matter under section 72(1).
[1089E F ] 1.3 The absence of the word "appeal" in section 72(1) does not make any difference.
[1089C] Hiragar Dayagar vs Ratanlal, ; and [1986] 58 Bombay Law Reporter 894 approved and AIR 1974, Bombay 40, disapproved.
Consequently, the Single judge of tile High Court while deciding the appeal from the order of the District Court deals with a matter made by the District Judge in the exercise of a appellate jurisdiction by a Court subject to the superintendence of the High Court and hence clause 15 of the Letters Patent Appeal is directly attracted.
[1089F G]
