Ever since 1933, a cattle fair called Nagar Cattle Hat is being held on Saturday every week by the Nagar Quorania Junior High Madrassah.
Since 1974, respondent No. 6, a club called Prabartak Parishad set up a parallel cattle fair at Sherpur, about two kilometres away from the site of Nagar Cattle Hat on every Saturday, known as Sherpur Cattle Hat.
The holding of two rival cattle fairs on the same day gave rise to feeling of rivalry couple with tension and this frequently led to violent conflicts and skirmishes between the two rival groups.
Upon a representation made to him, the District Magis trate, Murshidabad caused an inquiry to be held, and held that holding of the two cattle fairs on the same day created serious law and order problem and accordingly directed holding of the hats on two different days for preservation of public peace and tranquility.
a writ petition filed by the respondent No. 6 the High Court struck down the order of the District Magistrate on the ground that no such direction could be issued by him as the competent authority was the Khargrar Panchayat Sami ti.
In compliance with the directions made by the Court, the Panchayat Samiti passed a resolution that the Nagar Cattle Hat run by Nagar Quorania Junior High Madrassah would be held on Saturday and the Sherpur Cattle Hat run by Prabartak Parishad would be held on Friday.
1208 Respondent No. 6 filed another writ petition challenging the said resolution.
A Single Judge quashed the resolution of the Panchayat Samiti on the ground that it acted in breach of the rules ' of natural justice while reserving liberty to the Panchayat Samiti to come to a decision afresh after affording an opportunity to respondent No. 6.
The appeal preferred by the Panchayat Samiti was admit ted, but the Division Bench declined to grant stay and directed that the Panchayat Samiti should.
comply with the order of the Single Judge.
Consequently, the Panchayat Samiti issued notices to the contending parties requiring them to submit their claims for consideration.
The Panchayat Samiti after considering the claims of both parties and the material record, passed a resolution that the Nagar Cattle Hat would be held on Saturday every week and the Sherpur Cattle Hat would be held on Friday, and directed the Execu tive Officer to incorporate such a condition in the licence granted to the two organisations for holding the cattle fairs on these days.
Again, respondent No. 6 filed a writ petition challeng ing the resolution dated April 12, 1985.
A Single Judge dismissed the writ petition.
Respondent No. 6 then moved the Division Bench for restraining the Panchayat Samiti from giving effect to the said resolution.
The Division Bench quashed the resolution dated April 12, 1985 holding that although in terms of section 117 of the Act, the Panchayat Samiti was vested with the power of granting a licence for the holding of a hat or fair, by the framing of rr. 7, 8 and 9 of the West Bengal Panchayat (Samiti Administration) Rules, 1984 the power of the Panchayat Samiti is confined to making provision for maintenance of sanitation, health and in the market area which is the essence of the power under section 117, and further that in the absence of a provision in the rules in that behalf it had no power to specify a day on which such hat or fair should be held.
Allowing the Appeal, HELD: 1.
The view taken by the High Court that although the Panchayat Samiti was vested with the power to grant a licence for the holding of a hat or fair under section 117 of the West Bengal Panchayat Act, 1973, yet it had no consequential or incidental power to specify a day for holding of such hat or fair, is manifestly erroneous.
[1213C D] 2.
The power to grant a licence for the holding of a hat or fair under section 117 of the Act necessarily carries with it the power to specify a day on which such hat or fair shall be held.
Such power to specify a day must be held to be a power incidental or consequential upon the principal power of issuing a licence under section 117 of the Act for holding of a hat or fair.
[1214H; 1215A] 1209 3.
The rules or the absence of it do not detract from the substantive power conferred by a statute.
[1215A B] 4.
The essence and content of the power of a Panchayat Samiti under section 117 of the Act is issuance of a licence for the holding of a hat or fair and not mere maintenance of sanitation, health and hygiene as held by the High Court.
[1215B] 5.
It is well accepted that the conferral of statutory powers on local authorities must be construed as impliedly authorising everything which could fairly and reasonably be regarded as incidental or consequential to the power itself.
[1213F G] 6.
The doctrine of ultra. vires is not to be applied nar rowly.
[1214B C] De Smith 's Judicial Review of Administrative Action, 4th edn., p. 95; HWR Wade 's Administrative Law, 5th edn., p. 217; Craies on Statute Law, 6th edn., p. 276; Attorney General vs Great Eastern Railway, ; ; Baro ness Wenlock vs River Dee Co., ; V.T. Khanzode & Ors.
vs Reserve Bank of India, ; and State of Uttar Pradesh vs Batuk Deo Pati Tripathi & Anr., , relied upon.
