The respondent company had a current account with the lant bank in its Mangalore Builder Branch.
The Manag ing Director of the company and the General Manager of a sister concern of the company had been authorised to operate the said current account.
The second defendant was attending to the maintenance of accounts of the respondent company and was also in charge and had the custody of the cheque book issued by the Bank to the respondent company.
During the process of bringing the accounts upto date certain irregu larities were noticed in the account and on verification it was found that cheques purporting to bear the signature of the Managing Director were encashed, though they did not bear 'his signature.
A complaint was lodged by the respond ent Company with the police and a special audit of the company 's accounts for the years 1957 58 to 1960 61 by a firm of Chartered Accountants disclosed that the second defendant had withdrawn a sum of Rs.3,26.047.92 under 42 cheques.
A suit was filed for the recovery of the said amount on the plea that the amounts as per the forged cheques were not utilised for the purpose of the respondent company.
that they were not authorised ones.
that there was no acquiescence or ratification open or tacit on the part of the respondent company and that the respondent was unaware of the fraud till the new accountant discovered it.
The appellant bank resisted the suit on the grounds (1) that the cheques were not forged ones; (2) that even if they were forged ones.
the company was not entitled to recover the amount on account of its own 1139 negligence; (3) that there was settlement of accounts be tween the parties from time to time and as such.
the company was not entitled to reopen the same and claim the sums paid under the cheques; and (4) that the suit was barred by limitation.
The second defendant pleaded that the cheques were utilised for the purpose of the company.
The trial Court negatived the contentions of the bank and passed a decree for the sum claimed with interest at 6%.
In appeal the Division Bench confirmed the judgment of the trial court but as the case involved substantial ques tions of law of general public importance it granted a certificate to file the appeal.
In the appeal before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that: (1) after reasonable opportu nities are given to the customer to examine the bank state ments, its debit entries should be deemed to be final and will not be open for reconstruction to the detriment of the bank; (2) a representation may be made either by statement or by conduct, and conduct included negligence, silence, acquiescence or encouragement, and if a customer of a bank, by his negligence, to give timely information of forged cheques, allows amount to be drawn on such cheques.
the debit will stand for the whole amount and the consumer will be estopped from claiming the amount; and (3) in action for a long period would amount to such negligence as would persuade a court to impute to the customer with knowledge or at any rate constructive knowledge,_to decline him relief in an action for recovery of amounts which would be to the detriment of an innocent party, namely, the bank.
Dismissing the appeal.
HELD: 1.
When a cheque duly signed by a customer is presented before a bank with whom he has an account there is a mandate on the bank to pay the amount covered by the cheque.
However.
if the signature on the cheque is not genuine.
there is no mandate on the bank to pay.
The bank.
when it makes payment on such a cheque, cannot resist the claim of the customer with the defence of negligence on his part such as leaving the cheque book carelessly so that third parties would easily get hold of it.
This is because a document in cheque form.
on which the customer 's name as drawer is forged.
is a mere nullity.
[1147B D] 2.
The relationship between the customer of a bank and the bank is that of a creditor and debtor.
When a cheque presented for encashment contains a forged signature the bank has no authority to make payment against such a cheque.
The bank would be acting against law 1140 in debiting the customer with the amounts covered by such cheques.
When a customer demands payment for the amount covered by such cheques, the bank would be liable to pay the payment to the customer.
The bank can succeed in denying payment only when it establishes that the customer is disen titled to make a claim either on account of adoption, estop pel or ratification.
[1146G H; 1147A B] For negligence to constitute an estoppel.
it is neces sary to imply the existence of some duty which the party against whom estoppel is alleged owes to the other party.
There is a duty of sorts on the part of the customer to inform the bank of the irregularities when he comes to know of it.
But by mere negligence.
one cannot presume that there has been a breach of duty by the customer to the bank.
The customer should not by his conduct facilitate payment of money on forged cheques.
In the absence of such circum stances.
mere negligence will not prevent a customer from successfully suing the bank for recovery of the amount.
[1150B D] 4.
In order to sustain a plea of acquiescence, it is necessary to prove that the party against whom the said plea is raised.
had remained silent about the matter regarding which the plea of acquiescence is raised.
even after knowing the truth of the matter.
[1150D E] 5.
There is no duty for a customer to inform the bank of a fraud committed on him, of which he was unaware.
Nor can in action for a reasonably long time in not discovering fraud or irregularity be made a defence to defeat a customer in an action for loss.
[1157G H] 6.
There is no duty on the part of the customer to intimate the banker about any error that may be seen in the pass book and he will be entitled to claim any amount paid on a forged cheque though there may be some negligence or in action on his part in not being careful to discover the errors in the pass book or other documents.
Banks do business for their benefit.
Customers also get some benefit.
If banks are to insist upon extreme care by the customers in minutely looking into the pass book and the statements sent by them, no bank perhaps can do profita ble business.
It is common knowledge that the entries in the pass books and the statements of account sent by the bank are either not readable.
decipherable or legible.
There is always an element of trust between the bank and its custom er.
The bank 's business depends upon this trust.
[1156B D] 1141 8.
Whenever a cheque purporting to be by a customer is presented before a bank it carries a mandate to the bank to pay.
If a cheque is forged there is no such mandate.
The bank can escape liability only if it can establish knowledge to the customer of the forgery in the cheques.
In action for continuously long period cannot by itself afford a satisfac tory ground for the bank to escape the liability.
[1156D E] 9.
In the present case.
during the relevant period when 42 cheques were encashed, the company did not know anything about the sinister design of the second defendant.
Since the bank had not proved to the satisfaction of the court that the company had with full knowledge acknowledged the cor rectness of the accounts for the relevant period the case of acquiescence cannot be flourished against the company.
There is no evidence to show that any one other than the second defendant knew that the forged cheques had been encashed.
After the matter was discovered immediate action was taken.
Therefore, in the absence of any evidence of the respondent company 's involvement.
it cannot be non suited on the ground of negligence or in action.
Unless the bank is able to satisfy the court of either an express condition in the contract with its customer or an unequivocal ratifica tion it will not be possible to save the bank from its liability.
[1150E F; 1151A B; 1156B] Bihta Co operative Development Cane Marketing Union Ltd. Joint Stock Bank Ltd. vs Macmillan, ; Tai Hing Cotton Ltd. vs Liu Chong Bank, [1985] 2 All England Reports 947; Greenwood vs Martins Bank Ltd., = [1932] All England Reports 318; and New Marine Coal Co. (Bengal) Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
