The prosecution alleged that on the evening of May 30, 1974 the appellant 's daughter caught hold of the deceased, and the appellant poured kerosene oil on her and set her on fire.
On hearing deceased 's screams the neighbours rushed to the house and extinguished the flames.
Thereafter, she was taken to the hospital where on the basis of questions put by the doctor (P.W. 2), Head Constable (P.W. 7) recorded her statement.
She expired on June 1, 1974.
It was further alleged that the husband and his parents were unhappy about the quantum of dowry brought by the deceased and she was, therefore being subjected to severe harassment and maltreat ment.
In a letter written by the deceased to her father she had set out the details of the iII treatment meted to her and expressed grave apprehension that her life was in immi nent danger.
The trial court convicted the appellant and her daughter of the offence under section 302 I.P.C. acting on the dying declaration made by the deceased, the letter written by her to her father and his evidence as to the demands for dowry and the torture inflicted on his daughter.
The husband was given benefit of doubt and acquitted.
The High Court confirmed the conviction of the appellant but acquitted the daughter giving her benefit of doubt.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1.
The conviction of the appellant by the High Court was fully justified.
The dying declaration made by the deceased wherein 1222 she has given a clear and vivid account of the pouring of kerosene oil over her body and being set on fire by the appellant, has the ring of truth.
The testimony of the doctor (P.W. 2) and the Head Constable (P.W. 7) clearly establishes that she was in a fit condition to make the statement.
There was, therefore, no reason whatever not to act upon it.
[1224D; G] 1.2.
In addition, there was also clear circumstantial evidence furnished by the letter written by the deceased to her father and the testimony of the father regarding the demands for dowry and the harassment and torture inflicted on the deceased as part of the endeavour to extract more dowry.
[1224F G] 2.
Whenever a case of gruesome murder of a young wife by the barbaric process of pouring kerosene oil over the body and setting her on fire as the culmination of a long process of physical and mental harassment for extraction of more dowry comes before the court and the offence is brought home to the accused beyond reasonable doubt, it is the duty of the court to deal with the case in the most severe and strict manner and award the maximum penalty prescribed by the law in order that it may operate as a deterrent to other persons from committing such anti social crimes.
[1222H; 1223A]
