Section 167 of the provides that whenever a person is sentenced by a Court Martial to imprisonment, the term of his sentence shall be reckoned to commence on the day on which the original proceedings were signed by the Presiding Officer.
Section 5 of the Code of Criminal Proce dure lays down that nothing contained in the Code shall affect any special or local law or any special jurisdiction or power or any special form of procedure prescribed by any other law in.
force.
Section 428 of the Code provides for set off of the period of detention undergone by an accused person during the investigation, inquiry or trial against the term of imprisonment.
Section 475 of the Code states that when any person is brought before a Magistrate and charged with an offence for which he is liable to be tried either by a Court to which the Code applies or by a Court Martial, such Magistrate shall in proper cases deliver him together with a statement of the offence, of which he is accused, to the commanding officer of the unit to which he belongs.
The appellants who were convicted by the General Court Martial for offences under the are undergoing their sentences of imprisonment.
Their petitions claiming grant of benefit of the provision for set off contained in section 428 of the Code having been dismissed by the High Court they pre ferred these appeals by certificate under Article 13 A of the Constitution of India.
It was contended on their behalf that the is silent with respect to the topic as to the date with effect from which the period of imprisonment covered by the sen tence is to be reckoned, and that since section 5 of the Code only lays down that nothing contained therein shall affect any special or local law, in the absence of any specific provision in the the provisions of the Code would get attracted.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, 85 HELD: 1.
The provision for set off contained in section 428 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is not attracted in the case of persons convicted and sentenced by Court Martial to undergo imprisonment.
[91F] 2.
The , the Navy Act and the Air Force Act constitute special laws in force conferring special juris diction and powers on Courts Martial.
They embody a com pletely self contained comprehensive code specifying the various offences and prescribing the procedure for deten tion, custody, investigation and trial of the offenders, the punishment to be awarded, confirmation and revision of the sentences imposed, the execution of such sentences and the grant of pardons, remissions and suspensions in respect of such sentences.
Section 5 of the Code renders the provisions of the Code inapplicable in respect of all matters covered by such special law.
[87G 88B] 3.
Section 167 of the specifically lays down that whenever a person is sentenced by a Court Martial to imprisonment, the term of his sentence shall be reckoned to commence on the day on which the original proceedings were signed by the Presiding Officer.
In the race of this cate gorical provision it cannot be said that the is silent with respect to the topic as to the date with effect from which the period of imprisonment covered by the sen tence is to be reckoned.
[88G; 89AB] 4.
The distinction made in section 475 of the Code between "trial by a Court to which this Code applies" and by a Court Martial ' conclusively indicates that Parliament in tended to treat the Court Martial as a forum to the proceed ings before which the provisions of the Code will have no application.
[90F] 5.
There is also intrinsic indication contained in the very wording of section 428 of the Code that it cannot have any application in respect of persons tried and sentenced by Court Martial.
There is no 'investigation ' conducted by any police officer under the Code or by any person authorised by Magistrate in that behalf in the case of persons tried by the Court Martial.
No inquiry is conducted under the Code by any Magistrate or Court in respect of offences committed by persons which are tried by the Court Martial.
The trial is also not conducted by the Court Martial under the Code but only in accordance with the special procedure prescribed by the .
There is, therefore, absolutely no scope for invoking the aid of section 428 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in respect of prisoners convicted by Court Martial under the Act.
[90G; 91D; E; 89C] 86 P.P. Chandrasekaran vs Government of India & Ors., ; T.S. Ramani vs The Superintendent of Prisons, and F.R. Jesuratnam vs Chief of Air Staff, , approved.
Subramanian vs Officer Commanding Armoured Static Work shop, Anand Singh Bishit vs Union of India & Ors., , overruled.
