Consequent to an agreement between the Executive Commit tee of the Central Board of the appellant Bank and its Officers ' Federation, in pursuance of the Pillai Committee Report, the Grade I and Grade II Officers discharging mana gerial and supervisory functions, were merged into the new Junior Management Grade.
It was agreed that Officers, of Grade II would be junior to the existing officers of Grade I and the seniority list would be prepared accordingly.
There after, in exercise of powers conferred by sub section
(1) of section 43 of the the State Bank of India Officers ' (Determination of Terms and Conditions of Service) Order, 1979 was made and brought into force with effect from October 1, 1979.
Paragraph 2(1) of that Order provided that it shah apply to the existing officers of the Bank and to such employees of the Bank to whom it may be made applicable.
Under paragraph 3(h) the expression "exist ing officers" was defined to mean officers in the service of the Bank immediately prior in the appointed date, i.e., October 1, 1979.
Paragraph 7 provided for the placement of existing officers on the appointed date in the corresponding new grades and scales.
Paragraph 8(1) provided for fitment of existing officers in the new grades, and scales of pay in accordance with paragraph 7, at a stage corresponding to the existing grade and scale.
Under paragraph 18(5) the seniori ty among the existing officers was to 116 remain the same, i.e., the Officers Grade I were to rank senior to Officers Grade II.
Certain Probationary/Trainee Officers, who were appoint ed by the Bank in Grade I on October 30/31, 1979 before the Order was made on December 19, 1979 flied writ petitions before the Allahabad High Court and some others before the Delhi High Court claiming seniority over the erstwhile Grade II Officers, in which it was contended for the Bank that since the petitioners were not the employees of the Bank on October 1, 1979, i.e., the appointed date, they could not be given seniority over the erstwhile Grade II Officers, who were the 'existing officers ' within the mean ing of the expression under paragraph 3(h) of the Order.
The Allahabad High Court took the view that the expres sion 'existing officers ' has to be read as including the Probationary Officers and Trainee Officers, otherwise a repugnancy between the definition of 'existing officers ' and the provisions of paragraph 7 and 8 of the Order will arise, that the notional date of the coming into force of the Order, viz., October 1, 1979 is only to protect the emolu ments of the officers and nothing else, and directed the Bank to prepare the seniority list of its officers accord ingly.
The Delhi High Court, however, took a contrary view and dismissed the writ petitions.
In these appeals by the Bank against the decision of the Allahabad High Court and Special Leave Petition by the Probationary/Trainee Officers against the decision of the Delhi High Court, it was submitted for the Probationary/Trainee Officers in support of their contention that they should be considered as 'existing officers ' within the meaning of paragraph 3(h) of the Order, that the Bank itself had treated them as 'existing officers ' by fitting them to the Junior Management Grade and giving them a higher start of Rs.960 p.m., that such fitment had been made by the Bank following the principles laid down in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Order, that unless the expression 'existing offi cers ' is read as including 'Probationary/Trainee Officers ', three will be a repugnancy between the definition of 'exist ing officers ', as contained in paragraph 3(h) and the provi sions of the paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Order, that the definition of 'existing officers ' is only illustrative and not exhaustive, that the merger of officers of Grade II and Grade I into the Junior Management Grade was only for the purpose of fitment in the higher scale of pay and not for the purpose of seniority, that they have to undergo tests which were more stringent than the tests to be undergone by Grade II Officers and as such Probationary/Trainee 117 Officers, could not be placed under Officers Grade II in the seniority list, and that the Bank had no authority to give retrospective operation to the Order with effect from Octo ber 1, 1979 inasmuch as section 43 of the Act under which the Order has been passed, did not authorise the Bank to pass any such Order with retrospective effect.
For the Bank it was contended that the order had not been made retrospective, that all that has been done was that the Officers Grade I and Grade II, who were in the employment of the Bank immediately before October 1, 1979 have been merged into one category, namely, Junior Manage ment Grade, in terms of the recommendations of the Pillai Committee, that these Officers were already employees of the Bank before October 1, 1979 and as such they were 'existing officers ' within the meaning of paragraph 3(h) of the Order, that the Probationary/Trainee Officers, who were appointed on 30th/31st October, 1979 had no locus standi to challenge the Order or the merger of Officers Grade I and Grade II and that as no order has been passed under paragraph 2(1) of the Order applying the same to the Probationary/ Trainee Offi cers, they were outside the purview of the Junior Management Grade and, as such, were precluded from challenging the seniority of the erstwhile Officers of Grade II.
Allowing the appeals and dismissing the special leave petition, this Court.
HELD: 1.
The expression 'existing officers ' as defined in paragraph 3(h) of the State Bank of India Officers ' (Determination of Terms and Conditions of Service) Order, 1979 means officers in the service of the Bank immediately prior to the appointed date, i.e., October 1, 1979.
The Probationary/Trainee Officers who were appointed by the Bank on 30/31st October, 1979 after the appointed date could not, therefore, be held to be 'existing officers ' within the meaning of paragraph 3(h) of the Order.
[128B; F] 2.
It is incorrect to say that when an employee is fitted to a particular scale of pay of another cadre, he does not become a member of that cadre.
In the instant case, the Probationary/Trainee Officers were placed in the corre sponding scales of pay in the Junior Management Grade for the purpose of fitment in the new scales of pay.
It may be that such fitment has been made by the Bank following the principles as laid down in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Order presumably with a view to removing any disparity between Officers Grade I and Officers Grade II in the Junior Manage ment Grade, but it cannot be said that they were treated as existing officers and such fitment was made under 118 paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Order.
The Probationary/Trainee Officers were not in the service of the Bank immediately prior to the appointed date.
As such the Bank could not treat them as existing officers for the purpose of fitment or giving a higher scale of pay.
[128D F; B] 3.1 Repugnancy of the definition of any term my arise only if such definition does not agree with the subject or context of a particular provision.
But any action not in conformity with the provision of the definition clause will not render the definition of a term repugnant to the subject or context of any provision of the statute containing that term.
[129BC] 3.2 In the instant case, there is no ambiguity in the definition of 'existing officers ', as given in paragraph 3(h) of the Order, nor is it in any way repugnant to the subject or context of paragraphs 7 and 8.
If the Probation ary/Trainee Officers are treated as 'existing officers ' it would be doing violence to the provision of paragraph 3(h).
[129B; A] 4.
The definition of 'existing officers ' in paragraph 3(h) does not give any illustration whatsoever.
On the contrary, it is quite specific and points to only one class of officers who were in the service of the Bank immediately prior to the appointed date and to whom any of the rules, as mentioned in that paragraph were applicable.
[129D] 5.
All the officers of the Bank at the lower level before the Probationary or Trainee Officers were appointed on 30/31 October, 1979 had agreed that they would merge into a new grade, and Officers Grade I would be senior to the Officers Grade ii.
When two grades of officers are merged into a new grade, the question of inter se seniority automatically arises and casts a duty on the employer to fix the seniori ty.
Paragraph 18(5) of the Order lays down that the seniori ty among the existing officers will remain the same, that b, the Officers Grade I will remain senior to Officers Grade II.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the merger was only for the purpose of fitment in the higher scale and not for purposes of seniority.
[130B D; 129F] 6.
The question is not whether the Probationary/Trainee Officers have to undergo more stringent tests than the tests to be undergone by Grade H Officers, but whether the Probationary/Trainee Officers were existing officers or not, that is to say, whether they were in the employment of the Bank immediately prior to October 1, 1979.
As they were not existing officers, they could not claim seniority over the Officers of Grade II.
[130FG] 119 7.1 Unless the statute, under which the rules are framed by the rule making authority, does not specifically autho rise the making of rules with retrospective effect, such authority cannot frame any role with retrospective effect.
[130H 131A] Cannanore Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd. vs Collector of Customs and Central Excise, Cochin, & Ors.
, ; ; Income Tax Officer, Alleppey vs M.C. Ponnoose & Ors., ; ; Hukam Chand etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; and Regional Transport Officer, Chittoor, & Ors.
vs Associated Transport Madras (P) Ltd. & Ors., ; , referred to.
7.2 In the instant case, it cannot be said that the Order was retrospective in operation.
All that has been done by it is that the Officers Grade I and Grade II in the em ployment of the Bank immediately prior to October 1, 1979 have been merged into one category, namely, Junior Manage ment Grade.
Although the Order was actually published on December 19, 1979, the Officers of the Bank who were there on or before October, 1, 1979 were aware of the fact that the Order would be given effect to from October 1, 1979 as agreed to between the Bank and the Officers ' Federation.
The appointed date is relevant for the purpose of applicability of the Order to the Officers who have been there in the service of the Bank immediately prior to the appointed date.
[131E; C; 132G 133A] V.T. Khanzode & Ors.
vs Reserve Bank of India & Anr., and Reserve Bank of India vs C.N. Sahasra naman, [1986] Suppl.
SCC 143, referred to.
The distinction in the status of Officers Grade I and Grade II having been abolished in the instant case, it is apparent that the Probationary/Trainee Officers being Offi cers of Grade I were of the same status and position as the Officers of Grade II.
Admittedly, the erstwhile Officers of Grade H were appointed much earlier than the Probationary/Trainee Officers.
They cannot, therefore, be considered senior to the erstwhile Officers Grade II.
[134G 135AB] 9.
The Probationary/Trainee Officers have not been brought within the purview of the new cadre, viz., the Junior Management Grade since no order has been passed under paragraph 2(1) of the Order applying the same to them.
As they are not in the Junior Management Grade, which is a completely different cadre, they have no locus standi to challenge any benefit conferred on the Officers of the 120 Junior Management Grade comprising erstwhile Officers Grade I and Officers Grade II as were in the employment of the Bank prior to October 1, 1979.
[134F; CD; 135C]
