An officer involved in a defalcation case who was sus pended, challenged the order of suspension under article 14 of the Constitution on the ground that another officer similar ly situate had merely been transferred.
The order was quashed by a Single Judge of the High Court, but, on appeal, his judgment was reversed by the Division Bench.
The matter came up before the Court by way of a Special Leave Petition.
The counter affidavit filed by the State Government indicated that it had initiated action to prosecute two other officers involved in the case.
When the Special Leave Petition came up for hearing, the Court made an interim order directing the counsel to convey to the State Govern ment the Court 's concern at the petitioner alone having been placed under suspension and, indicating that if the State Government did not pass any order placing the other offi cers, who, on a perusal of the investigation report, ap peared to be equally culpable, under suspension, it may become necessary lot the Court to revoke the suspension of the Special Leave Petitioner at the next hearing.
When the matter came up again, it had to be adjourned by the Court with another interim order directing the State Government to pass necessary orders for suspension of all the delinquent officers.
In anticipation of action by the State Government, two other officers involved in the case filed applications praying for recall of the two interim orders aforesaid.
However, the two officers in question were also placed under suspension before the matter finally came up for hearing.
The Court impressed upon counsel appearing for the applicants who had prayed for recall of the interim orders that the proper course for them was to move the State Gov ernment by way of appeal and/or representation against their suspension.
While counsel for one of the applicants accepted that suggestion and ,withdrew the application, counsel for the other applicant did not do so.
The latter applicant had, 147 in his application, made certain reckless allegations and cast aspersions on the Court.
The counsel appearing for him gave the impression that the application had been settled by him without noticing the offending averments but went on to advance arguments with undue vehemence and unwarranted passion.
The Court, while dismissing the Special Leave Petition as infructuous and expressing disapproval of the manner in which arguments had been advanced on behalf of one of the applicants.
HELD: By virtue of the pre eminence which 'Senior Coun sel ' enjoy in the profession, they not only carry greater responsibilities but they also act as a model to the junior members of the profession.
A senior counsel more or less occupies a position akin to a Queen 's counsel in England next after the Attorney General and the Solicitor General.
It is an honour and privilege conferred on Advocates of standing and experience by the Chief Justice and the Judges of this Court.
They thus become leading counsel and take precedence on all counsel not having that rank.
A senior counsel though he cannot draw up pleadings of the party, can nevertheless be engaged "to settle" i.e. to put the plead ings into "proper and satisfactory form" and hence a senior counsel settling pleadings has a more onerous responsibility as otherwise the blame for improper pleadings will be laid at his doors.
[153C E] In this case, not only were the arguments advanced with undue vehemence and unwarranted passion, reflecting identi fication of interests beyond established conventions but were of degrees not usual of enlightened senior counsel to adopt.
The majesty of law and the dignity of Courts cannot be maintained unless there is mutual respect between the Bench and the Bar and the counsel act in full realisation of their duty to the Court alongside their duty to their cli ents and have the grace to reconcile themselves when their pleas and arguments do not find acceptance with the Court.
Neither rhetoric nor tempestuous arguments can constitute the sine qua non for persuasive arguments.
[153A C] Rondel vs W, and Rondel vs Worsley, ; , referred to.
