The Petitioner 's husband, Mohan Lal Jatia, was detained by an 47 order passed under sub section
(1) of section 3 of the (COFEPOSA) by the Additional Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Finance on being satisfied that it was necessary to detain him 'with a view to prevent ing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the augmen tation of foreign exchange '.
The residential premises of one Subhash Gadia, a very rich and prosperous businessman of Bombay, the brother in law of the detenu, were searched on the basis of intelli gence gathered by the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence that he was under invoicing imports of yarn from Japan and it resulted in seizure of certain documents.
As the seized documents not only revealed violation of the provisions of the Customs Act but also indicated certain payments and transactions in violation of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (FERA), the matter was referred to the Enforcement Directorate Investigation from the FERA angle.
Subhash Gadia was summoned under section 40 of the FERA and his statement was recorded by Shri R .C.
Singh, an officer of the Enforcement Directorate.
The incriminating documents seized from the residential premises of Subhash Gadia and the revelations made by him during his examination in relation to the docu ments seized which revealed that the detenu Mohan Lal Jatia was engaged in foreign exchange racketeering to the tune of several crores of rupees formed the basis of the aforesaid order of detention.
The petitioner approached the High Court with petitions under article 226 of the Constitution seeking to challenge the impugned order of detention.
Upon the dismissal of the first of these petitions by the High Court, the petitioner had approached this Court under article 136, and, the Court, while declining to grant special leave to appeal, had directed that the detenu should appear before the Commissioner of Police and, upon his doing so, he should immediately be released on parole for a period of ten days.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed the second petition under article 226 with an application for extending the period of parole which was rejected by the High Court.
The petition filed under article 136 against refusal of interim relief by the High Court was also rejected by this Court.
Thereafter, the High Court dismissed the writ petition, against which, the petitioner sought special leave to appeal and also filed a petition under article 32 challenging the order of detention.
While issuing notice on the petitioner, the Court directed the release of the detenu on parole for a week and by a subse quent order further extended the period of parole.
Both the special leave petition and the writ petition were heard together.
48 In the writ petition filed before the High Court from which the petition for special leave petition arose, the petitioner had challenged the order of detention on two grounds: that there was no material on which the satisfac tion of the detaining authority could be reached that the detention of the detenu was necessary; and, that there was total non application of mind on the part of the detaining authority to the material on record, and in particular, to the factual mis statements contained in paragraph 44 of the grounds of detention as detailed in entries 'A ' to 'F '.
The writ petition filed before this Court was principally based on the ground that there was information of the Constitu tional Safeguard Contained in article 22(5) of the Constitution inasmuch as there was failure on the part of the detaining authority to consider an alleged representation made by the detenu under section 8(b) read with section 11 01 ' the COFEPOSA against the order of detention addressed to the President of India which was presented through one Ashok Jain at the President 's Secretariat.
The other substantial question raised was that R.C. Singh was not a gazetted officer of Enforcement within the meaning of section 40 of the FERA and therefore the statements recorded by him could not be re garded as valid statements under the aforesaid section 40 and thus could not form the basis upon which the satisfaction of the detaining authority could be reached.
Alternatively, it was contended that the statements recorded by him could not be treated as statements recorded under section 39.
The respondents not only denied that the detenu had addressed any representation to the President of India but made an application under section 340, Cr.
P.C. for prosecution of persons responsible for forgoing the document purporting to be the alleged representation made by the detenu and for making certain interpolations in the Dak Register kept at the President 's Secretariat.
The respondents also placed on record an order showing that R.C. Singh had been appointed an officer of enforcement on ad hoc basis three years before he had summoned Subhash Gadia for examination.
Dismissing both the petitions, HELD: 1. (a) The expression 'officers of Enforcement ' as defined in section 3 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, embraces within itself not only (a) a Director (b) Additional Director (c) Deputy Director and (d) Assistant Director of Enforcement but also (e) such other class of officers of Enforcement as may be appointed for the purpose or ' the Act.
Obviously, R.C. Singh who was Assistant En forcement Officer having been appointed as an officer of Enforcement on an ad hoc basis 49 in 1982 tell within the category 'such other class of offi cers ' covered by section 3(e).
Sub section
(1) of section 4 provides that the Central Government may appoint such persons, as it thinks fit, to be officers of Enforcement.
Sub section
(2) there of provides for delegation of such power of appointment by the Central Government to a Director of Enforcement or an Additional Director of Enforcement etc., to appoint officers of Enforcement below the rank of an Assistant Director of Enforcement.
Sub section
(3) of section 4 provides that subject to such conditions and limitations as the Central Government may impose, an officer of Enforcement may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on him under the Act.
Undoubtedly R.C. Singh was discharging his duties and functions as a gazetted officer of Enforcement under section 40(1) when he recorded the statements in question.
The expression 'gazetted officer of Enforcement ' appearing in section 40(1) must take its colour from the context in which it appears and it means any person appointed to be an offi cer of Enforcement under section 4 holding a gazetted post.
There is no denying the fact that R.C. Singh answered that de scription.
[69G H; 70A D] (b) Even if the contention that R.C. Singh was not a gazetted officer of Enforcement within the meaning of section 40(1) were to prevail, it would be of little consequence.
If evidence is relevant the Court is not concerned with the method by which it was obtained.
There is a long line of authority to support the opinion that the Court is not concerned with how evidence is obtained.
The rule is however subject to an exception.
The Judge has a discretion to exclude evidence procured, after the commencement of the alleged offence, which although technically admissible appears to the Judge to be unfair.
This being the substan tive law, it follows that the detaining authority was enti tled to rely upon the statements recorded by R.C. Singh under section 40(1).
Even if R.C. Singh was not competent to record such statements under section 40(1), the statements were clearly relatable to section 39(b) of the Act.
It cannot there fore be said that there was no material on which the detain ing authority could have based his subjective satisfaction.
[70E H] Barindra Kumar Ghose vs Emperor, ILR ; Kuruma vs Reginam, ; R.V. Sang; , ; Magruder Patodia vs R.K. Birla & Ors.
, ; ; R.M. Malkani vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; and Pooran Mal, etc.
vs Director of Inspection; , ; referred to.
(c) Where an office exists under the jaw, it matters not how the appointment of the incumbent is made, do far as validity of its acts are 50 concerned.
It is enough that he is clothed with the insignia of the office, and exercises its powers and functions.
The official acts of such persons are recognised as valid under the de facto doctrine, born of necessity and public policy to prevent needless contusion and endless mischief.
[69B C] Gokaraju Rangaraju vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; ; Pulin Behari vs King Emperor, [1912] 15 Cal.
ZJ 517; and P.S. Menon vs State of Kerala & Ors., AIR (1970) Kerala 165; referred to.
(a) It has long been established that the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority as regards the factual existence of the condition on which the order of detention can be made, i.e., the grounds of detention con stitutes the foundation for the exercise of the power of detention and the Court cannot be invited to consider the propriety or sufficiency of the grounds on which the satis faction of the detaining authority is based.
Nor can the Court, on a review of the grounds, substitute its own opin ion for that of the authority.
But this does not imply that the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority is wholly immune from the power of judicial review.
It inferen tially follows that the subjective satisfaction being a condition precedent for the exercise of the power conferred on the executive, the Court can always examine whether the requisite satisfaction was arrived at by the authority; if it is not, the condition precedent to the exercise of the power would not be fulfilled and the exercise of the power would be bad.
The simplest case is where the authority has not applied its mind at all; in such a case, the authority could not possibly be satisfied as regards the tact in respect of which it is required to be satisfied.
[66E H] Emperor vs Shibnath Banerjee & Ors., AIR (1943) FC 75 and Khudi Ram Das vs State of West Bengal & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
In this case, it is quite apparent that the so called factual mis statements listed as items 'A ' to 'F ' in para graph 44 of the grounds of detention are not mis statements at all.
The High Court rightly held that the alleged mis takes or infirmities pointed out were not so material or serious in nature as to vitiate the impugned order of deten tion and rightly observed that the facts stated in paragraph 44 of the grounds cannot be read in isolation and the grounds of detention have to be read as a whole with the accompanying documents and material.
The grounds of deten tion was only one, viz., that the detenu was engaged 51 in activities prejudicial to the augmentation of foreign exchange and therefore it became necessary in the public interest to place him under detention.
It cannot be said on a perusal of the grounds that there was no material on which the detaining authority could have acted.
[74E; 78A B] (b) The contention that, even if one of the grounds or reasons which led to the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority is non existent or misconceived or irrelevant, the order of detention would be invalid since it is not possible to predicate as to whether the detaining authority would have made an order for detention even in the absence of non existent or irrelevant ground, cannot be accepted.
That principle was enunciated by this Court some 30 years ago.
With the change in law brought about by the introduction of section 5A of the COFEPOSA Act that though one or more of the grounds of detention were found to be vague, non existent, not relevant, not connected, irrational or invalid for any other reason whatsoever, the detention could be sustained on the remaining grounds, that principle no longer holds goods.
[63A C] Shibban Lal Saxena vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
, ; ; Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar & Ors., ; and Pushkar Mukherjee & Ors.
vs State of West Bengal; , ; referred to.
Mohd. Shakeel Wahid Ahmed vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, ; ; Asha Devi vs K. Shivraj, Addi tional Chief Secretary; , and Kurjibhai Dhanjibhai Patel vs State of Gujarat, ; distinguished.
(c) Sufficiency of grounds is not for the Court but for the detaining authority for the formation of his subjective satisfaction that the detention of a person under section 3(1) of the COFEPOSA Act is necessary with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the augmentation of foreign exchange.
The Act is a law relating to preventive detention.
That being so, the power of detention exercisable under sub section
(1) of section 3 of the Act is subject to the limi tations imposed by the Constitution.
When the liberty of the subject is involved, it is the bounden duty of the court to satisfy itself that all the sate guards provided by the law have been scrupulously observed and that the subject is not deprived of his personal liberty otherwise than in accord ance with law.
Nevertheless, the community has a vital interest in the proper enforcement of its laws, particularly in an area such as conservation of foreign exchange and prevention of smuggling activities in dealing effectively with persons engaged in such smuggling and foreign exchange 52 rackteering by ordering their preventive detention and at the same time, in assuring that the law is not used arbi trarily t9 suppress the citizen of his right to life and liberty.
The Government must therefore ensure that the constitutional safeguards of article 22(5) read with subs.
(1) of section 3 of the Act are fully complied with.
[65A B] Mangalbhai Motiram Patel vs State of Maharashtra, ; and Narendra Purshotam Umrao vs B.B. Gujral, ; ; relied on.
In the instant case there was no failure on the part of the Government to discharge its obligation under article 22(5).
The relevant records of the Enforcement Directorate placed before us clearly show that there was sufficient material for the formation of the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority under sub s.(1) of section 3 of the Act.
They also show that the detenu was afforded a reasonable opportu nity for making an effective representation against his detention.
[66C D] 3.
(a) Preventive detention is an extraordinary measure resorted to by the State on account of compulsive factors pertaining to maintenance of public order, safety of public life and the welfare of the economy of the country.
The need for this extraordinary measure was realised by the founding fathers of the Constitution as an inevitable necessity and hence a specific provision has been made in cl.
(3) of article 22 providing for preventive detention.
Placing the interests of the nation above the individual liberty of the anti social and dangerous elements who constitute a grave menace to society by their unlawful acts, the preventive detention laws have been made for effectively keeping out of circula tion the detenus during a prescribed period by means of preventive detention.
The underlying object cannot be achieved if the detenu is granted parole and brought out of detention.
Even if any conditions are imposed with a view to restrict the movements of the detenu while on parole, the observance of those conditions can never lead to an equation of the period of parole with the period of detention.
Due to the spectacular achievements in modern communication system, a detenu, while on parole, can sit in a room in a house or hotel and have contracts with all his relations, friends and confederates in any part of the country or even any part of the world and thereby pursue his unlawful activities if so inclined.
It will, therefore, be futile to contend that the period of parole of a detenu has all the trappings of actual detention in prison and as such both the periods should find a natural merger and they stand denuded of their distinctive characteristics.
It will not be out of place to point out here that inspite of the Criminal Procedure Code providing 53 for release of the convicted offenders on probation of good conduct, it expressly provides, when it comes to a question of giving set off to a convicted person in the period of sentence, that only the actual pre trial detention period should count for set off and not the period of bail even if bail had been granted subject to stringent conditions.
In contrast.
in so far as preventive detentions under the COFEPOSA Act are concerned.
it has been specifically laid down in section 12(6) that a person against whom an order of detention has been passed shall not be released on bail or bail bond or otherwise and that any revocation or modifica tion of the order of detention can be made by the Government in exercise of its power under section 11.
[78E H; 79G] (b) The question whether the period of parole should be treated as part of the detention period itself was elabo rately considered by this Court in Smt.
Poonam Lata vs M.L. Wadhawan & Ors., and it was held therein that the period of parole has to be excluded in reckoning the period of deten tion under sub section
(1) of section 3 of the COFEPOSA Act.
[78C] Smt.
Poonam Lata vs M.L. Wadhawan & Ors.
J.T., , relied on.
The respondents have placed sufficient material before the Court to show that the alleged representation addressed to the President of India was neither filed by the detenu nor was it received at the President 's Secretariat.
The attempt to assail the order of detention on the ground of violation of the constitutional sate guard enshrined in article 22(5) and the violation of section 11 of the Act by the Central Government is a well planned and ingenuous move on the part of the detenu.
The facts revealed not only warrant an inference that the detenu and his associates have gone to deplorable lengths to create evidence favourable to the detenu but arouse convulsive thoughts in our minds about the efficiency and integrity of the concerned sections of the President 's Secretariat.
The case with which and the fascile manner in which the detenu 's agent Ashok Jain claims to have entered the President 's Secretariat and delivered the Dak and obtained an endorsement of acknowledgement in a copy of the representation and the length to which the concerned Secretariat staff have gone to give credence to the version of Ashok Jain not only reveals the deep fall in standards but also lack of security and vigilance.
We feel fully persuaded to hold that this is a fit case in which the detenu, the petitioner, Ashok Jain and all other persons responsible for the fabrication of false evidence should be prosecuted lot the offences committed by them.
We defer the passing of 54 final orders on the application filed under section 340, Cr.
P.C. till the investigation by the Central Bureau of Investiga tion is completed.
[80E F; 82F H; 83A B]
