The appellant in the appeals was the tenant of the demised premises who was inducted as a monthly tenant for the purpose of conducting the ice cream business carried on by her husband.
The letting was done on an agreement dated December 29, 1975 by the landlord respondent which was to become effective from January 1, 1976.
The landlord alleged that in breach of the agreement and the terms of the tenancy, as also in violation of the prohi bition prescribed under section 13(1) of the Bombay Rents, Hotels & Lodging House Rates (Control) Act, 1947 the tenant had indulged in several acts of commission by which not only there had been permanent alterations of major nature, but the entire structure of the demised premises was completely changed.
it was also alleged that the tenant had indulged in acts of waste and damage to the property, and that she had changed the user of the premises when some of the employees started residing there.
On the basis of the aforesaid allegations the landlord gave a notice to quit dated 20th September, 1978 to the tenant.
Thereafter in 1979 the landlord fried a suit against the tenant in the Small Causes Court for possession of the demised premises.
The Trial Court on 11th November, 1982 decreed the suit upholding the allegation that the tenant had made 307 alterations of permanent nature in the demised premises and had committed acts or waste and damage.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision the tenant filed an appeal before the Appellate Bench of the Small Causes Court on 28th September, 1985, and the respondent 's suit for eviction was dismissed on the ground that the suit was barred by lapse of time under Article 113 of the Limitation Act, 1973, which prescribed a period of three The landlord thereafter filed a writ petition under Article 227 which was allowed by the High Court which held that Article 66 or Article 67 was applicable which pre scribed a period of 12 years.
The writ petition filed by the tenant was however dismissed.
In the appeals by the tenant to this Court the only question for consideration was: whether Article 113 or either of Articles 66 or 67 of the Limitation Act would be applicable, and what would he the date of the accrual of the cause of action.
On behalf of the tenant appellant it was contended that on the facts of the case Article 113 of the Limitation Act alone would apply and that neither Article 66 nor Article 67 would have any application.
Article 67 of the Limitation Act had no application inasmuch as time begins to run only when the tenancy is determined and that determination of tenancy which takes place under the Transfer of Property Act is wholly irrelevant for cause of action in ejectment.
That Article 66 contemplates an immediate right to recover pos session.
Breach of a condition only leads to an immediate right to possession without more, and not a determination in law.
That Article 66 is a general article which does not apply to landlord or tenant, and that when a specific Arti cle applied the general Article should not be applied spe cially when it was not free from doubt.
On behalf of the respondent landlord it was however submitted that for any suit by a landlord against the tenant for recovery of possession under the Rent Act the Limitation Act was inherently inapplicable.
Dismissing the Appeals, HELD: 1.
Recovery of possession is by a suit and there is no section in the scheme of the Limitation Act to indicate that the Limitation Act was inherently inapplicable.
In the scheme of the Rent Act or in 308 the various contingencies contemplated under the Rent Act, there is nothing to indicate or warrant that there would be no limitation of any period.
[311E F] 2.
Sections 12 and 13 of the Bombay Rent Act co exist and must be harmonised to effect the purpose and intent of the legislature for the purpose of eviction of the tenant.
In that view of the matter Article 113 of the Limitation Act has no scope of application.
[316C D] 3.
Article 67 indicates that time begins to run only when the tenancy is determined.
It comprehends suit by a landlord and deals with the right to recover possession from the tenant.
Therefore it deals with landlord and tenant.
[31 IF G] 4.
On the strict grammatical meaning Article 67 of the Limitation Act would be applicable.
This is indubitably a suit by the landlord against the tenant to recover posses sion from the tenant.
Therefore, the suit clearly comes within Article 67 of the Limitation Act.
The suit was flied because the tenancy was determined by the combined effect of the operation of Sections 12 and 13 of the B ombay Rent Act.
At the mast it would be within Article 66 of the Limitation Act if it is held that forfeitures have been incurred by the appellant in view of the breach of the conditions mentioned in Section 13 of the Bombay Rent Act, and on lifting of the embargo against eviction of tenant in terms of section 12 of the said Act.
That being so, either of the two, Article 66 or Article 67 would be applicable to the facts of the instant case.
There is no scope for the application of Article 113 of the Limitation Act in any view of the matter.
The period of limitation in this case would therefore be 12 years.
The suit was therefore not barred.
[315H; 316A E] Dhanpal Chettiar vs Yesodai Ammal, ; ; Pradesh Kumar Bajpai vs Binod Behari Sarkar, [1980] 3 S.C.R. 93, Gian Devi Anand vs Jeevan Kumar & Other, [1985] 2 S.C.C. 683; Hiralal Vallabhram vs Kastorbhai Lalbhai & Others, ; at 349 and 350; Bahadur Singh & Anr.
vs Muni Subrat Dass & Anr., at 436, Kau shaiaya Devi & Others vs Shri K.L. Bansal, [1969] 2 S.C.R. 1048 at 1050; Ferozi LaIJain vs Man Mal and another, A.I.R. at 795 aud 796; aud Haji Suleman Haji Ayub Bhiwandiwala vs Narayan Sadashiv Ogale, [1967] 84 Bombay Law Report p. 122, referred to.
