A coparcener in a Joint Hindu Family governed by the Mitakshara school in Hindu Law executed a deed of settlement (which indisputably was really a deed of gift) in favour of another coparcener (his brother) conveying his entire undi vided interest in the coparcenary but reserving a life interest to himself and also providing that after his death the other coparcener should maintain his wife.
In a suit for partition and recovery of the property filed by the widow of the coparcener who executed a deed of settlement on the ground that the gift deed was a void document under the Hindu Law, the Trial Court held that the deed of settlement was void and inoperative under the Hindu Law in the absence of consent of the other coparcener.
On appeal the High Court held that the deed of settlement was valid.
In this appeal by special leave the question for consideration was whether a gift by a coparcener of his undivided coparcenary interest to another coparcener is void or not.
The argument of the respondent was that it was a case of renunciation or relin quishment of a coparcener 's interest in favour of his broth er and his sons.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court.
HELD: 1.
A gift made by the coparcener to his brother should he construed as renunciation of his undivided inter est in the coparcenary in favour of his brother and his sons, who were the remaining coparceners.
A gift was, there fore, valid and consent of other coparceners was immaterial.
[246A B] Mulla 's Hindu Law, Fifteenth Edition, Article 264 at page 357, referred to.
237 2.
It is, however, settled law that a coparcener may alienate his undivided interest in the coparcenary property for a valuable consideration even without the consent of other coparceners.
Such recognition of alienations of copar cenary property for valuable considerations has been one of gradual growth rounded upon the equity which the purchaser for value has to be allowed to stand in his vendor 's shoes and to work out his rights by means of a partition.
[244B C] Suraj Bunsi Koer vs Sheo Proshad Singh and Ors.
, ILR 6 IA 88, referred to.
The personal Law of the Hindus governed by Mitakshara school of Hindu Law is that a coparcener can dispose of his undivided interest in the coparcenary property by a will but he cannot make a girt of such interest.
[243D] Ponnusami vs Thatha and Ors.
, ILR 9 Madras, 273; Ramanna vs Venkata, ILR 11 Madras 246; Rottala Rungunatham Chetty vs Pulicat Ramasami Chetti, ILR 27 Madras, 162; Mayne 's Hindu Law, Eleventh Edition, Article 382 and Mulla 's Hindu Law, Fiteenth Edition, Article 258, referred to. 4.
It is a settled law that a coparcener can make a gift of his undivided interest in the coparcenary property to another coparcener or to a stranger with the prior consent of other coparceners.
Such a gift will be quite legal and valid.
[243G] 5.
When a particular state of law has been prevailing for decades in a particular area and the people of that are having adjusted themselves with that law in their daily life.
it is not desirable that the court should upset such law except under compelling circumstances.
It is for the Legislature to consider whether it should change such law or not.
It may be legitimately presumed that before the passing of the , the Legislature must have taken into consideration the prohibition against making of gifts by a coparcener of his undivided interest in the coparcenary property, but the Legislature has not, except permitting the coparcener to make a will in respect of his undivided interest by section 30 of the , altered the law against making of gift by a coparcener of his undivided interest.
While considering whether the strict rule against alienation by girt should he interfered with or not, the court should also take into consideration the legislative inaction in not interfering with the rule against alienation by gift, while enacting the Hindu Succes sion Act.
[244D G] 238 G. Suryakantam vs
G. Suryanarayanamurthy and Ors., AIR 1957 Andhra Pradesh 1012, differed.
A. Perumalakkal vs Kumaresan Balakrishnan and Ors., , referred to.
That an individual member of the joint Hindu family has no definite share in the coparcenary property.
By an alienation of his undivided interest in the coparcenary property, a coparcener cannot deprive the other coparceners of their right to the property.
The object of this strict rule against alienation by way of gift is to maintain the jointness of ownership and possession of the coparcenary property.
It is true that there is no specific textual authority prohibiting an alienation by gift and the law in this regard has developed gradually, but that is lot the purpose of preventing a joint Hindu family from being disin tegrated.
[242G H; 243A B]
