The appellants, by an agreement, let out two trucks on hire to the respondent.
The respondent terminated the agreement but failed to return the trucks on the fixed date on the plea that they had already been returned to a partner of the appellants.
The appellants served the statutory notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure and, on the respondent 's failure to comply, brought a suit for wrongful detention claiming, inter alia, return of the trucks or their value in the alternative as stated in the notice and damages for wrongful detention till delivery.
Claim was also made for such appreciated value of the trucks as would prevail at the date of the decree by paying additional Court fee.
The trial court held that the return of the trucks as alleged by the respondent was not justified, and, besides the rent claimed in the suit, passed a decree for recovery of the price of the trucks in the alternative as stated in the notice and interest thereon by way of damages, holding that the price as at the date of the tort was sufficient compensation in law either for wrongful conversion or for wrongful detention.
The High Court affirmed the decision of the trial court so far as the recovery of the price in the alternative was concerned holding that the respondent could not be called upon to pay more than what it was asked to pay by the notice, but disagreed on the question of award of damages and enhanced the decree to the extent of the claim as tentatively laid in the appeal.
Held, that the courts below were in error in deciding the matter as they did and the appeal must be allowed.
Where the bailee fails to deliver the goods, the bailor has normally the right to elect his own remedy and sue him either for wrongful conversion or for wrongful detention.
If he chooses to adopt the latter remedy, the bailee cannot take advantage of his own wrongful conversion and compel the bailor to choose the other remedy to his disadvantage.
Reeve vs Palmer, ; , and Wilkinson vs Verity, , referred to.
The cause of action in a suit for wrongful detention, unlike that in a suit for wrongful conversion is a continuing one ,and 782 the measure of damages must be the value of the goods not as at the date of the tort but as at the date of the judgment.
Although the cause of action arises with the refusal of the bailee to deliver the goods, it continues till delivery is made by the bailee or he is compelled to do so by a decree of court.
While in a suit for wrongful conversion the plaintiff abandons his title and claims damages in lieu of the goods, in a case of wrongful detention the plaintiff claims delivery of the goods on the basis of his title that subsists till the date of decree.
Consequently, the value of the goods in the alternative on failure of delivery can be ascertained only at the date of the decree.
Rosenthal vs Alderton & Sons Ltd., , referred to.
Case law discussed.
It is well settled that in a suit for wrongful detention the plaintiff is entitled not merely to the delivery of the goods or their value in the alternative but also to damages for the wrongful detention till the date of the decree.
The principle for assessing such damages must be the same as in any other case where the wrongful act of one so injures something belonging to another as to render it unusable or something is taken away so that it can no longer be used, and the amount of damages must be ascertained by a reasonable calculation after taking all relevant circumstances into consideration.
In the instant case the High Court should have made a reasonable calculation of the number of days the trucks could have been put to use by the appellants and awarded damages accordingly.
Strand Electric & Engineering Co., Ltd., , Owners of the Steamship " Mediana " vs Owners, Master and Crew of Lightship "Comet", , referred to.
Anderson vs Passman, ; , held inapplicable.
While the terms of section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure must be strictly complied with, that does not mean that the terms of the section should be construed in a pedantic manner or in a manner completely divorced from common sense.
There can be no doubt on a reasonable construction of the terms of the section that the value of the trucks as stated in the notice in the instant case, could be no other than the value as on the date fixed for delivery and, consequently, it could be no bar to the recovery of such appreciated value as prevailed at the date of the judgment.
Bhagchand Dagadusa vs Secretary of State, (1927) L.R. 54 I.A. 338, considered.
Jones vs Nicholls, ; E.R. 149, and Chandu Lal Vadilal vs Government of Bombay, I.L.R. , referred to.
