Section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Sahayata Upkram (Vishesh Upbandh) Adhiniyam, 1978 provides for the declaration of a State industrial undertaking as a relief undertaking and section 5 for suspension of suits or other legal proceedings against such relief undertakings and bars institution or commence ment of suits or other legal proceedings against such an industrial undertaking during the period in which it remains a relief undertaking notwithstanding any law, usage, custom, contract, instrument, decree, order, award, or settlement.
The appellant, a textile undertaking at Ujjain, M.P. was declared a 'relief undertaking ' by notification dated 15.11.1980 issued by the State Government under section 3 of the Act and the time extended by subsequent orders till 15.11.1987.
The respondent filed a summary suit against the appellant in the Bombay High Court for a certain sum with interest and costs, which was decreed ex parte.
He then got the decree transferred for execution to the Court of Dis trict Judge, Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh on 26.9.1986.
The appel lant resisted execution on the ground of the bar contained in section 5 of the Act.
The respondent while admitting that the appellant was a relief undertaking contended that the Dis trict Judge had no jurisdiction to entertain any objection to the execution of the decree validly passed by the High Court as it could not 248 go behind the decree, and the decree mandated execution on its terms.
The District Judge held that the appellant could not take advantage of the notifications under the Act because the rights and liabilities of the parties had to be deter mined by the transferee court in accordance with the sub stantive law bearing on the question in the court that passed the decree, and that the execution of the decree could not be challenged before the transferee court unless it was shown that the transferor court had no jurisdiction to pass the decree.
The High Court took the view that the executing court could not go behind the decree even if it was erroneous on law or on facts and after considering the effect of section 5 on the general law governing decrees and their execution as provided in the Civil Procedure Code held that there was no bar against execution of the decree, and consequently rejected the revision and affirmed the order of the District Judge.
In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the respondent that the expression 'other legal proceedings ' would not take in execution proceedings and the execution court could not, therefore, refuse to execute a valid de cree, that if such a wide construction was given to that expression institution of even claims of workers under the Industrial Disputes Act and other similar beneficial legis lation would be barred, that the execution court could not, while executing decrees, adopt a procedure under any special law available in the State in which the execution court was situate in relation to decrees obtained outside the States, and finally that section 5 could not apply to post notification liabilities.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court was in error in allowing execu tion to proceed.
It has completely overlooked the purpose of the Madhya Pradesh Sahayata Upkram (Vishesh Upbandh) Adhini yam, 1978 and the limited period of operation of section 5.
The bar contained in the section by way of suspension of suits or other legal proceedings against relief undertakings is an absolute one for the period contemplated in the Act.
[263C; 253B; 262F] 2.
The section is not happily worded.
What it intends to convey if the words are re arranged, would be: "Notwith standing any law, usage, custom, contract, instrument, decree, order, award, settlement or other provisions, no suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted or commenced or if pending shall be proceeded against the industrial undertaking as from the date specified in the notification under sub section
249 (1) of section 3 during the period in which it remains a relief undertaking".
So, read, the object of the section becomes clear.
[257BD] 3.
The section has to be construed and interpreted as it stands.
It iS unambiguous and full import has to be given to its words and its intent.
The expression 'other legal pro ceedings ' in the section includes execution proceedings also.
The non obstante clause contained therein takes within its ambit all the decrees passed against relief undertak ings.
The bar of 'institution or commencement ' takes within its ambit suits or 'other legal proceedings ', which include execution petitions also.
The inclusion of the expression 'decree ' in the section further shows that a decree validly obtained against a relief undertaking cannot be executed during the period the declaration is in force.
[2S8C; 261E; 257DE] The Governor General in Council vs Shiromani Sugar Mills Ltd., , referred to.
State Bank of India vs Jaipur Udyog & Ors., (AIR 1986 Delhi 357), distinguished.
Section 5 has a free field of operation unfettered by any limitation.
It is independent and uncontrolled by sections 4, 6 and 7 which deal with suspension or modification of cer tain remedies, rights etc., stay of proceedings, their revival and continuance.
It does not make any reference to section 4.
It had been enacted with a definite object and that is to protect the relief undertakings from litigations and consequent actions during the period the declaration is in force.
[257B; 261F] 5.
Section 5 operates even against execution of decrees obtained against the relief undertaking by its creditors outside the State of Madhya Pradesh.
To direct execution of such decrees would be to encourage filing of suits in courts situated in areas where the Act is not in operation, secure decrees and then try to circumvent the operation of the Act by getting those decrees transferred under sections 40 and 42 of the Civil Procedure Code and defeat the purpose of the Act.
Such an abuse is not permissible in the face ors.
5 of the Act.
[262A; 258B; 253F; 257G] 6.
The transferee court has to execute the decree in accordance with the law obtaining in the court that passed the decree and determine the rights and liabilities of the parties in accordance with the substantive law obtaining in the State where that court is situate.
That being so, the judgment debtor cannot move the execution court and get the benefit of the procedure available in the State in which the transferee court is situated.
[262D] 250 In the instant case the decree obtained from the Bombay High Court was a valid decree.
No court in Madhya Pradesh could question its validity, nor could refuse to execute it.
All that is sought to be done by section 5 of the Act is to suspend its animation for the period mentioned in the noti fication.
It is not a permanent relief.
Section 5, there fore, does not come into conflict either with section 40 or 42 of the Civil Procedure Code.
[257FG; 258AB; 261FG; 262EF] 7.
It cannot be said that the debts incurred prior to the notification under section 3 alone are barred and debts incurred subsequent to the notification under section 3 are not barred.
Section 5 does not permit such an interpretation.
[263BC] 8.
There is need to evolve a more acceptable procedure while dealing with sick units.
Invariably, the amounts pumped in in trying to rescue sick units are ultimately lost.
No purpose will be served by giving life to such units.
The concern for workers must be matched with concern for modernisation also.
The labour should not be left to the mercy of such sick units.
The Government will have to evolve a more acceptable and intelligent policy.
Units with decrep it and antiquated machineries must be got rid of and public money must be saved.
In their places new units must come into existence.
If Government finds it difficult a trial must be undertaken to entrust such units to the labour to test how they work with their cooperative effort.
[263DH]
