The petitioner company, engaged in manufacture of ferro silicon, silicon metal and silicon carbide, was per mitted clubbing of electricity for the water years 1979 80 to 1983 84 for its units in an industrial complex in the State of Orissa, which utilised electricity as raw material and which were classified as 'power intensive industries".
During the water year 1984 85, clubbing of power supply from July 1984 onwards was allowed and bills for the period from July 1984 to December 1984 were drawn up and served on the basis that the company was entitled to the benefit of club bing.
Though the position was subject to revision in October 1984 no revision took place.
In December 1984, the facility of clubbing was refused on the ground that one of the units being a lOO% export oriented industry, power supply to it had to he regulated separately for purposes of power alloca tion and that clubbing had been allowed for the month of July 1984 only.
Under Section 22B of the Indian Electricity Act, 1949, the State of Orissa issued an order on January 22, 1985, effective from July 1, 1984, directing the State Electricity Board to reduce supply of energy so as to allow consumers to avail of supply only to the extent specified in the Annexure to the order.
There was a note to the order prescribing certain conditions.
All the units of the petitioner company were shown in the 266 Annexure under the classification 'power intensive indus tries '.
The First three units were allotted energy together and the fourth unit separately.
After the promulgation of the above order, the Board served a revised bill on the company demanding payment at the higher tariff rate for the period from October 1984 to June 1985, on the ground that there had been alleged excess drawal by the company due to clubbing.
The company field a writ petition in the High Court challenging the aforesaid order and also the letter of the Board refusing clubbing for the entire water year 1984 85 and praying for quashing the same.
The company also sought a writ of mandamus directing the Board and the State Govern ment to permit clubbing for the water year 1984 85 as well as for the future years.
On behalf of the State it was contended that clubbing had been allowed to the company by the Board temporarily for the month of July 1984 only during the water year 1984 85 and that the power allotted to the fourth unit could not be allowed to be clubbed with that allotted to the other three units since the former was a 100% export oriented unit and, it had, therefore, to be treated separately for the allocation of power.
During the pendency of the writ petition the State Government passed another order effecting allocation of power under Section 22B of the Act for the water year 1985 86.
The company was served with a notice of disconnection for non payment of the bills prepared at the higher tariff rate for the month of August, 1985.
The company filed anoth er writ petition challenging the order and praying for identical reliefs as in the previous petition.
This petition was opposed by the State contending that the said unit, being a 100% export oriented unit, had to be treated sepa rately for the purpose of power allocation.
The High Court passed an interim order directing the State Government to dispose of the company 's request for clubbing of the power allotted for all the four units for the water year 1985 86.
The State Government, thereafter passed an order, rejecting the application without giving any reason.
The company 's application for amending the writ petition by challenging the Government 's refusal was allowed.
The High Court held that under Section 22B of the Act, the State Government had the power to grant or refuse the request of a consumer for being allowed the facility of clubbing, and upheld the power of the State Government to impose special tariff in case the allotted quota of energy was exceeded.
It however held that the State Government and 267 the Board had no power under the Act to impose restrictions on the use of electric energy with retrospective effect and quashed the demands made under the revised bills impugned in the first writ petition.
It also held that the orders passed by the State Government under Section 22B of the Act did not show that there was any application of mind by the Govern ment on the question as to whether or not clubbing should be allowed with reference to relevent considerations and that the plea raised by the State Government that the fourth unit should be treated separately from the other three units since the former was an export oriented unit was without any substance.
The High Court quashed the demands for additional tariff made in the revised bills challenged in the first writ petition and declared that the company would be liable to pay tariff only at the contractual rate for the supply made during the water year 1984 85.
In respect of the water year 1985 86, the High Court directed that the company shall enjoy the benefit of clubbing till the State Government passed an appropriate statutory order rejecting its request.
For the water year 1986 87 the State Government passed an order dated 8th December, 1986 effecting an allocation of power supply on the same pattern as was adopted for the previous year and rejecting the request of the company to allow the facility of clubbing to its fourth unit.
The company filed a writ petition in this Court challenging the said order.
In the Special Leave Petitions of the company it was submitted.
that the four electrical sub merged arc furnaces of the company producing ferro alloys cannot be run at a low capacity and they required continuous and uninterrupted supply of energy to sustain production and also to ensure that the furnaces did not sustain damage, as electric power was used as a raw material in the manufacture of ferro alloys, that on account of frequent interruptions and the undependable nature of supply of power, the fourth unit had suffered very serious damage causing a great loss and that the benefit of clubbing cannot be denied to the company under Section 22B of the Act.
It was contended in the Special Leave Petitions on behalf of the State and the Electricity Board that the power availability position in respect of each water year can be reasonably ascertained with some degree of precision only after the peak monsoon period and the High Court was, there fore, not right in holding that the orders under Section 22B of the Act cannot be passed with retrospective effect in the middle of a water year.
268 Allowing the writ petition to a limited extent and disposing of the Special Leave Petitions of the company and dismissing the Special Leave Petitions of the State and the Board, this Court, HELD:I.
It is clear from a reading of Section 22B of the Electricity Act that what is contemplated by it is that the State Government should only lay down policy guidelines to be adopted by the Board for regulating, supply, jurisdic tion, consumption or use of energy.
The implementation of the policy after working out the details is a matter to he carried out by the Board.
It is, therefore, strange that the State Government had taken upon itself the task of allocat ing the quantum of power that may he consumed by the differ ent industrial units in respect of the years 1984 85, 1985 86 and 1986 87 under Section 22B of the Act.
[283F H] 2.
The High Court was right in holding that under this Section, the Government may for purposes of securing equita ble distribution of energy regulate its consumption or use and decide as a matter of policy whether the benefit of clubbing should he allowed to the consumers of energy.
The immediate consequence of denial of the facility of clubbing will he to restrict the quantum of permissible consumption of energy by each of the respective units to the quota allotted to it singly or jointly and this necessarily in volves serious implications and repercussions, both economic and otherwise, on the viable functioning of the industry because excessive drawals of energy by resort to clubbing would necessarily invite liability for payment at a higher tariff for the energy so drawn.
[283H; 284A B] 3.
The High Court was right in holding that the benefit of clubbing which the company had enjoyed pursuant to the impugned order during the water year 1984 85 till the end of December, 1984 could not he taken away by the impugned letter of the Board dated 24 1 1985.
The earlier letter dated 12th July 1984 had made an allocation of power to all the four units on a monthly basis commencing from 1st July, 1984 with permission accorded to the company to club the drawal subject to the condition that the whole position would be reviewed in October, 1984.
There was no such review and it was only in the impugned letter of 24th January, 1985 that the Board had incorporated its decision not to permit clubbing.
This decision could not operate retrospectively so as to cover the period during which the company had been enjoying the benefit of clubbing under the permission valid ly granted to it by the Board and which had not been revised till then.
[284F; 285B D] 269 4.
The High Court was right in holding that the demands for additional tariff made by the Board as per the revised bills issued to the company for the year 1984 85, were illegal and were liable to be quashed and that the sole reason stated by the Board in its impugned letter for refus ing the facility of clubbing to the company was fallacious, illegal and untenable.
[285D E] 5.
The High Court was not right in observing that the orders under Section 22B of the Act imposing restrictions on consumption of power could not legally and validly be passed by the Government 'with retrospective effect ' in the middle of a water year.
[284D] 6.
If a consumer had been allowed the benefit of club bing previously, that benefit could not be taken away with retrospective effect thereby saddling him with heavy finan cial burden in respect of the past period where he had drawn and consumed power on the faith of the orders extending to him the benefit of clubbing.
[284E] 7.
Inspite of the express pronouncement by the High Court to the effect that the reason stated by the Board for refusing the benefit of clubbing for the year 1984 85 was illegal and untenable, the State Government merely reiterat ed the very same reason in its impugned order refusing benefit of clubbing for the year 1986 87.
This clearly indicated lack of due care and proper application of the mind of the Government to relevant aspects of the matter before the order was passed.
[287C] 8.
There was no separate categorisation of export ori ented industries under Regulation 28 of the Orissa State Electricity Board (General Conditions of Supply) Regulations 1981.
Under the scheme of the regulation, industries had to fall under one or other of the five categories small, medi um, large, power intensive and heavy.
In the orders passed by the State Government under Section 22B of the Act for the years 1984 85, 1985 86 and 1986 87, the only categories mentioned were heavy industries and power intensive indus tries and all the four units of the company had been includ ed under the category 'power intensive industries '.
Clubbing had been allowed by the Board and was being allowed even now in respect of all the power intensive industries, other than export oriented industries.
There is no justification at all for this differential treatment meted out to export oriented industries.
The note appended to the Government 's orders for the years 1985 86 and 1986 87 did not in any way lay down that an export oriented industry was to he made a separate allocation 270 of power and was to be denied the benefit of clubbing merely on account of its being engaged in an export oriented ven ture.
It continues to be classified as a power intensive industry for purposes of allocation of power.
[285G H; 286A C] 9.
So long as no additional power allocation had been made and no preferential treatment had been given to the particular power intensive industry on the ground that it was a 100% export oriented industry, it cannot be meted out a prejudicial treatment different from what was given to other power intensive industries, termed as "domestic units".
[286G] 10.
When all other power intensive industries were being allowed the benefit of clubbing it would not be legally permissible nor proper to deny the facility of clubbing to an industry classified as 'power intensive unit ' merely on the ground that the particular power intensive unit was an export oriented unit, so long as it had not been given any special allotment of power on the said ground on the basis of its fulfilment of the conditions specified for a 100% export oriented unit in the note appended to the Govern ment 's order passed under Section 22B of the Act.
Such differential treatment would amount to arbitrary discrimina tion, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[287F] The Court quashed the impugned order of the State Gov ernment for the year 1986 87 and directed that: ,(a) the respondents allow the petitioner company the facility of clubbing of the energy supply to the four units; [288E] (b) the impugned order for the year 1986 87 passed by the State Government under Section 22B of the Act insofar as it fixes the energy allocation for the different units shall not be treated or construed as denying the facility of clubbing to the company; and [288F] (c) that nothing, contained in the judgment of this Court is to be construed as laying down a general proposi tion that industrial consumers of electrical energy having more than one unit are entitled, under all circumstances, as of right, to club the power allotted to their different units.
[288B]
