Sub section (1) of section 5 of the Orissa Forest Produce (Control of Trade) Act, 1981 provides that on the issue of a notification under sub section
(3) of section 1 in respect of an area (a) all contracts for the purchase, sale, gathering or collection of specified forest produce shall stand rescind ed, and (b) no person other than the State Government or its officers or agents shall purchase or transport any specified forest produce in the said area.
Explanation II thereto provides that purchase of specified forest produce from the State Government or its officers or agents is not to be deemed to be a purchase in contravention of the provisions of the Act.
The appellant company was granted a licence for collec tion, sale and purchase of sal seeds from Government forests on the stipulation that it would establish solvent extrac tion units in backward areas.
The appellant company was to supply sal seeds to these extraction plants.
The agreement was renewed for a further period of ten years from October 1, 1979.
The State Government by a notification dated Decem ber 9, 1982 issued under sub section
(3) of section 1 brought the Act into force immediately in the whole of the State in relation to sal seeds.
Thereafter it refused to accept royalty from the appellant on the ground that the notification had the effect of rescinding the contract between the company and the Government.
318 A writ petition filed by the company for a declaration that the abovesaid notification did not have the effect of rescinding their contract with the State Government, was dismissed by the High Court.
In the appeals to this Court it was contended for the appellants that the Act had no application to the produce grown in Government forests, that the Act was aimed at creating a monopoly in forest produce in the Government by vesting in it the exclusive right to purchase forest produce grown in private holdings, and that even otherwise Explana tion II to section 5(1) saved such contracts for the purchase of specified forest produce from Government lands also.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that the very wide language of section 5(1)(a) made it applicable to all forest produce whether grown in private holdings or Government forests, and that the contract being for collection and not for purchase of forest produce it was not saved by the Explanation II to section 5(1).
Allowing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The Orissa Forest Produce (Control of Trade) Act, 1981 and the notification issued under it do not apply to the forest produce grown in Government forests.
It was not, therefore, open to the Government to treat the con tracts with the appellants as rescinded.
[333C] 2.
The scheme of the Act is fully in tune with the object set out in the Statement of Objects and Reasons and in the Preamble, namely, that of creating a monopoly in forest produce by making the Government the exclusive pur chaser of forest produce grown in private holdings.
Sections 4, 5(1)(b), 5(3), 7, 8 and 9 deal with purchase of forest produce by the State Government.
This can only be of forest produce grown in private holdings and not in Government forests since there can be no question of or providing for the purchase by the Government of forest produce grown on Government lands.
The only provision in the Act which ex pressly deals with sale of forest produce by the State Government is section 12, and that again is confined to the sale of specified forest produce purchased by the State Govern ment.
The Act, therefore, cannot to said to have any appli cation to produce grown in Government forests.
[331H 332A, 331FG, EF, CD, F, 323E] 3.1 The safest guide to the interpretation of a statute is the reason for it, which can he discovered through exter nal and internal aids.
The external aids are Statement of Objects and Reasons when the Bill is 319 presented to Parliament, the reports of Committees which preceded the Bill and the reports of Parliamentary Commit tees.
Occasional excursions into the debates of Parliament are permitted.
Internal aids are the Preamble, the scheme and the provisions of the Act.
[328EF[ 3.2.
No provision in the statute and no word of the statute may be construed in isolation.
Every provision and every word must be looked at generally before any provision or word is attempted to be construed.
The setting and pat tern are important.
Parliament does not waste its breath unnecessarily.
It is neither expected to use unnecessary expressions, 'nor to express itself unnecessarily.
While the words of an enactment are important, the context is no less important.
The fact that general words are used in a statute is not in itself a conclusive reason why every case failing literally within them should be governed by that statute.
The context of an Act may well indicate that wide or general words should be given a restrictive meaning.
[328F 329B] Attorney General vs H.R.H. Prince Augustus, ; Chertsey, U.D.C.v.
Mixnam 's Properties, , Empress Mills vs Municipal Committee, Wardha, ; and Maunsell vs Olins, , referred to.
4.1 It is not permissible to the Court to construe the wide and general words of section 5(1)(a) in their literal sense as that would not be in consonance with the scheme of the Act.
The proper way to construe that provision is to give a restricted meaning to the wide language there used so as to fit into the general scheme of the Act.
[332B D] 4.2 Section 5(1)(a) and 5(1)(b) are connected by the conjunction 'and ', and having regard to the circumstances leading to the enactment and the policy and design of the Act, cls.(a) and (b) must be construed in such a way as to reflect each other.
Viewing section 5(1)(a) and 5(1)(b) together and in the light of the Preamble and the Statement of Ob jects and Reasons and against the decor of the remaining provisions of the Act, it is apparent that section 5(1), like the rest of the provisions, applied to forest produce grown in private holdings and not to forest produce grown in Govern ment lands.
[332D, F G] 5.
The contracts relating to specified forest produce which, therefore, stood rescinded were contracts in relation to forest produce grown in private holdings only.
Since the very object to the Act was to create a monopoly in forest produce in the Government so as to enable the Government, among other things, to enter into contracts and since 320 section 5(1) does not bar any future contracts by the Government in respect of the forest produce, there was no justification in rescinding contracts solemnly entered into by the Govern ment for the avowed purpose of encouraging the setting up of certain industries in the State.
[332E, 334A] 6.
The object of the Act was to prevent smuggling of those varieties of forest produce as were grown both in Government forests and private lands.
It was expressly mentioned in the Statement of Objects and Reasons that such varieties of forest produce were unlike sal seeds which were grown only in Government forests.
Even so the only notifica tion ever issued under the Act was in respect of sal seeds and no other forest produce.
The mere inclusion of 'sal seeds ' in the definition of 'forest produce ' cannot in the teeth of the several provisions of the Act lead to the inference that forest produce grown in Government lands was also meant to be dealt with by the Act.
Several species of forest produce were included in the definition of forest produce and among them 'sal seeds ' were also included so as to eliminate even the remote possibility of the existence of some stray private holdings in which sal seeds may have been grown.
[324G 325A, 333AB] 7.
The circumstance that 'grower of forest produce ' is defined so as to include the Government is of no consequence in determining whether the Act is applicable to forest produce grown on Government lands.
The expression 'grower of forest produce ' is not found in any other provision except section 5(2)(a) and section 10.
Section 5(2)(a) provides for the transport of forest produce by the grower from a place within one unit to another place within the unit.
Section 10 requires every grower of specified forest produce to get himself registered in the prescribed manner.
Neither section 5(2)(a) nor section 10 has, therefore, any application to the Government lands.
[331B, A] 8.
It is not necessary to consider the submission that Explanation II to section 5(1) saves the present contract or that Explanation I1 is an explanation only to section 5(1)(a) and not to section 5(1)(b).
[333B] [It is not permissible for the Court to extend the period of lease of the appellants by way of relief for the business lost.
The parties to work out their rights in the light of the various interim orders and the declaration granted by the Court. ] [333E]
