The appellant, a working journalist who was appointed on November, 1961 as a Staff Correspondent in the Calcutta Office of the respondent company while working as such at Calcutta, applied on 29 April, 1975 to the Government of West Bengal under sub section
(1) of section 17 of the Working Jour nalists and Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 for recovery of the unpaid portion of his wages relating to the period April 1968 to February 1973.
While the conciliation proceedings were on, he was promoted and transferred to Pune on 16 February, 1976.
The Conciliation Officer reported the fail ure of the proceedings before him on 16 November, 1976 and the Government of West Bengal made a reference under sub section
(2) of section 17 of the Act to the First Labour Court, West Bengal on 23 August, 1977 for the adjudication of the dis pute between the parties.
The preliminary objection raised by the respondent company that the Government of West Bengal was not competent to make the reference was rejected by the Labour Court.
The respondent company 's writ petition chal lenging 'the order of the Labour Court was allowed by a Single Judge whose decision was affirmed in appeal by the Division Bench of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal by special leave and dismissing the writ petition of the respondent company, this Court.
HELD: (i) Sub section
(1) ors.
17 of the Act requires that an application by the newspaper employee complaining that an amount due to him has remained unpaid by the employer should be made to the State Government.
Which is the State Govern ment to which such application lies is 476 indicated by r: 36 of the Rules made under the Act and that rule provides that an application under section 17 of the Act shall be made to the Government of the State where the central office or the branch office of the newspaper estab lishment in which the newspaper employee is employed is situated.
It is the location of the central office or the branch office in which the newspaper employee is employed which determines which State Government it will be.
The rule works in favour of the convenience of the newspaper employ ee.
[478C E] (ii) Sub section
(2) of section 17 provides that if any question arises as to the amount due under the Act to a newspaper employee from his employer, the State Government may refer the question to any Labour Court, constituted by it under the or under any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in the State.
If a question arises as to the amount due, it is a question which arises on the appli cation made by the newspaper employee, and the application having been made before the appropriate State Government, it is that State Government which will call for an adjudication of the dispute by referring the question to a Labour Court.
The State Government before whom the application for recov ery is made is the.
State Government which will refer the question as to the amount due to a Labour Court.
[478F G; 479C D] In this case, the appellant was employed at the Calcutta branch of the respondent company.
He made the application to the Labour Department of the Government of West Bengal for recovery of the unpaid portion of his wages.
When the ques tion arose as to the amount due to the appellant, the Gov ernment of West Bengal made the reference for adjudication to the First Labour Court, West Bengal.
Upon the construc tion of sub section
(2) of section 17 as indicated at (ii) above, it is beyond dispute that the Government of West Bengal is competent to make the reference.
The High Court erred in holding that the reference was without jurisdiction and that it was the State of Maharashtra which was competent to make the reference.
[479E G]
