Rule 3(c) of the U.P. Service of Engineers (Buildings and Roads Branch) Class II Rules, 1936 defined 'direct recruitment ' or 'direct appointment ' as recruitment or appointment of Assistant Engineers in the manner prescribed in r. 5(i), (ii) and (iii) thereof, after consultation with the Public Service Commission.
Rule 6 empowered the Govern ment to decide in each case the source from which a vacancy shall be filled up provided that 25% of the vacancies were reserved for promotion of persons selected from subordinate services.
Rule 3(b) thereof defined a 'member of the serv ice ' as a government servant appointed in a substantive capacity.
Rule 23 stipulated that seniority in the service shall be determined by the date of order of appointment to the service.
By an Office Memorandum dated December 7, 1961, the State Government laid down that direct recruitment to the posts of Assistant Engineers would be made on the results of a competitive examination conducted by the Commission, the successful candidates being appointed in the order of merit against vacant permanent posts and, those following, against temporary posts.
It was further laid down that while 50% of the permanent vacancies in the Department would be filled by direct recruitment, 25% of them would be filled by selection from amongst the temporary Assistant Engineers recruited through the Commission and for this purpose the temporary Assistant Engineers already working in the Department who were appointed on the advice of the Commission prior to the introduction of the new scheme and who 428 possessed the requisite qualifications were given relaxation in the age limit upto 40 years for appearing in the competi tive examinations to be conducted by the Commission.
As a measure of further concession to the existing temporary Assistant Engineers, it was provided that initially 50% of the permanent vacancies would be filled up by selection of temporary Assistant Engineers and only 25% thereof would be filled up by direct recruitment.
The competitive examina tions were held commencing from the year 1962.
On July 28, 1969, the State Government brought into force the U.P. Service of Engineers (Buildings and Roads Branch) Class II (Amendment) Rules, 1969 with retrospective effect from March, 1962 amending inter alia rr: 3(b), 3(c), 5 and 6 of the 1936 Rules to bring them in line with the scheme enunciated in the Office Memorandum dated December 7, 1961.
On November 26, 1971, r. 23 was amended by the U.P. Service of Engineers (Buildings and Roads Branch) Class II (Amendment) Rules, 1971 as under: "Except as provided for hereunder seniority in the service will be determined by the date of order of appointment in a substantive vacancy . " The competitive examinations for direct recruitment of Assistant Engineers in accordance with the new Scheme were held upto the year 1971 and were discontinued by the execu tive instruction contained in Office Memorandum dated June 23, 1972 as it was felt that the system had done more harm than good to the service.
The respondents, who were directly recruited Assistant Engineers appointed, after consultation with the Commission, to temporary posts in the cadre upto 1961 challenged the seniority list prepared in 1980 in terms of the Office Memorandum dated December 7, 1961 and the Amendment Rules, 1969 and 1971 as violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Consti tution and prayed for determination of their seniority on the basis of the length of their continuous service in terms of the decision of this Court in Baleshwar Dass & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
, [1981] 1 S.C.R. 449.
The High Court allowed the petitions and directed preparation of a fresh seniority list by treating the appointments of respondents as substantive appointments to the cadre.
The appellants in these appeals were those temporary Assistant Engineers working in the Department who were selected for appointment to permanent vacancies 429 on the results of the competitive examinations held by the Commission.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: There is no controversy that all those Assistant Engineers who were substantively appointed to temporary posts in consultation with the Commission and had been rendering their service for long years till 1961 have become members of the service in accordance with the provisions of the Rules.
Therefore, on the basis of r. 23 as it was before the amendment made in 1971, these Assistant Engineers are entitled to have their seniority reckoned from the date of their being members of the service, no matter whether they are holding posts which remain as temporary for years to gether.
The direct recruits appointed on the basis of the examination held under the amended Rules cannot encroach upon their rights in the matter of determination of their seniority.
[442E H] 2.
This Court, in Baleshwar Dass & Ors.
vs State of U. P. & Ors.
, [1981] 1 S.C.R. 449, while holding that Office Memorandum dated December 7, 1961 was not arbitrary in so far as it fixed the proportion of permanent vacancies to be filled from various sources, observed that this scheme of 1961 could not stand in isolation and had to be read as subordinate to the 1936 Rules.
Hence, the aforesaid Office Memorandum does not affect the petitioners who have become members of the service and are entitled to have their sen iority reckoned from the date of their being members of the service in accordance with r. 23 of the 1936 Rules.
[440G H; 441A B] 3.
The effect of the amendments made in rr. 3(b), 3(c), 5 and 6 is that Assistant Engineers who have become members of the Service being appointed substantively in temporary posts will no longer be members of the service and will have to wait till they are selected and appointed as Assistant Engineers under r. 5(a)(ii) against quota fixed by r. 6 for this purpose.
This creates serious prejudice to them and it also creates uncertainty as to when they will be selected and appointed against the quota set up for such selection under r. 5(a)(ii).
The amended r. 23 lays down that seniori ty will be determined from the date of order of appointment in substantive vacancy.
These provisions have been made retrospectively effective from March 1, 1962 to the existing officers i.e., the respondents appointed substantively against temporary vacancies.
Such retrospective amendments cannot take away the vested rights.
[444H; A B] 430 T.R. Kapur vs State of Haryana & Ors., JT (1986) S.C. 1092; E.P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu, A.I.R. 1974 S.C. 555 and Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1978 S.C. 597; relied on.
The Assistant Engineers who have already become members of the service on being appointed substantively against temporary posts have already acquired the benefit of 1936 Rules for having their seniority computed from the date of their becoming members of the service.
The Amendment Rules, 1969 and 1971 take away this right of these temporary Assistant Engineers by expressly providing that those As sistant Engineers who are selected and appointed in perma nent vacancies against 50% quota provided by amended r. 6 will only be considered for the purpose of computation of seniority from the date of their appointment against perma nent vacancies.
Therefore, the temporary Assistant Engineers are not only deprived of their seniority but they are driven to a very peculiar position inasmuch as they have to wait until they are selected and appointed against permanent vacancies in the quota set up for this purpose by the amend ed r. 6.
There are about 200 Assistant Engineers who have been appointed substantively by the Government with the approval of the Public Service Commission before the en forcement of 1969 Rules.
The direct recruits appointed on the basis of the examination against permanent vacancies will get precedence over Assistant Engineers appointed in the matter of determination of their seniority in the cadre of Assistant Engineers on the basis of changed Rules, par ticularly amended r. 23, which takes into account only appointments in substantive vacancies.
The 1969 and 1971 Amendments in effect take away from the officers appointed to the temporary posts after selection by the Public Service Commission, the substantive character of their appointment.
These amendments are not only disadvantageous to the future recruits against temporary vacancies but they were made applicable retrospectively from March 1, 1962 even to exist ing officers recruited against temporary vacancies through Public Service Commission.
The Government has power to make retrospective amendments to the Rules but if the Rules purport to take away the vested rights and are arbitrary and not reasonable then such retrospective amendments are sub ject to judicial scrutiny.
[446B H; 447A C] S.B. Patwardhan vs State of Maharashtra, [1977] 3 S.C.R. 775, referred to.
The Office Memorandum dated December 7, 1961 which purports to amend the U.P. Service of Engineers (Buildings and Roads Branch) Class II Rules, 1936 cannot override, amend or supersede 431 statutory rules as it is nothing but an administrative order or instruction.
The temporary Assistant Engineers who have become members of the service after being selected by the Public Service Commission in accordance with the service rules are entitled to have their seniority reckoned in accordance with the provisions of r. 23 as it was then, from the date of their becoming members of the service, and this cannot be taken away by giving retrospective effect to the Amendment Rules of 1969 and 1971 as it is arbitrary, irra tional and not reasonable.
[448B D] Sant Ram Sharma vs State of Rajasthan & Anr., ; , referred to.
The Amendment Rules of 1969 read with the Amendment Rules of 1971 adversely affect the rights of the Assistant Engineers appointed to substantive posts prior to the intro duction of these amended Rules and create fetters for the long years of service being ever considered for reckoning of seniority in the cadre of Assistant Engineers.
For promotion from Assistant Engineer to the post of Executive Engineer seniority cum merit is the criterion.
These temporary As sistant Engineers, unless they are selected to the 50% quota in permanent vacancies reserved for promotion from the Assistant Engineers appointed to temporary posts, will never have their service reckoned for determination of seniority in the cadre.
The respondents were appointed long before the appointment of appellants as Assistant Engineers in perma nent vacancies.
The appointment of respondents has been made in consultation with the Public Service Commission and according to the decision in Baleshwar Dass 's case the respondent having become members of the Service they are deemed to be appointed substantively in temporary posts.
Therefore, the amended Rules, more particularly rr. 3(c), 5 and 6 of 1969 Rules as well as r. 23 of 1971 amended Rules are wholly arbitrary and discriminatory and are violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Mohammad Shujat Ali & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
The argument that the Amendment Rules were framed to attract meritorious and talented engineers in the U.P. Service of Engineers (Buildings and Roads Branch) as there were very little prospects of promotion for such Assistant Engineers to be promoted to the higher posts owing to the large number of Assistant Engineers appointed to temporary posts cannot be sustained, firstly, because it 432 seriously prejudices the rights of the Assistant Engineers appointed substantively to the temporary posts and working as Assistant Engineers for a number of years and secondly, because this process of direct recruitment against permanent vacancies was discontinued after 1971 as it worked injustice and had led to patent discrimination.
[449C F] 8.
When recruitments to a particular service are made from more than one source, quota and rota may be introduced consistent with the equality clause envisaged in articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In the instant case all the Assistant Engineers whether appointed in a temporary post of the cadre or in the permanent post of the cadre are recruit ed directly from graduates in Civil Engineering.
The only difference is that due to exigencies of service a large number of Assistant Engineers were recruited against tempo rary vacancies.
Under the 1936 Rules the Assistant Engineers appointed against temporary vacancies became members of the Service under the then r. 3 and they were eligible for their seniority being reckoned from the date of their becoming members of the service.
The impugned Rules of 1969 and 1971 purport to take away or to cruelly cut off the long years of valuable service rendered by these Assistant Engineers only on the pretext of appointment against permanent posts.
These temporary Assistant Engineers after introduction of the amended Rules have been relegated to a very uncertain posi tion as to when they will be selected against permanent vacancies by the Commission in the 50% quota provided under r. 6 of the amended Rules to become members of service and to have their seniority reckoned.
The fate of those Assist ant Engineers who are selected and appointed in temporary posts on the basis of the results of the examination is also very uncertain inasmuch as they will be considered for selection by the Commission against the quota for temporary Assistant Engineers after the Assistant Engineers appointed before them are all considered for selection in the said quota set up for the temporary Assistant Engineers in perma nent vacancies even though they have been appointed through the same process of examination.
Considering all these circumstances we are constrained to hold that the impugned rr. 3(c), 5 and 6 of the 1969 Rules and r. 23 of the 1971 Rules are arbitrary, irrational and unreasonable infringing articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[451G H; 452A F] Narender Chadha vs Union of India & Ors., , referred to.
State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa, ; , distinguished.
433 9.
Purely ad hoc employees or employees on purely offi ciating basis or employees purely for a temporary period in the cadre of Assistant Engineer, being not members of the service in accordance with the service rules, are not enti tled to have the benefit of their such adventitious, purely ad hoc and temporary service being reckoned for determina tion of seniority unless and until they become members of the service in accordance with the provisions of service rules.
Only those ad hoc appointees whose services have been regularised by the regularisation rules framed under proviso to article 309 of the Constitution after being duly selected by the Selection Committee and becoming members of the Service, will be entitled to seniority only from the date of order of appointment after selection in accordance with those regula tions as provided in r. 7 of the Regulations.
[453H, 454A C] Ashok Gulati and Ors.
vs D.S. Jain & Ors., ; and State of Gujarat vs
C.G. Desai, [1974] 2 S .C .R. 255, referred to.
