Appellant was tried by the Sessions judge and a jury on the charge of committing rape.
On the question of the age of the girl expert medical evidence was produced but no birth certificate was available.
The father of the girl could not be examined as he was dead.
According to the Police evidence the whereabouts of the mother were not traceable but the Police Officer who himself made the inquiry was not produced.
As regards the commission of the rape the girl herself was examined and there was the evidence of another girl and some circumstantial evidence.
The 750 accused filed a written statement but the judge refused to read it out to the jury.
The jury returned a unanimous verdict of guilty and the judge, accepting the verdict, convicted the appellant and sentenced him to 5 years rigorous imprisonment.
An appeal to the High Court was summarily rejected.
But the High Court granted "leave to appeal" on the ground that on account of the summary dismissal of the appeal appellant did not have the satisfaction of feeling that he had been fully heard and that justice should also appear to have been done by a full consideration of the evidence by the appellate court.
Held that, the certificate granted by the High Court amounts to a condemnation of the practice of summary dismissal of appeals, especially in jury trials.
Such practice prevails in most High Courts and has the sanction of statute law.
No certificate should be granted on a mere question of fact nor in a case where there are no complexities of law involved requiring an authoritative interpretation by the Supreme Court.
Haripada Dey vs The State of West Bengal, ; , followed.
There is no provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure requiring a Session judge to accept a written statement filed by an accused.
If such a written statement is allowed to be used at a Sessions trial by jury, it may throw the door open to irrelevant and inadmissible matter and cast an additional burden on the judge of separating admissible from inadmissible statements.
The judge had rightly refused the written statement to be read to the jury.
There is no rule of law or practice that there must be cor roboration of the testimony of the prosecutrix, before conviction for rape.
If the jury had been appraised of the necessity of corroboration, it was for the jury to decide whether or not it would convict on the uncorroborated testimony of the prosecutrix in the particular circumstances of the case before it.
Rameshwar vs The State of Rajasthan, , followed.
There was no misdirection on the question of the age of the girl.
The Session judge had pointed out the several items of evidence to the jury.
The failure of the prosecution to examine the Police Officer who actually made inquiry into the whereabouts of the mother does not affect the case as in any case the inquiry would be the result of hearsay.
