The election of the respondent, who was returned to the Lok Sabha in a bye election in 1981, was challenged by the appellant under section 80 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, on a number of grounds, including the allegations of corrupt practice of undue influence, hiring and procuring of vehicles for carrying voters and obtaining the assistance of Government servants and incurring expenses at the elec tion in excess of the permissible limit.
Upon a preliminary objection raised by the respondent the High Court struck off the pleadings as vague, general, unnecessary, frivolous and vexatious within the meaning of Order VI Rule 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure and rejected the petition under Order VII Rule 11 read with section 87 of the Act on the ground that it did not disclose any cause of action.
In the appeal under section 116 A of the Act against the order of the High Court, it was contended for the appellant that the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain prelim inary objections under Order VI Rule 16 or to reject the election petition under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code before the respondent had filed his written statement to the peti tion, which deprived him of the opportunity of amending the petition by supplying material facts and particulars, that allegations contained in various paragraphs of the petition constituted corrupt practices which disclosed cause of action within the meaning of section 100 of the Act and the High Court committed error in holding that the petition was detective, on the premise that it did not disclose any triable issue, and that the election petition disclosed primary facts regarding corrupt practice and 370 if there was absence of any particulars or details the High Court should have afforded opportunity to the appellant to amend the petition.
The respondent was subsequently returned to the Lok Sabha in the general election held in 1984 and the validity of that election has been upheld in Azhar Hussain vs Rajiv Gandhi, ; and Bhagwati Prasad vs Rajiv Gandhi, ; The relief of setting aside the impugned election had thus become infructuous by lapse of time as the subsequent election could not be set aside on the grounds raised in the petition.
But since section 98 read with section 99 of the Act mandates investigation of charges of corrupt practice, if any, raised against the returned candi date, and as proof thereof entails incurring of disqualifi cation from contesting subsequent election for a period of six years, the Court heard the appeal at length.
On the questions: Whether the High Court had jurisdic tion to strike out pleadings under Order VI Rule 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure and to reject an election petition under Order VII Rule 11 of that Code at the preliminary stage, even though no written statement had been filed by the respondent, whether in the instant case in entertaining the preliminary objections and rejecting the election peti tion the High Court deprived the appellant of an opportunity to amend the petition and to make good the deficiencies by supplying necessary particulars and details of the corrupt practices alleged in the petition, and whether the various paragraphs of the said election petition disclosed any cause of action.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 Right to contest election or to question the election by means of an election petition is neither common law nor fundamental right, instead it is a statutory right regulated by the statutory provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, which is a complete and self con tained Code.
Outside the statutory provisions, there is no right to dispute an election.
The provisions of the Civil Procedure Code are applicable to the extent as permissible by section 87 of the Act.
[387H 388B] 1.2.
The scheme of the Act shows that an election can be questioned under the statute as provided by section 80 on the grounds as contained in section 100.
The pleadings are regulated by section 83, which lays down a mandatory provision in providing that an election petition shall contain a COncise statement of material facts and set forth full particulars of 371 corrupt practices with exactitude.
[388C] 1.3 Since allegations of corrupt practice are in the nature of criminal charges, it is necessary that each and every corrupt practice must be clearly and specifically pleaded and it should be complete in itself so that the returned candidate may know the case he has to meet.
If the allegations are vague and general and the particulars of corrupt practice are not stated in the pleadings the trial of the election petition cannot proceed for want of cause of action.
[388DE] N.P. Ponnuswami vs Returning Officer, ; ; Jagan Nath vs Jaswant Singh, ; and Jyoti Basu vs Debi Ghosal, ; , referred to.
2.1 A combined reading of sections 81, 83, 86 and 87 of the Act makes it apparent that an election petition is liable to be dismissed in limine at the initial stage if it does not disclose any cause of action.
Cause of action in questioning the validity of election must relate to the grounds speci fied in section 100 of the Act.
If the allegations contained in the petition do not set out grounds of challenge as contem plated by section 100 and if the allegations do not conform to the requirement of sections 81 and 83 the pleadings are liable to be struck off under Order VI Rule 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
If after striking out defective pleadings the Court finds that no cause of action remains to be tried it would be duty bound to reject the petition under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code.
[382H, 386A C] Azhar Hussain vs Rajiv Gandhi, ; ; Bhag watii Prasad vs Rajiv Gandhi, ; ; Udhav Singh vs Madhay Rao Scindia, ; and Charan Lal Sahu to. 2.2 In the instant case, the appellant failed to plead complete details of corrupt practices which could constitute a cause of action as contemplated by section 100 of the Act.
He also failed to give the material facts and other details of the alleged corrupt practices.
The High Court, therefore, rightly exercised its power in rejecting the election peti tion under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code.
[401G, 403G H] 3.
I Order VI Rule 16 of the Civil Procedure Code per mits striking out of pleadings which are unnecessary, scan dalous, frivolous, or vexatious or which may tend to preju dice, embarrass or delay a fair trial at any stage of the proceedings.
It does not admit of any exception that the respondent must file written statement before the 372 preliminary objections could be entertained.
If, therefore, a preliminary objection is raised before commencement of the trial, the court is duty bound to consider the same.
It need not wait for the filing of the written statement by the defendant and point out defects.
Instead it can proceed to hear the preliminary objection and strike out the pleadings.
[387BC, 386D, 383AB, CD] 3.2.
The High Court, therefore, had jurisdiction in the instant case to strike out pleadings at the preliminary stage even though no written statement had been filed by the respondent.
[382CD] K. Kamaraja Nadar vs Kunju Thevar & Ors., , referred to.
Union of India vs Surjit Singh Atwal, ; , distinguished.
Vidya Charan Shukla vs G.P. Tiwari & Ors., AIR 1963 MP 356 overruled.
4.1 The Court did not deprive the appellant of the opportunity to amend the petition and to make good the deficiencies by supplying the necessary particulars and details of the corrupt practices alleged in the petition.
He was free to file amendment application, but at no stage did he express any desire to make any amendment application nor he made any application to that effect before the High Court.
It was open to him to have made that application but he himself did not make any such application.
[387DE] 4.2 The High Court was under no legal obligation to direct the appellant to amend pleadings or to suo moto grant time for the same.
Moreover, the allegations of corrupt practice as required by Section 83 were not complete and did not furnish any cause of action.
[387E] 5.1 The petition was drafted in a highly vague and general manner.
Various paragraphs of the petition presented disjointed averments and it is difficult to make out as to what actually the petitioner intended to plead.
[401H] 5.2 The allegations contained in paragraphs 1 to 7 contain narration of facts as to when the election took place and the petitioner 's desire to file his nomination paper and the obstruction raised by the authorities and the allegation that the police were shadowing the appellant do not make out any ground under section 100 of the Act.
[388H] 5.3 The allegation in para 8 that food was given to the workers of the respondent at some places assuming to be true does not make out a 373 case of corrupt practice or any other ground of challenge under section 100 of the Act.
A corrupt practice as contemplated by section 123(6) contemplates incurring or authorising expendi ture beyond the prescribed limit.
The impugned allegation does not contain any averment that the respondent incurred or authorised expenditure beyond the prescribed limit.
[389B D] 5.4 Paras 9 to 19 merely show that a number of vehicles were plying with party flags of the respondent in the con stituency on different dates which by itself do not consti tute any corrupt practice.
The basic ingredients to make out a ground for challenging the election under section 100 of the Act in these paras were totally lacking.
They, therefore, disclosed no cause of action.
[389E G] 5.5 The allegations in paras 20 and 21 that the mother of the returned candidate, who was the Prime Minister, had toured the constituency alongwith him and in her speeches had appealed to the voters to vote for him do not constitute undue influence or any other corrupt practice.
It is always open to a candidate or his supporters to appeal to the electors to vote for a particular candidate for the develop ment and progress of the area.
This would be a legitimate appeal, [389H 390A] 5.6 The allegations in paras 22 to 26 of the petition relate to the relationship of the appellant with his agent.
These do not make out any ground under section 100 of the Act.
[390BC] 5.7 The statement in para 27 that the appellant as we11 as his election agent were being followed by police does not refer to any violation of law or rule or commission of any electoral offence by the returned candidate or his workers with his consent.
[390C] 5.8 The allegation in para 28 that on the polling day a lady went to the polling booth alongwith a voter where he affixed stamp on ballot paper and returned with her does not amount to any corrupt practice with consent of the returned candidate unless it could be shown that it materially af fected the result of the election.
[390D] 5.9 The allegation in para 29 that on the polling day drinking water and batashas were being distributed to the voters at the polling station does not show that it was being done with the consent of the respondent or that he spent money over it or that the said action influenced the voters or that it materially affected the result of the election.
In the absence of such allegations it disclosed no cause of action.
[390F] 374 5.10 The allegations in paras 31 to 35 that workers of the respondent helped voters to cast their votes in favour of the respondent, do not amount to any corrupt practice unless there was further allegation that it materially affected the result of the election.
[390G] 5.11 The averments made in paras 37 and 38 contain narration of facts which have no bearing on any corrupt practice.
[391A] 5.12 The allegations in paras 39 to 49 that neither the appellant nor his election agent had appointed any counting agents but a number of persons had acted as his counting agents in an unauthorised manner and that complaints made by him were not considered by the Returning Officer, even if assumed to be true do not make out any case of commission of corrupt practice.
[391B] The High Court, was, therefore, justified in striking out all these paragraphs.
6.1 In order to constitute a corrupt practice as contem plated by sections 77 and 123(6) it is necessary to plead requi site facts showing authorisation or undertaking of reim bursement by the candidate or his election agent.
A mere vague and general statement that the candidate and his workers with his consent spent money in election in excess of the permissible ceiling would not be sufficient to con stitute corrupt practice.
[392G 393A] Rananjaya Singh vs Baijnath Singh, ; ; Smt.
Indira Gandhi vs RaI Narain, and Kunwar Lal Gupta vs
A.N Chawla, , referred to.
6.2 Any voluntary expense incurred by a political party, well wishers, sympathisers or association of persons does not fail within the mischief of section 123(6), instead only that expenditure which is incurred by the candidate himself or authorised by him is material for the purpose ors.
[392B] Dr. P. Nalla Thampy Terah vs Union of India & Ors., [1985] Supp.
SCC 189, referred to.
6.3 The allegations contained in various sub paras of para 50 merely allege that a number of vehicles were plying with the flags of the party to which the returned candidate belonged and food was served in connection with the election meetings, distribution of badges and 375 leaflets.
There is no allegation that the returned candidate incurred or authorised incurring of expenditure for the aforesaid purposes.
Unless the allegations are specific that the candidate or his election agent authorised the expenses before the money was actually spent and that the candidate or his election agent reimbursed or undertook to reimburse the same the necessary ingredient of corrupt practice would not be complete and it would provide no cause of action to plead corrupt practice.
The High Court was justified in striking out the same.
[393G 394A] 7.1 If some developmental activity was carried on in the constituency and if it was completed during the election period it could not amount to any gift or promise to the voters.
[394G] 7.2 The allegation in para 53(1)(A) does not disclose any material fact or particular regarding the alleged cor rupt practice of making gift which may amount to bribery within the meaning of section 123(1)(A).
It merely states that Amethi railway station was being constructed and during the election its work was speeded up which persuaded the voters to cast their votes in favour of the returned candidate.
There is no allegation that ,he returned candidate or his workers with his consent made any gift, offer or promise to any elector to vote or refrain from voting at an election.
[394EF] 8.1 A candidate, his workers and supporters have every right under the law to canvass for the success of a particu lar candidate saying that if elected he would work for the development of the constituency.
Such a promise does not in any way interfere with the free exercise of electoral right of the electors.
[395E] 8.2 The allegations in paras 53(1)(B) and (C) that the returned candidate, his mother and their workers with their consent made promise through newspapers, pamphlets and speeches that voters should cast their votes in favour of the respondent for the sake of progress and development of the constituency, merely amounts to a representation being made by the party leader and the returned candidate and his workers.
Such a statement of promise is a legitimate one and it does not fail within the definition of bribery and undue influence under section 123(1)(A) or section 123(2).
[395B, D] 8.3 Declaration of public policy or a promise of public action or promise to develop the constituency in general do not interfere with free exercise of electoral rights as the same do not constitute bribery or undue influence.
[396B] 376 Shiv Kirpal Singh vs
V.V. Giri, [1971] 2 SCR 197 and H.V. Kamath vs Ch.
Nitiraj singh; , , referred to.
9.1 Hiring or procuring of a vehicle by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with his consent is the first essential ingredient of the corrupt practice under section 123(5), the second such ingredient is that the hiring or procuring of the vehicle must be for conveyance of the voters to and from the polling station, and the third that conveyance of electors is free from any charge.
If any of the three ingredients is not pleaded to make out a case of corrupt practice under section 123(5) the charge must fail.
[397E, 399C] 9.2 The allegations contained in para 30 and 53(1)(D) conspicuously do not contain any pleading regarding hiring and procuring of the vehicles by the returned candidate or any of his workers with his consent for conveyance of the voters to and from polling station free of cost.
No particu lars of any kind have been ' specified.
The paras, therefore, do not make out any charge of corrupt practice as contem plated by section 123(5) and the High Court was justified in striking out the same.
[399G 400A] Joshbhai Chunnibhai Patel vs Anwar Beg A. Mirza, ; ; Ch.
Razik Ram vs Ch.
J.S. Chouhan & Ors., ; Balwant Singh vs Lakshmi Narain, ; ; Dadasaheb Dattatraya Pawar & Ors.
vs Pandurang Raoji Jagtap & Ors., ; ; Dharmesh Prasad Verma vs Faiyazal Azam, ; ; Rajendra Singh Yadav vs Chandra Sen & Ors., AIR 1979 SC 882 and Balwan Singh vs Prakash Chand & Ors., ; , referred to.
10.1 In order to constitute a corrupt practice under section 123(7), it is essential to clothe the petition with a cause of action which would call for an answer from the returned candidate and it should, therefore, plead mode of assist ance, measure of assistance and all facts pertaining to the assistance.
The pleading should further indicate the kind or form of assistance obtained and in what manner the assist ance was obtained or procured or attempted to be procured by the candidate.
for promoting the prospect of his election.
The petitioner must state with exactness the time of assist ance, the manner of assistance and the persons from whom assistance was obtained or procured by the candidate.
[400DE] 10.2 The allegations in sub paras 1, 2 and 3 of para 53(1)(E) that though the appellant had not appointed any counting agent but still 377 certain persons acted as his counting agents and the return ing officer did not hold any inquiry into his complaint, in sub para 4 that there was fear psychosis and it looked as if the police and other government officials wanted to help the returned candidate, in sub para 5 of certain persons helping the voters to cast their votes on the polling day and that some persons cast votes 100 to 200 times and their signa tures were not obtained do not make out any charge of cor rupt practice within the provisions of section 123(7).
[400FG] 11.
The allegations in para 53(2) that the presiding officers did not perform their duties in accordance with law inasmuch as they failed in their duty to remove the posters and other propaganda material from the polling booth and that the election symbol of the returned candidate was displayed within 100 metres of the polling booth in viola tion of the rules do not make out any charge of corrupt practice.
If at all, it could be a ground under section 100(1)(d)(iv) for setting aside election on the ground of its being materially affected but no such plea was raised.
[401EF] 12.
The allegation in para 52 that the returned candi date had polled cent per cent votes in his favour in certain villages of the constituency do not make out any corrupt practice or any ground of challenge under section 100 and it was rightly struck off by the High Court.
[394B] 13.
Order VI Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure permits amendment of an election petition but the same is subject to the provisions of the Act.
Section 81 prescribes a period of 45 days from the date of the election for pre senting election petition calling in question the election of the returned candidate.
After the expiry of that period no election petition is maintainable and the High Court or this Court has no jurisdiction to extend the period of limitation.
An order of amendment permitting a new ground to be raised beyond the time specified in section 81 would amount to contravention of these provisions and is beyond the ambit of section 87 of the Act.
A new ground cannot, thus, be raised or inserted in an election petition by way of amendment after the expiry of the period of limitation.
[402CD] In the instant case, the election petition was presented to the Registrar of the High Court on the last day of the limitation.
The amendments claimed by him are not in the nature of supplying particulars instead those seek to raise new grounds of challenge.
Various paras of the election petition which are sought to be amended do not disclose 378 any cause of action.
Therefore, it is not permissible to allow amendment after expiry of the period of limitation.
[402A, E] 14.1 Court should not undertake to decide an issue unless it is a living issue between the parties, for if an issue is purely academic in that its decision one way or the other would have no impact on the position of the parties, it would be waste of public time to engage itself in decid ing it.
[380D] Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada vs Jervis, , referred to.
14.2 Election is the essence of democratic system and purity of elections must be maintained to ensure fair elec tion.
Election petition is a necessary process to hold inquiry into corrupt practice to maintain the purity of election.
But there should be some time limit for holding this inquiry.
[381E] 14.3 Parliament should consider the desirability of amending the election law to prescribe time limit for in quiry into the allegations of corrupt practice or to devise means to ensure that valuable time of this Court is not consumed in election matters which by afflux of time are reduced to mere academic interest.
[381D]
