The respondent holding a Middle Management Grade Scale II post in the appellant Bank was found not fit for promo tion to Grade Scale III by the Selection Committee in the year 1979 and superseded.
His case was again considered in the years 1980, 1981 and 1983 but denied promotion.
He filed a writ petition in the High Court in 1984 for the issue of a direction to the management to promote him to the higher post with effect from 1979 with the assertion that he was fully eligible for such promotion.
The Single Judge noticed that in respondent 's confiden tial reports for the years 1977 78, 1979 80 and 1980 81 it had been recorded that his service was 'satisfactory ' and that there were no adverse remarks against him.
He, there fore, took the view that there was nothing which disentitled the respondent to promotion and that the action of the management in not promoting him was arbitrary, and accord ingly issued a direction to the appellants to promote the respondent with effect from 1.8.1979 when his batch mates were promoted.
The Division Bench dismissed the appeal filed by the appellants.
In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the appellants that the promotion to Middle Management Grade Scale III posts depended not merely upon the eligibility but on merit and such promotion was accorded only after a proper evaluation by the Selection Committee of the service re cords, performance appraisal and potentiality of the officer concerned to assume higher responsibilities, that the mere 533 absence of adverse remarks did not entitle an employee to promotion to the next higher grade automatically when promo tion was by selection.
that after applying the relevant tests laid down by the management for promotion to the Middle Management Grade Scale III it was found from time to time that the respondent was not entitled to be promoted, and that in any event the High Court was not right in issu ing a direction to the management to promote the respondent to the higher post particularly in the absence of any plea of mala fides.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The High Court was not right in directing the appellants to promote the respondent to the Middle Manage ment Grade Scale 111 with effect from 1979.
[538C] If promotion has been denied arbitrarily or without any reason ordinarily the Court can issue a direction to the management to consider the case of the officer concerned for promotion but it cannot issue a direction to promote the officer concerned to the higher post without giving an opportunity to the management to consider the question of promotion.
This is because the Court is not by its very nature competent to appreciate the abilities, qualities or attributes necessary for the task, office or duty of every kind of post which is to be filled up by selection.
The duties of such posts may need skills of different kinds scientific.
technical, financial, industrial, commercial, administrative, educational etc.
The evaluation of the abilities should, therefore, in the public interest ordi narily be left to be done by the individual or a committee consisting of persons who have the knowledge of the require ments of a given post.
[536E H] Whenever promotion to a higher post is to be made on the basis of merit no officer can claim promotion to the higher post as a matter of right by virtue of seniority alone with effect from the date on which his juniors are promoted.
It is not sufficient that in his confidential reports it is recorded that his services are 'satisfactory '.
An officer may be capable of discharging the duties of the post held by him satisfactorily but he may not be fit for the higher post.
Before any such promotion can be effected it is the duty of the management to consider the case of the officer concerned on the basis of the relevant materials.
Of course, the process of selection adopted by them should always he honest and fair.
It is only when the process of selection is vitiated on the ground of bias, mala fides or any other similar vitiating circumstances other considerations will arise.
[536C E; H; 537A] 534 State of Mysore and Anr.
vs Syed Mohmood and ors.
, [1968]3 S.C.R. 363, applied.
In the instant case at all relevant times the case of the promotion of respondent has been considered in accord ance with law by the selection committee constituted by the appellant Bank and it did not find him fit for promotion on all such occasions.
There is no allegation of bias or mala fides urged against the members of the selection committee or the management.
The appellants, therefore, cannot be said to have committed any error is not promoting the respondent. ]538B C] The appellants are directed to consider the case of the respondent for promotion within four months from the date of the judgment.
and if found fit to promote him forthwith.
[538E]
