The appellants had borrowed from the respondent Corpora tion a certain sum for the acquisition of fixed assets under a deed of hypothecation.
They also created an equitable mortgage, mortgaging the land and factory building by depos iting the original title deeds of the properties with the Corporation.
The loan had to be repaid within a period of 8 years by half yearly instalments.
The appellants were liable to pay interest at 8.5 per cent per annum and that was to be calculated and charged at the end of every half year.
The appellants committed default in payment of instal ments and interest due to the Corporation.
The Corporation filed an application under section 31 of the before the District Judge claiming the entire outstanding loan, interest and commitment charges.
The appellants having admitted the claim of the Corporation, an order of compromise was passed by the Court under which the appellants undertook to pay a sum of Rs.15,000 every month towards the claim of the Corporation.
The appellants failed to pay the amount as ordered by the Court.
The respondent thereupon filed an application under section 32(8) of the Act requesting that the property hypothecated in favour of the Corporation be directed to be sold by the Commissioner appointed by the Court and the amount so rea lised be appropriated towards the dues.
The appellants raised an objection that since the Court had not in 608 its order expressly directed payment of any interest on the amount, the Corporation was not entitled to recover any amount by way Of interest due on the principal amount for the period subsequent to the date of the order, and since payment of interest subsequent to the date of the decision of the Court was governed by section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the appellants were not liable to pay any inter est.
The first appeal and the Letters Patent Appeal filed by the appellants were dismissed by the High Court.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellants that a proceeding under section 31 of the Act is in the nature of a suit, an order made thereon under section 32 thereof is a decree, and since by subs.
(6) of section 32 of the Act, the District Judge was required to investigate the claim of the Corporation in accordance with the provisions of the Code, section 34 of the Code would be attracted to the proceeding instituted under section 31 of the Act also, and that since the decree passed in this case is silent on the ques tion of payment of any interest on principal sum from the date of the decree to the date of payment, the Court should be deemed to have refused such interest by virtue of sub section
2 of section 34 of the code.
Disposing of the appeal, HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in holding that inter est would be payable on the principal amount due in accord ance With the terms of the agreement between the parties till the entire amount due was paid as per the order passed under section 32 of the .
[613GH] 2.
Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 is not applicable to this case.
A proceeding instituted under section 31(1) of the Act is something akin to an application for attachment of property in execution of a decree at a stage posterior to the .passing of the decree.
That being so, no question of passing any order under section 34 of the Code would arise since that provision would be applicable only at the stage of the passing of the decree and not to any stage posterior to the decree.
Even under the Code, the question of interest payable in mortgage suits filed in civil courts is governed by Order 34 rule 11 of the Code and not by section 34 of the Code which may be applicable only to cases of person al decrees passed under Order 34 rule 6 of the Code.
[614C, 613F] 3.
In the instant case, the Joint Judge is to redeter mine the actual amount due and payable to the Corporation as per the contract between the parties before directing sale.
[614D] 609 Karnataka State Financial Corporation, Bangalore vs Sri Nithyananda Bhavan & Anr., A.I.R. 1982 Karnataka 179 and Gujarat State Financial Corporation vs M/s Natson Manufac turing Co. (P) Ltd. & Ors., ; , referred to.
