The respondent purchased the suit premises in April, 1973 and in September, 1973 applied to the Competent Author ity under the Slum Area (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956 for permission to evict the appellants who were induct ed into the premises by the erstwhile landlord.
The permis sion was granted in December, 1974 and three eviction suits were filed in April, 1975 on the grounds contained in Sec tion 14(1)(a), (h) and (j) of the Delhi Rent Control Act.
1958 and the Additional Rent Controller held that the ground under Section 14(1)(h) was made out against all the three appellants.
The Rent Control Tribunal confirmed the decree.
Before the High Court in revision, it was submitted that when the landlady purchased the property she and her vendor had also been aware that the tenants owned a house and that on account of this knowledge the respondent had waived her rights under clause (h) of Section 14(1) of the Act, that if a tenant built a house or has been allotted a residential accommodation, he must acquire/obtain vacant possession before he was evicted under clause (h), and that the area where the allotted quarter was situated was not governed by the Act 540 and, therefore, the ground covered by clause (h) was not available to the landlady.
The High Court construed Section 14(1)(h) of the Act to mean that a building constructed by the tenant which is outside the purview of the Delhi Rent Control Act on the date of application for ejectment, was yet within Section 14(1)(h), and held that the word 'or ' showed the different circumstances in which a tenant was liable to be evicted, that it was not necessary for a landlord to prove either that the tenant had built a house and acquired vacant pos session of the building or that he had been allotted and taken possession of the allotted premises, and that there was no substance in the argument advanced by the tenants that on account of the knowledge of the landlady that the tenants owned a house, she had waived her rights under clause (h) of Section 14(1) of the Act, and dismissed the Revision Petitions.
In the appeals, it was submitted that there must be a suitable residence, one which is a good and a reasonable substitute for the appellants or the landlord before evic tion could be ordered under Section 14(1)(h) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeals by special leave, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Rent Control Act is a beneficial legisla tion to both the landlord and the tenant.
It protects the tenant against unreasonable eviction and exorbitant rent.
It also ensures certain limited rights to the landlord to recover possession in stated contingencies.
[550B C] 2.1 The words 'has built ' or 'has acquired ' or 'has been allotted ' in clause (h) of Section 14(1) clearly mean that the tenant has already built, acquired or been allotted the residence to which he can move and that on the date of the application for his eviction, his right to reside therein exists.
Therefore, the High Court was right in holding that the words as they stood associated with each other in clause (h) lead to the only conclusion that as on the date of application the tenant must be possessing a clear right to reside in some other premises than the tenancy premises as a matter of his own rightful choice either because he may have built such premises or acquired vacant possession thereof or the same may have been allotted to him.
The words 'built ' and 'allotted ' did not mean that after building a residence or after allotment of a residence the tenant must also acquire its possession.
[548D F] 2.2 The landlord, in order to be entitled to evict the tenant, must 541 establish one of the alternative facts positively, either that the tenant has built, or acquired vacant possession of or has been allotted a residence.
It is essential that the three ingredients must be pleaded by the landlord who seeks eviction but after the landlord has proved or stated that the tenant has built, acquired vacant possession or has been allotted a residence, whether it is suitable or not and whether the same can be really an alternative accommodation for the tenant or not, are within the special knowledge of the tenant and he must prove and establish those facts.
[549F H] 2.3 The landlord must be quick in taking his action after the accrual of the cause of action, and if by his inaction, the tenant allows the premises to go out of his hands then it is the landlord who is to be blamed and not the tenant.
[550A B] 2.4 The High Court was right in holding that once the condition stipulated in clause (h) was fulfilled by the tenant, he was disentitled to protection.
He cannot, there fore, claim that he should he protected.
[547B C] 3.1 Article 66 of the stipulated that for possession of immovable property the cause of action arises or accrues when the plaintiff has become entitled to possession by reason of any forfeiture or breach of condition.
[550C D] 3.2 On the facts of this case it is clear that Article 66 would apply in this case because no determination is necessary, as determination by notice under Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act is no longer necessary.
[550D E] In the instant case, the landlady purchased the property on April, 9, 1973.
She filed an application for permission after about six months from the date of purchase, and filed eviction application after about four months from the date of the grant of the permission by the Slum Authority.
Time begins to run from the date of the knowledge.
Knowledge in this case is indisputably in 1973 looked at from any point of view.
There is, therefore, no question of limitation in this case.
[55OH; 551A] Ved Prakash vs Chunilal, [1971] Delhi Law Times Vol. 7, 59; Smt Revti Devi vs Kishan Lal, [1970] Rent Control Re porter Vol.
II, 71; Naidar Mal vs Ugar Sain Jain and anoth er.
A.I.R. 1966 Punjab 509; Siri Chand vs Jot Ram, Punjab Law Reporter Vol.
LXIII, 1961, 915; Govindji Khera vs Padma Bhatia Attorney, [1972] Rent Control Repor 542 ter Vol.
4, 195: Harbans Singh and another vs Custodian of Evacuee Property 'P ' Block and others, A.I.R. 1970 Delhi 82; Ujagar Singh vs Likha Singh and another, A.I.R. 1941 Allaha bad 28, 30; Somdass (deceased) vs Rikhu Dev Chela Bawa Har Jagdass Narokari, Punjab Law Reporter Vol. 85, 184 and K.V. Ayyaswami Pathar and another vs M.R. Ry.
Manavikrama Zamorin Rajah and others, A.I.R. 1930 Madras 430, referred to.
