The appellant wife and her husband were estranged and living apart.
The husband, by a letter dated July 28, 1956, entrusted.to the appellant the land in dispute alongwith another piece of land and a house and agreed to pay a sum of Rs.100 per mouth for her maintenance.
After a few years, the husband conceived the idea of selling the land in dispute.
The appellant protested by her letter dated June 15, 1966 and implored him not to sell the land.
Despite this, the husband sold the said land to the plaintiff respondents.
The purchaser instituted a suit for an injunction re straining the appellants from interfering with possession, which was contested initially on the ground that the land had been gifted to the appellant orally by the husband, and that title had been acquired by adverse possession.
Later, the written statement was amended and a further plea was taken that the said land had been given in lieu of mainte nance and that she had become the absolute owner of the land under Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act.
All courts found that there was no oral gift.
A Single Judge of the High Court held that the land was given to the appellant by her husband in lieu of maintenance and that by Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act, she had become full owner of the property.
On appeal under the Letters Patent, a Division Bench of the High Court held that "The reading of the letter left no meaning of doubt that there was never any intention on the part of the husband to give away the land to the lady and that instead of sending the total amount in cash he allowed her to utilise the amount of ckakota for meeting her day to day expenses", that she did not at all acquire any such right or interest in the property as could be termed 'limit ed ownership ' so as to permit 577 her to take the benefit of the provisions of Section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act, that "if the husband had given over the land in dispute completely to the lady, then the question of sending more money could not have arisen" and reversed the Judgment of the Single Judge.
The appellant appealed to this Court.
On behalf of the respondents, it was contended that even if the land was given to the appellant in lieu of maintenance, it must be established that what was given to her was a limited estate in the sense of ownership without the right of alienation and that under Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act only such a limited estate would blossom into an absolute estate.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Section 14 is aimed at removing restrictions or limitations on the right of a female Hindu to enjoy, as a full owner, property possessed by her so long as her posses sion is traceable to a lawful origin, that is to say, if she has a vestige of a title.
It makes no difference whether the property is acquired by inheritance or devise or at a parti tion or in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance or by gift or by her own skill or exertion or by purchase or by prescription or in any other manner whatsoever.
The Explana tion to the Section expressly refers to property acquired in lieu of maintenance and the widow is not required to estab lish her further title before she could claim full owner ship, under Section 14(1) in respect of property given to her and possessed by her in lieu of maintenance.
[582F H] 1.2 The very right to receive maintenance is sufficient title to enable the ripening of possession into full owner ship if she is in possession of the property in lieu of maintenance.
Sub section (2) of Section 14 is in the nature of an exception to Section 14(1) and provides for a situa tion where property is acquired by a female Hindu under a written instrument or a decree of court and not where such acquisition is traceable to any antecedent right.
[582H; 583A] 2.
If a female Hindu is put in possession of property pursuant to or in recognition of a right to maintenance, it cannot be denied that she has acquired a limited right or interest in the property and once that position is accepted, it follows that the right gets enlarged to full ownership under Section 14(1) of the Act.
That is clear from the language of Section 14(1) of the Act.
[586B C] 3.1 In the instant case, the question was not whether the husband 578 intended to give away the land in dispute absolutely but whether the land was given to her in lieu of maintenance.
A perusal of the letters exchanged between the husband and the appellant wife clearly establishes that the land in dispute was given by the husband in lieu of maintenance.
The Divi sion Bench of the High Court was wrong in making distinction between day to day expenses and maintenance.
[581F G] 3.2 It is rather late in the day to contend that the land which was given to the appellant in lieu of maintenance did not vest in her absolutely.
[586F] [The Judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court set aside and that of the Single Judge restored. ] Eramma vs Verrupanna & Ors., , distin guished.
Badri Pershad vs Smt.
Kanso Devi, ; ; Naraini Devi vs Smt.
Rano Devi and Ors., ; ; V. Tulasamma & Ors.
vs V. Sesha Reddi (Dead) by L.Rs.; , ; Bai Vajia (Dead) by L.Rs.
vs Thakorbhai Chelabhai and Ors., ; ; Santhanam vs Subramanya AIR 1977 SC 2024 and Jagannathan Pillai vs Kunjithapadam Pillai, ; , referred to.
