The landlord respondent filed a suit against the appel lant tenant for contravention of Section 13(1)(a) of West Bengal Premises Act, 1956 for sub letting without his writ ten consent by parting with the possession of two rooms out of the four rooms of the premises in question to the sub tenant who had established a tailoring business therein.
The trial court held that there was evidence of a sewing machine being used, that the sub tenant was occupying the suit premises for tailoring business, and that it was for the tenant to establish that the sub tenant had not been induct ed as a sub tenant and that he had given shelter to a help less man.
In the absence of the evidence of the sub tenant, the trial court drew the inference that there was sub tenan cy.
The first appellate court upheld the finding of the trial court, and the High Court, in appeal, did not inter fere with the findings of the courts below.
In the appeal before this Court, it was contended that the question of sub tenancy in a situation like the present case is an inference to be drawn from a certain conduct, and that the question was whether the sub tenant was in exclu sive possession of the part of the premises or whether the tenant had retained no control or that part of the premises.
681 Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In order to prove tenancy or sub tenancy, two ingredients had to be established, firstly, the tenant must have exclusive right of possession or interest in the prem ises or part of the premises in question and secondly, that right must be in lieu of payment of some compensation or rent.
[684G] 2.1 In view of the provisions of Rent Act, services cannot be consideration for sub lease.
[686B] 2.2 Services in lieu of the right of occupation would not amount to receipt of rent under the Rent Act to create sub tenancy.
Work performed by sub tenants and the wages paid by doing certain kind of services may be in lieu of rent as in the case of Agricultural Tenancies.
But in urban area in civilised time that cannot be so.
The Rent Act, 1956 cannot be fitted into a position where the services can be rendered in exchange of the right of occupation.
[687D, E] 3.
In the second appeal, no court should interfere with the concurrent findings of fact.
[684F] Normally, this court is too reluctant to interfere with the concurrent findings of fact.
But if the essential ingre dients necessary for finding of a fact have not in fact been found by the courts below then this court is bound to exam ine the question where injustice or wrong is done.
That jurisdiction has to be exercised sparingly but, that cannot mean that injustice must be perpetuated because it has been done two or three times in a case.
The burden of showing that a concurrent decision of two or more courts or tribu nals is manifestly unjust lies on the appellant but once that burden is discharged, it is not only the right but the duty of the Supreme Court to remedy the injustice.
[687F, 688A] In the instant case, as there is no finding of exclusive possession nor of any payment of money in exchange of the user of the part of the premises the finding of subletting cannot in law be upheld.
As the sewing machine in question was used as a part of the apparatus of the appellant in the facts of this case it could not be said to have been used separately or independently and cannot constitute a change of user as defined in Section 13(1)(h) of the Rent Act.
[688B C] [Justice of the case demands increase of rent.
The appellant has been in occupation since 1972 at a monthly rent of Rs.250.
By present 682 standards, this is wholly inadequate.
The appellant shall pay at least Rs.350 per month from 1st August, 87.
If the standard rent is more, then the respondent will be at liber ty to apply for increasing the rent.
[688D] Smt.
Krishnawati vs Shri Hans Raj, ; ; Associated Hotels of India Ltd. Delhi vs S.B. Sardar Ranjit Singh, ; ; Sachindra Nath Shah vs Santosh Kumar Bhattacharya, A.I.R. 1987 SC 409; Barnes & Another vs Barratt and another, and M/s Variety Emporium vs V.R.M. Mohd. Ibrahim Naina, A.I.R. 1985, SC.
207, referred to.
