The appellant was placed under detention on September 8, 1986, consequent upon an order of detention passed by the District Magistrate, Beed under section 3(2) of the on his being satisfied that it was neces sary to do so 'with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order '.
He was served with the grounds of detention alongwith copies of the relevant documents on September 14, 1986.
He ad dressed a representation to the Chief Minister, State of Maharashtra on September 22, 1986 through the Superintend ent, Central Jail, Aurangabad, who forwarded the same to the State Government, Home Department which received it on September 26, 1986, and on the same day forwarded it to the District Magistrate for his comments.
On October 3, 1986, the District Magistrate returned the representation along with his comments and the same were received in the Home Department on October 6, 1986.
The State Government had, in the meanwhile, accorded its approval to the impugned order of detention under section 3(4) of the Act on September 18, 1986.
On October 6, the appellant made another representation to the Advisory Board against the order of detention.
669 The Advisory Board met on October 8, 1986, considered the representation and forwarded its report to the State Govern ment on October 13 recommending confirmation of the order of detention.
Thereafter, the representation made by the appel lant was processed in the Home Department along with the report of the Advisory Board and forwarded to the Chief Minister 's Secretariat where the same was received on Octo ber 23, 1986.
The representation remained undisposed in the Chief Minister 's Secretariat and was put up before him on November 17, 1986 and he rejected the same.
Upon these facts, the appellant moved the High Court by a petition under article 226 of the Constitution for the grant of a writ of habeas corpus on the next day i.e. on November 18, 1986 contending that his continued detention was uncon stitutional and void inasmuch as there was inordinate, unexplained delay on the part of the detaining authority to consider and dispose of his representation which was in violation of the constitutional safeguards enshrined in article 22(5) read with section 8 of the .
The writ petition was dismissed by the High Court inter alia on the ground of defective pleadings regarding the delay in Chief Minister 's Secretariat in dealing with the representation.
In the appeal by special leave, the District Magistrate in his counter affidavit denied that there was any unreason able delay in the disposal of the representation and submit ted that no such ground regarding unreasonable delay was taken in the High Court in the writ petition, and was raised for the first time before this Court, presumably on the reasoning of the High Court.
In the other counter affidavit the Desk Officer, Home Department (Special) explained the reasons for the delay in the Chief Minister 's Secretariat asserting that the Chief Minister remained preoccupied with very important matters of the State during the period from October 23, 1986 to November 17, 1986 and therefore it was not possible for him to have dealt with the representation earlier.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.The continued detention of the appellant was illegal and he must be set at liberty forthwith.
[679G] 2.1 It is incumbent on the State to satisfy the Court that the detention of the petitioner/detenu was legal and in conformity not only with the mandatory provisions of the Act but also strictly in accord with the constitutional safe guards embodied in article 22(5).
[674F] 670 2.2 The constitutional right of the detenu to make a representation guaranteed by article 22(5) is a valuable right and is not a mere formality.
It includes by necessary impli cation the constitutional right to a proper consideration of the representation by the authority to whom it is made.
[677E] In the instant case, there were two representations made by the appellant, one to the Chief Minister dated September 22, 1986 and the other to the Advisory Board dated October 6, 1986.
While the Advisory Board acted with commendable despatch in considering the same at its meeting held on October 8, 1986 and forwarded its report on October 13, 1986, it was not till November 17, 1986 that the Chief Minister look at it.
There was no reason why he could not deal with it with all reasonable promptitude and diligence.
The explanation that he remained preoccupied with very important matters of the State, which involved tours as well as Cabinet meetings, was no explanation at all.
There was therefore, failure on the part of the Government to dis charge its obligations under article 22(5).
[676H 677B; 679F, 679E, 676G] 2.3 The constitution of an Advisory Board under section 9 of the Act does not relieve the State Government from the legal obligation to consider the representation of the detenu as soon as it is received by it.
The two obligations of the Government to refer the case of the detenu to the Advisory Board and to obtain its report on the one hand, and to give an earliest opportunity to him to make a representation and consider the representation on the other, are two distinct obligations independent of each other.
There is thus a duty cast on the Government to consider the representation made by the detenu without waiting for the opinion of the Adviso ry Board.
[677E, G, D] Narendra Purshotam Umrao vs B.B. Gujral & Ors.
; , referred to.
The failure of the Government in the instant case to consider the representation without waiting for the opinion of the Advisory Board renders the continued detention of the appellant invalid and constitutionally impermissible.
[678F] 3.
In return to the rule nisi issued by this Court or the High Court in a habeas corpus petition, the proper person to file the same is the District Magistrate who had passed the impugned order of detention, and he must explain his subjective satisfaction and the grounds therefore and if for some good reason the District Magistrate is not avail able, the 671 affidavit must be sworn by some responsible officer like the Secretary or the Deputy Secretary to the Government in the Home Department who personally dealt with or processed the case in the Secretariat or submitted it to the Minister or other officer duly authorised under the Rules of Business framed by the Governor under article 166 of the Constitution to pass orders on behalf of the Government in such matters.
[674F 675A] Niranjan Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh ; ; Habibullah Khan vs State of West Bengal, ; Jagdish Prasad vs State of Bihar & Anr., ; and Mohd. Alam vs State of West Bengal, ; , referred to.
In the instant case, no one has filed any affidavit to explain the delay in the Chief Minister 's Secretariat.
The counter affidavit filed by the District Magistrate contains a bare denial that there was any unreasonable delay in the disposal of the representation.
As regards the delay in the Secretariat he adverts to the affidavit filed by the Desk Officer, Home Department and asserts that it reveals the different steps that were taken.
There is in fact no expla nation offered as regards the delay in the disposal of the representation in the Secretariat.
[678G 679C] 4.
It was an improper exercise of power on the part of the High Court in disallowing the writ petition on the ground of imperfect pleadings.
The rule that a petitioner cannot be permitted to raise grounds not taken in the peti tion at the hearing cannot be applied to a petition for grant of a writ of habeas corpus.
It is enough for the detenu to say that he is under wrongful detention, and the burden lies on the detaining authority to satisfy the Court that the detention is not illegal or wrongful and that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief claimed.
[674DE] In the appeal the appellant having raised the ground of delay in disposal of his representation in Chief Minister 's Secretariat it was the duty of the State Government to have placed all the material along with the counter affidavit.
[679B]
