The plaintiffs great grandfather executed a partition deed exhibit P. 1 under which the properties acquired by him were divided into four shares as described in Schedules A, B, C & D and distributed to his sons and grandsons.
The plaintiff claimed in a suit for partition that plaint B schedule properties consisting of properties in Schedules A plaint A schedule and hence they were also the illom proper ties in which he was entitled to share on per capita basis.
Defendants 1 to 10, 24 to 26 and 29 to 33 supported his case.
Defendants 11, 13, 16 to 21, 22 and 27 contended that the plaintif 's great grandfather had no surplus income from plaint A schedule properties and the acquisitions made by him which were the subject matter of division under exhibit P. 1 were the separate properties.
The trial Court decreed the suit and held that parties were governed by marumakkathayam Law and Plaint A schedule properties were illom properties, that the plaintiff 's great grandfather could get surplus income therefrom which was utilised for purchasing properties dealt with under exhibit P. 1 and, therefore, the illom properties were available for partition, and that, in any event, the parties by their subsequent conduct appeared to have treated the properties as illom properties and passed a preliminary decree for partition on per capita basis.
The matter was taken in appeal to the High Court.
Cross Objection was also filed.
The High Court held that there was no acceptable evidence to show as to what were the proper ties allotted to the original testator for his maintenance when he left his illom or the income there 616 from and that there was no material to prove that the plaint A schedule properties were given to him for maintenance; nor was there evidence to establish that the plaint B schedule properties were acquired with the aid of surplus income from plaint A schedule properties.
With regard to properties allotted to the testator 's grandson under exhibit P. 1 and his subsequent conduct to treat the properties as joint family properties, it held that firstly, there was no intention on the part of the testator 's grandson to treat his properties as illom properties, and secondly, even if he had such an intention it would be doubtful whether the principle of Hindu Law could be applied to the properties.
In appeal before this Court, it was urged that the High Court proceeded on the wrong assumption that there was no proof that the plaint A schedule properties were illom properties that were given to the plaintiffs great grandfa ther for his maintenance.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, this Court, HELD: 1.
Malayala Brahmins are governed by Hindu Law unless they can be shown to have deviated in any respect and adopted different practices, like local customs, if any.
Some of their rights have now been regulated by the Kerala Nambudiri Act, 1958 (Act 27 of 1958) which provides for the family management and partition of illom properties among Nambudiri Brahmin Community and Section 13 confers right on a members of illom to claim partition on per capita basis.
[621F G] 2.
Iswara Sevas in temples like Santhi Ceremony and Parikarmam works are said to be the hereditary profession of Malayala Brahmins and the illom to which the parties belong.
But the income earned by any member of an illom from such practice would not become the joint family property.
It would be separate property of the individual.
It cannot become joint family property.
The position, however, may be different if a member earns from such practices which exclu sively belong to the joint family.
[622F G] 3.1 In the instant case, there is no doubt that the plaint A schedule properties are common illom properties which were in possession of the testator under a maintenance arrangement.
The plaint B Schedule properties or properties dealt with under exhibit P. 1 are illom properties and they are acquisitions made by the testator from time to time.
They could be regarded as illom properties provided it is estab lished that they have been acquired with the aid of illom properties.
But 617 the relevant evidence on record is scanty.
The High Court was, therefore, justified in stating that there was no acceptable evidence produced in the case to support the plea of the plaintiff.
[622B, C D] 3.2 exhibit P. 1 is an ancient deed executed at an undisput ed point of time.
The terms of the deed indicate that all the properties divided thereunder were acquired in the name of the father out of the personal exertions of the father and his sons, that the properties were divided into four shares taking into consideration the efforts made by each party to acquire the movable and immovable properties, and that the parties shall enjoy with absolute rights the properties allotted in the respective shares, which clearly go to show that the properties dealt with under exhibit P. 1 were the self acquisitions of the testator.
[622E, H, 623C] 4.
Litigants come to Courts for decisions and not for obtaining doubtful opinions.
The Court, therefore, should not be a prisoner of indecision.
Clarity and promptness in decision making are the need of the hour.
That would go a long way to reduce the docket explosion.
[620G] Kunji Amma Narayani Amma vs Dhathri Antherjanan, , referred to.
