Section 3 of the stipulates that a sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place in the course of inter State trade or commerce if the sale or purchase(a) occasions the movement of goods from one State to another, or (b) is effected by a transfer of docu ments of title to the goods during their movement from one State to another.
Sub section
(1) of section 9 provides that the tax payable by any dealer under this Act on sales of goods effected by him in the course of inter State trade or com merce, whether such sales fall within clause (a) or clause (b) of section 3, shall be levied by the Government of India and the tax so levied shall be collected by that Government in accordance with the provisions of sub section (2), in the State I from which the movement of the goods commenced and sub section
(2) thereof provides that the authorities for the time being empowered to assess, re assess, collect and enforce payment of any tax under general sales tax law of the appropriate State shall, on behalf of the Government of India,assess, re assess, collect and enforce payment of tax, including any , etc.
The respondent, a dealer in coal, had effected certain transactions by endorsing Bilties (Railway Receipts made out in its name to various parties in Uttar Pradesh while the goods relating to the Bilties were in a state of movement from Bihar to Uttar Pradesh.
The bills connected with such Bilties had also been prepared by the respondent which had realised the money from the purchasing parties.
The Sales Tax Officer, Lucknow was of the view that the sale of coal effected in this manner came under inter State sale and as such was liable under section 3(b) of the .
Disagreeing with the contention of the respondent that the goods having been sold to an unregistered dealer, the respondent too being not a registered dealer during the particular year.
there was no question of imposition of any sales tax, the Sales Tax 757 Officer imposed the liability under that provision which was challenged by the respondent by a writ petition.
The High Court, allowing the petition, set aside the order of assess ment.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The Sales Tax Officer in Uttar Pradesh was not the appropriate authority either to impose or collect the duty on inter State sale.
[764G] (i) Sub s.(1) of section 9 confers jurisdiction to make the levy and collect the tax on the State where the movement of the goods commences, and so the determinative test for discovering the jurisdiction of a particular State, in an inter State sale, is the place where the movement of the goods commences.
The words "appropriate Government" given in sub section
(2) of that section must necessarily refer to the State which by section 9(1) has been conferred jurisdiction to levy and collect the tax.
[763D E] (ii) It is clear from an analysis of the scheme of the that it is the Central Govern ment which imposes tax on inter State sale but it is col lected by the Government in accordance with the provisions of sub section
(2) of section 9 of the Act in the State.
It is clear from sub section
(2) of section 9 that the "appropriate State" imposes and collects the tax on behalf of the Government of India.
In order to be a sale or inter State transaction the sale must occasion the movement of goods.
In the instant case, there were Railway receipts which were endorsed in favour of the parties in U.P.
It is by that endorsement that title was transferred to the purchasers and that transaction occa sioned the movement of the goods, in other words, caused inter State sales to take place, namely, the sale which occasions the movement of goods from one State to another, from the State of Bihar to the State of U.P. [762E G] (iii) The proviso to section 9(1) can apply only if the sale is by a registered dealer.
Here the admitted position is that the dealer is not a registered one.
It was urged on behalf of the revenue that inasmuch as section 7 required every dealer to obtain registration within the prescribed period and in the event of not obtaining such a registration, penal consequences ensue under section 10, the words "registered deal er" as used in the proviso to section 9 do not refer necessarily to a dealer who has obtained registration under section 7, but to a dealer who should have obtained such a registration.
In other words, counsel tried to import the equitable maxim by stating an argument in the manner that if registra 758 tion in the facts of a particular case was compulsory then such registration should be deemed to have been made as by law enjoined that it should have been made.
Equity, it was said, "looks upon a thing as done which ought to have been done".
But that is not the position in a fiscal statute.
The fiscal statute with which we are concerned recognises regis tration and non registration and imposes liabilities on registration and consequences for non registration.
It is not, therefore, possible to look upon a thing as done which ought to have been done for which Legislature has separately featured differently in a fiscal statute of this nature.
The Act provides machinery provisions for the imposition and realisation of the Central Sales Tax.
It must be read in a commonsense point of view.
[763E H; 764A B] (iv) Sub section
(2) of section 6 provides that where a sale of goods in the course of inter State trade or commerce has either occasioned the movement of such goods from one State to another or has been effected by a transfer of documents of title to such goods during their movement from one State to another, any subsequent sale during such movement effect ed by a transfer of documents of title to such goods to the Government or to a registered dealer other than the govern ment, if the goods are of the description referred to in sub section (3) of section 8, shall be exempt from tax under this Act.
The proviso stipulates that no such subsequent sale shall be exempt from tax under this sub section unless the dealer effecting the sale furnishes to the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time, a certificate as mentioned therein.
In this case, the subsequent sale if there be any in U.P. did not occasion the movement of the goods.
It is therefore, not subject to inter State sales tax.
[764D F]
