By a Notification dated 26 9 1964 issued under Section 1(3)(b) of the Employees ' Provident Funds Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, the Act was made applicable to the establishments of engineers and engineering contractors not being exclusively engaged in building and construction industry.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner called upon the appellant company carrying on business as "engi neers and engineering contractors" and engaged in building and construction industry, to show cause why it should not be directed to comply with the Act in respect of the workmen employed at its workshop in Bombay.
The appellant contended that the Act was not applicable since it was exclusively engaged in building and construction industry and that the workshop had been set up only for the purpose of carrying out its work, ancillary to the building and construction industry, and not any work for others.
The respondent nega tived the contention and directed the appellant to make contributions with effect from 1st December, 1963 in respect of the workmen employed at its workshop.
The appellant assailed the validity of this notice in the Bombay High Court, which declined to follow the decision of the Calcutta High Court quashing a similar notice issued by the department in respect of the appellant 's workshop in Calcutta, dismissed the petition and upheld the demand of the department.
It held that the Act applied as the appel lant was not only engaged in building and construction industry 785 but was also engaged in running workshops for maintaining and repairing equipment such as piling machines, drills, etc., and hence it was an establishment of engineers and engineering contractors which was not ' 'exclusively engaged in building and construction industry." Allowing the appeal by special leave, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Where an establishment is engaged exclusively in carrying on a particular type of business by setting up any place of work with a view to carrying on the work of repairs etc.
to the tools, equipment, vehicles etc.
used in its business or to carry on any other activity which is essential for its business effectively and which is not used to carry on the work for the benefit of any third party but utilised exclusively for the business of the establishment, such establishment does not cease to carry on exclusively the business in which it is engaged.
It cannot also be said that the establishment had commenced to carry on another industry by the setting up of such a place of work.
[790B C] 1.2 Any such establishment which carries on an activity which forms part of the building and construction industry should be exempted from the operation of the Act because the expression "building and construction industry" refers collectively to all activities which have to be performed in connection with the building and construction industry.
[789F] In order to discharge effectively its functions as engineers and engineering contractors engaged in building and construction industry, an establishment has to maintain a workshop or workshops where the work of smithy, welding, cutting, carpentry etc.
are carried on.
Without these opera tions it is not possible for any person to carry on satis factorily the work of building and construction industry.
[789G] 1.4 Such a workshop in which works connected with the business of building and construction industry were being carried on in connection with such business for the owner cannot be construed as a separate establishment for purposes of the Act.
[790H] In the instant case, the work that is being carried on at the appellant 's workshop is work of maintaining and repairing of the equipment belonging to the appellant only.
The appellant is not earning any income or profit by carry ing on the work of any other establishment.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the workshop established by the appel 786 lant is an independent establishment of engineers and engi neering contractors which is not exclusively engaged in building and construction industry.
[790D E] 1.5 The High Court was in error in treating the workshop in question as a separate unit of the business of the appel lant forming a separate establishment for purposes of deter mining whether the Act is applicable or not.
It should have taken all the business operations carried on by the appel lant in their totality into consideration in order to ascer tain whether the appellant is engaged exclusively in build ing and construction industry or not.
By splitting up the several operations carried on by the appellant in connection with the building and construction industry into separate units and thereby treating the workshop alone as a separate establishment, the High Court misled itself into thinking that the workshop of the appellant was governed by the Act and thus committed the error of declaring the said workshop as an establishment governed by the Act.
[790F G]
