The appellant company and the respondent firm were carrying on business in the erstwhile patiala State, and were non residents in British India.
The appellant, acting as commission agent for the respondent, entered into several forward transactions with a Hapur firm of commission agents.
The profits accruing on these transactions amounted to Rs. 29,275 2 6 on which the Hapur firm paid a sum Of Rs. 9,314 13 4 as income.
In 1943 the appellant was ordered to be wound up and the respondent was placed on the list of contributories.
The Official Liquidator applied to the Liquidation judge for a payment order for a sum which included the amount of income tax paid by the Hapur firm for and on behalf of the respondent.
The main contention raised on behalf of the respondent was that it had no taxable income in the year in dispute and was not liable to pay any income tax and that, consequently, it was not liable for the income tax paid by the Hapur firm.
Held, that the Liquidator was entitled to claim from the respondent the amount of income tax paid by the Hapur firm irrespective of the consideration whether its world income was taxable or not.
Under the law the Hapur firm was an agent of the respondent for the business of the agency which was entrusted to it, and was as such liable under ss 40(2) and 42(1) Income tax Act, as an assessee for income tax on the profits made on the respondent 's transactions at Hapur and was entitled to retain the estimated amount of income tax payable on the amount of the respondent 's profits.
As the Hapur firm had rightly paid the tax on the profits, the respondent could not be allowed to challenge the liability on the ground that his total world income was not taxable and he was entitled to his profits without deductions.
That was a question which must be agitated by the non resident assessee at the time of his assessment.
As between the parties the tax paid by the agent had to be taken into account irrespective of the result of the assessment on the non resident.
