Sub section (1) of section 40 of the Andhra Pradesh Shops and Establishments Act, 1966 interdicts the employer governed by the Act from terminating the services of an employee without complying with the conditions laid therein.
Section 25F of the lays down conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen noncompliance with which will be fatal to any order of retrenchment.
The petitioner society retrenched the respondents on the ground that the business of the management did not warrant the continuance of its heavy establishment.
In an appeal under section 41(1) of the Act the appellate authority set aside the orders and directed reinstatement of the respondents.
The Labour Court set aside the orders of the appellate authority in respect of some of the respondents.
A Single Judge of the High Court found that the respond ents were 'workmen ' and the management was an 'industry ' as defined in the but dismissed the writ petition holding that they could not claim the benefit of section 25F of the in a proceeding under section 41 of the State Act, being of the view that there was no scope either in the language of section 40 of the State Act or its implication making it obligatory to read the condition of section 25F of the Central Act as 729 part of section 40 of the State Act, that the statutory authori ties, created under section 41(1) and section 41(3) of the State Act being creatures of the statute, had no right to apply the provisions of section 25F of the Central Act to proceedings before them and that whereas the rights under the Central Act could be agitated by a reference to a Labour Court the right agitated under section 41(1) and section 41(3) was a personal right.
The Division Bench on appeal by the respondents held that the orders of termination were unsustainable.
It took the view that the question of their retrenchment was gov erned by section 25F.
In the special leave petition it was contended on behalf of the management that the provisions of section 40, which deal with termination of service in a shop or establishment contained in the State Act, which is a later Act, being repugnant to the provisions contained in Chapter V A of the Central Act, which is an earlier law, should prevail as the assent of the President has been given to the State Act.
Dismissing the special leave petition, HELD: 1.1 The High Court was right in holding that section 25F of the having not been complied with, all the terminations were illegal.
The respondents were, therefore.
entitled to be reinstated in service with full back wages.
[743A] 1.2 If the employees are 'workmen ' and the management is an 'industry ' as defined in the and the action taken by the management amounts to 'retrench ment ', then the rights and liabilities of the parties are governed by provisions of Chapter V A of that Act and the said rights and liabilities may be adjudicated upon and enforced in proceedings before the authorities under section 41(1) and section 41(3) of the Andhra Pradesh Shops and Estab lishments Act.
In the instant case the Single Judge of the High Court had found that the respondents were 'workmen ' and the management was an 'industry ' as defined in the Central Act.
[741H 742A, 738C] 1.3 Sub section (1) of section 25J of the lays down that Chapter V A shall have effect notwith standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.
The proviso to that sub section, however, saves any higher benefit available to a workman under any law, agreement or settlement or award.
Sub section (2) of section 25J, which makes a distinction between any machinery provided by any State law for settlement of industrial disputes and the substantive 730 rights and liabilities arising under Chapter V A of the Central Act, provides that while that section would not effect the provisions in a State law relating to settlement of industrial disputes, the rights and liabilities of em ployers and workmen insofar as they relate to lay off and retrenchment shall be determined in accordance with Chapter V A of the Central Act.
It is thus apparent that section 41(1) and section 41(3) of the State Act prescribe alternative authori ties to settle a dispute arising out of a retrenchment.
Those authorities may exercise their jurisdiction under the State Act but they have to decide the rights and liabilities arising out of retrenchment in accordance with the provi sions of Chapter V A.
The said rights can be enforced by a workman personally by himself filing an appeal under section 41(1) of the State Act.
It is not necessary that a reference should be sought under the Central Act by collective action of workers.
[739A E] Sawatram Ramprasad Mills Co. Ltd. vs Baliram Ukandaji and Another, ; and Pest Control India Pvt. Ltd. vs The Labour Court, Guntur and Another, [1984] 1 Andhra Weekly Reporter 277, referred to.
2.1 There is no repugnancy between the two Acts.
The State Act, which is a later law, does not contain any ex press provision making the provisions relating to retrench ment in the Central Act ineffective insofar as Andhra Pra desh is concerned.
[740E] 2.2 Where there is a conflict between the special provi sions contained in an earlier law dealing with retrenchment and the general provisions contained in a later law general ly dealing with terminations of service, the existence of repugnancy between the two laws cannot easily be presumed.
[740H] Chapter V A of the Central Act, which is the earlier law, deals with rights and liabilities arising out of lay off and retrenchment.
Section 25J of that Act deals with the effect of the provisions of Chapter V A on other laws incon sistent with that Chapter.
Sub section (2) of section 25J is quite emphatic about the provisions relating to the rights and liabilities arising out of lay off and retrenchment.
By enacting that provision Parliament intended that such rights and liabilities should be uniform throughout India where the Central Act was in force and did not wish that the States should have their own laws inconsistent with the Central law.
These are special provisions and they do not apply to all kinds of termination of services.
If the State Legisla ture intended that it should have a law of its own regarding the rights and liabilities arising 731 out of retrenchment it would have expressly provided for It.
The State Legislature had not done so in the instant case.
Section 40 of the State Act deals with termination of serv ice generally.
In such a situation it cannot be said that there was any implied repugnancy between the Central law and the State law.
[740F, 741F, 740G, 741FG] Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edn.
p. 196 referred to.
[The Act should be suitably amended making it possible to an individual workman to seek redress in an appropriate forum regarding illegal termination of service which may take the form of dismissal, discharge, retrenchment etc.
or modification of punishment imposed in a domestic enquiry.
There is also a great need to review and to bring into existence an all India Labour Appellate Tribunal with powers to hear appeals against the decisions of all Labour Courts, industrial Tribunals and even of authorities constituted under several labour laws enacted by the States so that a body of uniform and sound principles of labour law may be evolved for the benefit of both industry and labour through out India.] [742B G]
