The appellant made an application before the Rent Con troller on or about July 15, 1976 to let out the premises to the respondent for residential purposes for a period of two years under section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 as he did not require the premises for that period.
The respondent agreed before the Rent Controller to the above statement of the appellant and undertook to vacate the premises after the expiry of two years from July 15, 1976.
Accordingly, the Rent Controller made an order allowing creation of a limited tenancy for a period of two years from July 15, 1976.
The respondent having refused to vacate the premises after two years, the appellant filed an application under section 21 on behalf of himself and his family members claiming possession of the premises for their bona fide need and use.
The Rent Controller passed an eviction order and the Appellate Tribu nal upheld the same.
The High Court allowing the appeal of the tenant re spondent held that the order under section 21 of the Act was a mindless order inasmuch as no reason had been stated as to why the premises in question was not required for a limited period, that it was not stated as to how the premises in question was dealt with before creating the said tenancy and that there was no writing and no lease registered after the permission was granted.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, 766 HELD: 1.1 The permission granted by the Rent Controller under section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act was valid.
The order permitting limited tenancy was not a mindless order but one passed by him after taking the relevant facts into consideration.
[780D] 1.2 In order to attract section 21 of the Act, it is necessary firstly that the landlord must not require the premises either in whole or part for a particular period; secondly, the landlord must obtain the permission of the Controller in the prescribed manner; thirdly, letting of the whole or part of the premises must be for residence, and fourthly such letting out must be for such period as may be agreed in writing.
These and these alone are the conditions which are required to be fulfilled.
[772G 773B] 1.3 Section 21 only gives sanction if the landlord makes a statement to the satisfaction of the Court and the tenant accepts that the landlord does not require the premises for a limited period.
This statement of the landlord must be bona fide.
The purpose must be residence.
There must not be any fraud or collusion.
There is a presumption of regulari ty.
But it is open in particular facts and circumstances of the case to prove to the satisfaction of the executing court that there was collusion or conspiracy between the landlord and the tenant and the landlord did not mean what he said or that it was a fraud or that the tenant agreed because he was wholly unequal to the landlord.
[776F H] 1.4 In the instant case there was no permission previ ously.
This was the first letting.
There was no evidence that when the landlord stated that he did not require the premises in question for a particular period, he did not mean what he said or that he made a false statement.
There was no evidence at any stage that the tenant did not under stand what the landlord was stating or that he did not accept what the landlord stated.
There was no evidence that either the tenant was in collusion or perpetrating any fraud with the landlord or the tenant was unequal to the landlord in bargaining powers.
There was thus no evidence to show that the Controller did not apply his mind.
[779F, 776H 777B] S.B. Noronah vs Prem Kumari Khanna, ; ; Nagindas Ramdass vs Dalpatram Ichharam, ; ; V.S. Rahi and another vs Smt.
Ram Chambeli; , ; J.R. Vohra vs India Export House Pvt. Ltd. and another; , and Smt.
Dhanwanti vs D.D. Gupta, [1986] 3 SCC 1, referred to 2.
It is not necessary to state under section 21 the reasons why the 767 landlord did not require the premises in question for.
any particular period.
The landlord or the tenant may be able to show that cogent reasons did exist or were within the knowl edge of the parties as to why the landlord did not require the whole or a part of his premises for a specified period.
[777BC, 782B] 3.
There is no presumption that in all cases the tenants are the weaker sections.
The presumption is, on the con trary, in favour of sanction.
It is he who challenges the statement and the admission of the landlord or the tenant who has to establish facts.
In the instant case the onus was on the tenant to show that the sanction under section 21 was a nullity.
He did not make any attempt to dislodge the pre sumption in favour of the permission.
[777C, 779F] 4.1 An agreement in writing submitted along with the application under section 21 of the Act is really a proposed agreement.
It comes into effect only after the grant of permission.
It does not require registration.
[782CD] S.B. Noronah vs Prem Kumari Khanna, , referred to.
Vijay Kumar Bajaj vs Inder Sain Minocha, [1982] 2 Rent Control Reporter 392, approved.
4.2 It has been consistently held by the Delhi High Court that section 21 is a code by itself, that the order of permission is itself an authority and that no lease was necessary.
This view has been acted upon for long and trans actions have been completed in the Union Territory on the basis of permission and it was never doubted that there was any requirement of any lease or any agreement subsequent to the order and the same required registration.
The view taken by the High Court over a number of years should normally be adhered to and not to be disturbed.
A different view would not only introduce an element of uncertainty and confusion but it would also have the effect of unsettling transactions which might have been entered into on the faith of those decisions.
[780A C] Raj Narain Pandey and others vs Sant Prasad Tewari & others; , and Kasturi Lal vs Shiv Charan Das Mathur, [1976] 8 Rent Control Reporter 703, referred to.
