At Patadi in the erstwhile State of Patadi in the Sau rashtra region of Gujarat State there were two temples known as Sri Dwarkadhishji Mandir and Sri Trikamrayji Mandir, which were constructed in the years 1872 and 1875 respec tively by the then ruler with funds from the State Treasury.
In the Gram Panchayat records the temples stood in the name of the deities, and the appellant, the former ruler of the State, was shown as a Vahivatdar.
The temples were exempted from payment of municipal and other taxes including land revenue.
The Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 was extended to the Saurashtra region of Gujarat State in the year 1952.
The Deputy Charity Commissioner, sometime in 1958, suo motu initiated proceedings under section 19 of the above named Act, and issued show cause notice to the appellant, who was Vahivatdar of the temples.
The appellant pleaded that the temples and the properties appurtenant thereto were private properties of the ruler and the members of the royal family, and were not public trusts.
After examining witnesses, the Deputy Charity Commissioner came to the conclusion that the shrines had been dedicated as places of public religious worship and were, therefore, temples within the meaning of section 2(17) of the Act, and that the temples together with the properties appurtenant thereto constituted public religious trust within the meaning of section 2(13).
These findings were upheld by the Charity Commissioner.
On an application under section 72 of the Act, the District Judge held 910 that there was no clear, cogent or satisfactory evidence of the existence of a public endowment, that the question whether the temples were dedicated to the public may be inferred from a long course of conduct of the founders and the descendants, and that the mere fact that the public was allowed access to the temples was not conclusive as to the nature of the endowment and that the department had failed to discharge the burden of showing that they were public endowments.
The department appealed to the High Court which held that the temples fell within the meaning of section 2(17) of the Act and were, therefore, within the ambit of the expression "public trust" under section 2(13).
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended that there was no evidence to establish that there was dedication of the temples by the appellant 's ancestor for the use and benefit of the public, that the findings reached by the High Court and the Charity Commissioner were vitiated due to misplacing of the burden to establish the existence of public endowment, and that the High Court was in error in holding that the temples were constructed by the appellant 's ancestor for the benefit of the community at large and that the general public or a particular section thereof, had an unrestricted right of worship at the temples, merely because there was proof of long user by the members of the Vaishnava sect without any let or hinderance, that in the revenue records and the register of the gram panchayat, the temples were recorded in the names of the deities with the appellant shown as a mere Vahivatdar, and that separate accounts were kept in respect of the temples.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The findings arrived at by the High Court as well as the Charity Commissioner that the temples were 'public temples ' and, therefore, 'public religious trusts ' within the meaning of section 2(17) read with section 2(13) of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950, and not the private proper ties of the appellant or the members of his family are unassailable.
[927C] 1.2 The question whether the temples had been dedicated or were the private property of the appellant was essential ly a matter of inference to be drawn from the other facts on record.
There is clear, consistent, reliable and unimpeacha ble evidence to establish that although the temples in question were constructed by the appellant 's ancestor, he had intended and meant that they were for the use and bene fit of the 911 public, that the public at large and members of the Vaishna va sect had been worshipping at the temples as of right for the last over 100 years and that the temples had all along been primarily maintained by contributions made by the public particularly devotees belonging to the Vaishnava sect.
[918C, 926G H] 2.1 The essence of a public endowment consists in its being dedicated to the public; and in the absence of any document creating the endowment, long user is the material factor from which an inference of dedication may arise.
The distinction between a private and public endowment is that whereas in the former the beneficiaries are specific indi viduals, in the latter they are the general public or a class thereof.
[921A B] 2.2 When property is dedicated for the worship of a family idol, it is a private and not a public endowment, as the members who are entitled to worship at the shrine of the deity can only be members of the family.
But where the beneficiaries are not the members of a family or specified individuals but the public at large or a specified portion thereof, then the endowment can only be regarded as public intended to benefit the general body of worshippers.
[921G] 2.3 Dedication need not always be in writing and can be inferred from the facts and circumstances appearing.
In the absence of a written grant, the question whether an endow ment made by a private individual is a public endowment or a private one is a mixed question of fact and law and the scope of dedication must be determined on the application of legal concepts of public and private endowment.
Facts and circumstances, in order to be accepted as proof of dedica tion must be considered in their historical setting viz. the origin of the temple, the manner in which its affairs are managed, the nature and extent of the gifts received, the rights exercised by the devotees in regard to worship there in, etc.
[919F, 920E F] In the instant case, the temples were constructed at public expenditure by meeting the cost of construction from the public ex chequer and the upkeep and maintenance of the temples was met by public subscription.
The High Court and the Charity Commissioner therefore, rightly inferred exist ence of a public endowment.
Such an inference was strength ened by the fact of user by the public as of right for over a century.
The appellant as well as his predecessors al though in management, have throughout treated the temples as public temples of which they were mere Vahivatdars.
The finding reached by the High Court and the Charity Commis sioner is based on a proper appreciation of the 912 evidence.
All the circumstances clearly support the finding.
[920G H, C, 927B] Shri Mahalaxmi Vahuji vs Rannchhoddas Kalidas & Ors., ; ; Nar Hari Sastri & Ors.
vs Shri Badrinath Temple Committee, ; ; Bihar State Board Religious Trust, Patna vs Mahant Sri Biseshwar Das, ; Radhakanta Deb & Anr.
vs Commissioner of Hindu Religious Endowments, Orissa, ; ; Pujari Lakashmana Goundan vs Subramania Ayyar, AIR 1924 PC 44; Babu Bhagwan Din vs Gir Har Saroop, LR 1939 67 IA 1; Deoki Nandan vs Murlidhar, ; ; Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj vs State of Rajasthan & Ors., [1964] 1 SCR 561; Bhaneshwarbuwa Guru Purshottambuwa, owner of Shri Vithal Rukhamai Sansthan vs The Charity Commissioner, State of Bombay, ; ; Hari Bhanu Maharaj of Baroda vs Charity Commissioner, Ahmedabad, ; Heir of deceased Maharaj Purshottamlalji Mahara], Junagad vs Collec tor of Junagad District & Ors., ; and Mulla 's Hindu Law, 15th edn., para 424 at pp.
544 545, Mukherjea 's Hindu Law of Religious & Charitable Trusts, 5th edn.
paras 4.36 to 4.40 at pp.
185 190, referred to.
