Under the relevant Recruitment Rules relating to Class I junior scale posts, there was a quota system two thirds of the vacancies had to be filled up by promotion by selection from Class II officers and the remaining one third by direct recruitment by competitive examination to be held by Public Service Commission.
When direct recruitment was not made timely as envisaged by the scheme in the Rules, officiating promotions were given in respect of the posts covered by the direct recruit quota.
Such temporary promotions remained effective for a number of years and later when the vacancies within the direct recruitment quota were filled up, the appointments made in the later years were deemed to carry weightage for seniority on the footing of deemed filling up when the vacancies had arisen.
Thus, the dispute as to seniority inter se between those who had manned the promotional posts beyond 2/3rds limit and the direct recruits subsequently appointed, arose for judicial determination.
This Court in V.P. Badami, etc.
vs State of Mysore and Ors., had dealt with a similar situation with reference to the same set of rules, and with a view to implementing the rule of this Court in Badami 's case, the State government had issued an official memorandum on 5.7.75, laying down guide lines for determination of the seniority between the direct recruits and promotees, and accordingly, gradation list of the junior scale officers as on 30.6.73 was drawn up, and notified on 10.8.75.
By a later notification dated 2.2.77, a further gradation list was published.
Then, on a representa tion by the 1974 batch of direct recruits for refixation of inter se seniority in the gradation list taking into account the carried forward vacancies, the State Government made an order on 22.5.80 to the effect that the 1974 batch of direct recruits should be shown immediately below serial number 64 and above serial number 65 in the continuation gradation list published on 2.2.77.
886 Aggrieved by this government direction, some promotees moved the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution for protection of their seniority, and aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, both, the direct recruits and promotees moved this Court for relief by appeals by special leave and writ petitions.
The promotees challenged the propriety of the direction of the High Court to modify the gradation list by applying the quota rule, while the direct recruits sought to have full application of the quota rule instead of the limitation of three years, and the consequen tial benefits.
Allowing the appeals and the writ petitions of the direct recruits and dismissing the appeals by the promotees, the Court, HELD: The rule of this court in V.P. Badami, etc.
vs State of Mysore and others, has to be given full effect.
The appeals and writ petitions of the direct recruits have to succeed and those by the promotees have to fail.
The Court hopes the State of Karnataka will not demote anyone who has been in a promotional post for several years in the Class II service as a consequence of this decision, but the gradation list has got to be adjusted to fit into the principles indicated in the judgment.
No justification was shown as to why the State of Karnataka failed to comply with its obligation of making recruitments in accordance with the quota system.
Once the State frames rules, the rules are binding on the State, and like individuals, the State has got to resulate its conduct in accordance with the rules; in fact, the State has to observe them all the more.
The Court hopes that the State of Karnataka in the years ahead will comply with the quota rule with regularity so that a litigation of this type may not arise again.
[907D F] Upon a suggestion of the Court, counsel for the parties filed charts, containing recast gradation list on the basis of the claims advanced before the Court showing (1) how it would be when the full claim of the promotees was granted and (2) how different it would look when the total claim of the direct recruits was allowed, and the Court notices that the process of pushing up and down would be inevitable, but would be within reasonable limits and no irreparable preju dice was apparent.
[907H; 908A B] OBSERVATION: The Court was struck by the innumerable rules framed within a period of about thirty years to cover the field relating to constitution, recruitment and provi sion for other conditions of service.
It is proper that service rules should be simple, making 887 reasonable provision for necessary aspects.
While framing such rules, the relevant provisions of the Constitution and the laws in force hove to be kept in view.
There should be no frequent alteration of the service rules.
Exigencies of circumstances and unforeseen situations will certainly justify alterations.
Those would be indeed rare occations.
[905H; 906A B] Experience shows that legal battles are fought in court between Government servants whether an individual pitched against an individual or a group against a group; this embitters relationship inter se and often results in a switch over of attention from public duty to personal cause.
Frequent litigations against the State or the higher author ities in the hierarchies of administration wipe out rever ence, loyalty and the sense of discipline, and substitute these by anger, disrespect and ram:our.
In the process, fellow feeling is lost and the sense of brotherhood vanish es.
The net result of all this is the deprivation of the efficiency of the bureaucratic community to serve the socie ty.
The undue growth of service litigation within the four decades of independence clearly calls for these observa tions.
As and when the occasion has arisen, the Court has sought to draw the attention of the State as the ' employer as also the government servants to this aspect of the mat ter.
This has been done not with a view to subjecting any litigant to undue criticism but with the fond hope that it would help the problem to receive adequate attention.
The Court is surprised that the words spelt out in the different judgments have fallen on deaf ears.
Thereby the most power ful wing in the administrative set up is gradually moving away from its designated path.
There have been cases where officers have been in court, litigating over service dis putes for about twenty five to thirty years of their career, which would mean almost three fourth of their service peri od.
What would be the contribution of such officers to the public service, can be well imagined.
Very often a public officer is forced into litigation as he gets no justice from his superior.
There are also several instances where an officer drags the employee into litigation without a cause of action.
These are matters which must be taken into ac count without further loss of time and with fortitude so that the most effective wing of the administration does not further lose its service ability.
[906B G] A public servant is in the position of a trustee.
Social power vests in him for rendering service to the community.
Every public servant has to be cognizant to that obligation.
Once the level of that consciousness grows up, there is bound to be a corresponding fail in the attitude 888 to litigate over small issues.
It is for the privileged public servant as also his employer to share this philoso phy.
[906H; 907C] V.P. Badami, etc.
vs State of Mysore & Ors.
, ; M.G. Kadali vs State of Karnataka & Ors., [1982] 2 K.L.J. 453; N.C. Sharma vs Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Ors., ; ; S.G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Bishan Sarup 's case, ; Bachan Singh & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; Sabraman 's case, ; Col. A.S. Iyer & Ors.
vs V. Balasubramanyam & Ors., ; ; P.S. Sahal & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; ; A. Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; S.S. Lamba and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; ; G.P. Doval and Ors.
vs Chief Secretary, Government of UP and Ors., ; O.P. Singla and Anr., etc.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; ; D.S. Nakara and Ors.
vs Union of India, ; ; N.K. Chandan & Ors.
vs State of Gujarat, ; ; Karam Pal vs Union of India; , and Dr. T.C. Siddapparadhya
