The respondent, a government official, while residing in Government quarters sought permission of the Rent Controller under section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for leasing out a portion of his house to the appellant for residential purposes for 18 months as he did not require it for his own use for that period.
The appellant declared before the Rent Controller that he accepted the statement of the respondent and that he shall vacate the premises on the expiry of the period of 18 months.
The Rent Controller, thereupon, passed an order granting permission in terms of the declaration.
When after expiry of the stipulated period the appellant failed to vacate the leased portion, the respondent filed an execution application for recovering possession.
The Rent Controller as well as the Appellate Authority rendered concurrent finding to the effect that the tenancy came into effect only by reason of the permission granted by the Rent Controller under section 21 and directed the appellant to deliver possession to the respondent.
In second appeal before the High Court it was contended by the appellant that since the lease agreement was not reduced to writing, as required under section 21 of the Act, the permission granted by the Rent Controller was not valid.
Dismissing the appeal the High Court held that in as much as the parties had made statements before the Rent Controller and duly signed them, there was sufficient compliance with the terms of section 21 and it was not necessary that there should be a separate agreement in writing over and above the draft agreement and the statements rendered before the Rent Controller.
938 In the appeal by special leave, the contention taken before the High Court was reiterated, and in addition it was contended for the first time that the permission obtained by the respondent from the Rent Controller under section 21 was in fraud of the statute inasmuch as he had been obtaining such permission on several occasions for short periods in order to deprive the tenants of their rights under the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 A plea pertaining to fraudulent practice is a mixed question of fact and law.
Without the requisite foun dation on facts to prove a wilful contravention or abuse of a provision of law a finding cannot be rendered as to wheth er a party has committed a fraud by abusing any legal provi sion.
[943FG] 1.2 In the instant case, the appellant had not cross examined the respondent with reference to the lease granted earlier by the respondent to other tenants nor had he ad duced independent evidence to prove the factum of those leases and such leases being granted by abuse of the provi sions of section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
In the absence of factual material to show the abuse or misuse of the provisions of section 21, it cannot be said that the respond ent had practised fraud on the Rent Controller in obtaining permission.
Besides, even if the respondent had let out different portions of the building to other tenants on earlier occasions by having recourse to section 21 he may have done so on the basis of bona fide grounds and genuine calcu lations and his calculations may have gone wrong due to factors or events beyond his control.
The mere fact of letting out of the premises once again by resort to section 21 for a limited period should not necessarily lead to the inference that from the very beginning the premises were available for letting out indefinitely.
[943EF, G 944A, 946A] Dhanwanti vs D.D. Gupta, (AIR referred to.
1.3 The respondent was a government servant and was living in Government quarters.
He had an apprehension that the said allotment may be cancelled because of his owning a house and so he had to provide for any contingency resulting from such cancellation and hence he felt he would be able to spare the leased premises only for a limited period.
There was no material before the Rent Controller to establish or even to arouse suspicion that the respondent was playing a fraud on the statute.
In such circumstances the order passed by the Rent Controller cannot be said to be vitiated in any manner.
[945AB] 939 S.B. Noronah vs Prem Kumari Khanna, ; , applied.
V.S. Rahi vs Ram Chambeli, ; , distinguished.
The appellant has waited for the full term of the lease to raise objections about the respondent playing a fraud on the statute.
He has failed to put forth these objections within a reasonable time, after the permission was granted by the Rent Controller, to impugn the order on the ground of the alleged fraud perpetrated by the respond ent,.
This factor weakens the objections raised by the appellant and denudes them of force and content.
[946CD] J.R. Vohra vs India Export House, ; at 911 912, referred to.
In the matter of interpretation of a local statute the law settled by the High Court over a continuous period of time should normally be adhered to and should not be disturbed.
The Delhi High Court has consistently held that section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 is a complete Code by itself, and a permission granted thereunder would not become invalid either on account of the landlord failing to disclose the reasons for non requirement of the leased premises for a particular period or because of the landlord and the tenant not entering into an agreement in writing subsequent to the grant of permission under section 21 or on account of the agreement of tenancy in writing not being subsequently registered.
A different view would not only introduce an element of uncertainty and confusion but it would also have the effect of unsettling transactions which might have been entered into on the faith of those deci sions.
[947B, 946H 947A, FG] Inder Mohan Lal vs Ramesh Khanna (C.A. No. 468 of 1977) decided on 4.8.1987; Raj Narain Pandey & Ors.
vs Sant Prasad Tewari & Ors., ; and Kasturi Lal vs Shiv Charan Das Mathur, [1976] Rent Control Reporter, Vol.
8 p. 703, referred to.
