The respondent distillery, an industrial unit of M/s. Modi Industries Ltd., at Modi Nagar manufacturing industrial alcohol has been discharging its highly noxious and polluted trade effluents into the river through a local drain.
It applied to the Pollution Control Board under sections 25(1) and 26 of the Act on March 27, 1981 for consent of the Board to discharge its trade effluents into the stream.
The Board found the application incomplete in many respects, and called upon the respondents to rectify the discrepancies.
As there was no response from the respondents, the appellant Board refused to grant the consent prayed for in the public interest and thereafter issued notice under section 20 of the Act directing the Company to furnish certain information regard ing the particulars and names of the Managing Director, Directors and other persons responsible for the conduct of the Company.
This was followed by various reminders.
Finding no response from the respondents, the Board on October 21, 1983 lodged a complaint against the respondents under section 44 of the Act in the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Gaziabad.
Instead of launching a prosecution against M/s. Modi Industries Ltd., the Board impleaded the industrial unit as respondent No. 1 and the Chairman.
Vice Chairman, Managing Director and members of the Board of Directors of the Company as respondent Nos. 2 to 11.
The Judicial Magistrate directed the issue of process.
799 The respondents preferred a revision under section 397 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 before the High Court in which an application was filed under section 482 of the Code for quashing the proceedings.
The Single Judge of the High Court quashed the proceedings on the ground that there could be no vicarious liability saddled on the Chairman, Vice Chairman, Managing Director and other members of the Board of Direc tors of the Company under section 47 of the Act unless there was a prosecution of the Company.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: A combined reading of the provisions contained in subss.
(1) and (2) of section 47 of the makes it apparent that the officials of the Company owning the respondent industrial unit could be prosecuted as having been in charge of and responsible to the Company for the business of that unit and could be deemed to be guilty of the offence with which they were charged.
[804DE] The industrial unit owned by the Company was discharging its trade effluents into the river prior to the commencement of the Act.
It was, therefore, mandatory for the Company to make an application to the Board under section 25(2) read with section 26 of the Act for grant of consent for the discharge of its trade effluents into the stream.
The application made by the industrial unit having been found incomplete in many re spects was rejected by the Board in public interest.
There after the Company which did not have proper arrangements for treatment of the highly polluted trade effluents discharged by it, had been in spite of repeated letters from the Board intentionally and deliberately avoiding compliance with the requirements of sections 25(1) and 26 rendering themselves pun ishable under section 44 of the Act.
The Chairman.
ViceChairman, Managing Director and members of the Board of Directors of the Company in such capacity were incharge of and responsi ble for the conduct of the business of the Company and were, therefore, deemed to be guilty of the said offence and liable to be proceeded against and punished under section 47 of the Act.
[805H 806F] The vicarious liability of these officials of the Compa ny is to be viewed not in isolation but in the conspectus of facts and events and not in vacuum.
The technical flaw in the complaint lodged by the appellant Board had occurred due to the recalcitrant attitude of the industrial unit, which in spite of more than one notice being issued had deliber ately failed to furnish information called for regarding the particulars and 800 names of the Managing Director, Directors and other persons responsible for the conduct of the Company.
Having wilfully failed to furnish the requisite information to the Board, it is not open to the respondents 2 to 11 to seek the Court 's assistance to derive advantage from the lapse committed by their own industrial unit.
Furthermore, the legal infirmity is of such a nature which could be easily cured by having the matter remitted to the trial court with a direction to call upon the appellant to make the formal amendments to the averments in the complaint so as to make the controlling company of the industrial unit figure as the concerned accused.
[805BC, 804G, EF, H 805A] The Board and its legal advisors should have drafted the complaint with greater circumspection not to leave any technical flaw which would invalidate the initiation of the prosecution allowing a large business house to escape the consequences of the breaches committed by it of the provi sions of the Act with impunity.
[805GH]
