The petitioner who had served in a temporary capacity in a pensionable establishment of the Central Government for 3 years prior to his absorption in an autonomous body spon sored by the Central Government, retired from the service of that body in 1980, and was not allowed to count his service under the Central 'Government for purposes of pensionary benefits, since, according to the then existing orders, that benefit was confined only to such Central Government employ ees who were permanent at the time of their absorption in the autonomous body.
By an order dated 29th August, 1984, the Central Govern ment decided inter alia that where a Central Government employee borne in a pensionable establishment is allowed to be absorbed in an autonomous body, the service rendered by him under the Government shall be allowed to be counted towards pension under the autonomous body irrespective of whether the employee was temporary or permanent in Govern ment, subject, however, to the condition that the pensionary benefits would accrue only if the temporary service is followed by confirmation.
In paragraph 7 of the said order it was stated that the order would take effect from the date of its issue.
The petitioner questioned the validity of the condition imposed in paragraph 7 of the order dated 29th August, 1984 making it applicable only to such of the employees of the Government/autonomous bodies who retired from service after the date of the issue of the order.
Allowing the petition, 929 HELD: Paragraph 7 of the Government order dated 29th August, 1984 cannot be used against persons in the position of the petitioner to deny them the benefit of the past service for purposes of computing the pension.
[936C D] 2.
There has been a continuous mobility of personnel between Central Government departments and autonomous bodies both ways and the Government thought that it would not be just to deprive an employee who is later on absorbed in the service of the autonomous body the benefit of the service rendered by him earlier in the Central Government for pur poses of computation of pension and similarly the benefit of service rendered by an employee who is later on absorbed in the Central Government service the benefit of the service rendered by him earlier in the autonomous body for purposes of computation of pension.
If that was the object of issuing the Government Order dated 29th August, 1984, then the benefit of that order should be extended to all pensioners who had rendered service earlier in the Central Government or in the autonomous body as the case may be with effect from the date of the said Government order.
[935A C] 3.
Now let us take the case of a person who had rendered service under the Central Government between January 1, 1953 and July 1, 1955 but who has retired from service of an autonomous body in 1985.
There is no dispute that such a person gets the benefit of the service put in by him under the Central Government for purposes of his pension.
But another pensioner who has put in service under the Central Government during the same period will not get similar concession if he has retired prior to the date of the Gov ernment order if Paragraph 7 of that order is applied to him.
The result will be that whereas in the first case there is pensionary liability of the Central Government in the second case it does not exist although the period of service under the Central Government is the same.
The discrimination arises on account of the Government order.
[935C E] 4.
There is no substance in the plea that this conces sion being a new one it can only be prospective in operation and cannot be extended to employees who have already re tired.
It is true that it is prospective in operation in the sense that the extra benefit can be claimed only after 29th August, 1984.
But it certainly looks backward and takes into consideration the past event that is the period of service under the Central Government for purposes of computing qualifying service because such additional service can only be the service rendered prior to the date of issue of the Government order.
By doing so the Government order will 930 not become an order having retrospective effect.
It still continues to be prospective in operation.
Whoever has ren dered service during any past period would be entitled to claim the additional financial benefit of that service if he is alive on 29th August, 1984 under the Government order but with effect from 29th August, 1984.
[935H; 936A C] 5.
The respondents have not furnished any acceptable reason in support of their case, except saying that the petitioner was not entitled to the benefit of the Government order because the order says that it would not be applicable to those who had retired prior to the date on which it was issued.
In the absence of any explanation which is worthy of consideration it has to be held that the classification of the pensioners who were working in the Government/autonomous bodies into two classes merely on the basis of the date of retirement is unconstitutional as it bears no nexus to the object to be achieved by the order.
[935F G]
