There were disputes between the partners of the respond ent firm and several legal proceedings were taken in the courts below, which ultimately came to this Court.
This Court by an order dated 2nd of November, 1982 referred the disputes to an Arbitrator.
An application for appointment of Receiver was also directed to be disposed of by the trial court.
The Arbitrator duly filed the award dated 3rd of April, 1985 in this Court under Section 14(1) of the .
The petitioner in the special leave petitions filed an affidavit alleging that the Arbitrator was guilty of legal misconduct, and that there were errors which were amenable to correction by this Court, that the award was inconsistent and, therefore, the award should be set aside so far as it was against the applicant.
On behalf of the Respondent Workers an application was filed and it was contended that their claims have not been fully protected, and that the workers ' claim on account of gratuity would come to about Rs.7 lakhs while the Arbitrator had estimated it erroneously at Rs.4 lakhs, and had also made no sufficient provision in respect thereof.
Disposing of the Civil Miscellaneous Petitions, the Court, HELD: There is no legal proposition either in the award or in any document annexed therewith which was erroneous.
The alleged mistake or alleged errors, if there be any, of which grievances are made, are mistakes of fact, if at all.
The grievances, even if true, do not amount to an error apparent on the face of the record.
[857A, B, D] 853 Sufficient provisions have been made in the award for the existing liabilities of the workers and for any further contingencies is respect of their claims.
The right of gratuity has been recognised.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the award of the arbitrator is left incomplete and this dispute left undetermined.
[855C D] The objection to the award cannot be sustained.
There will, therefore, be judgment in terms of the award.
There will be no interim interest.
There will, however, be inter est on judgment at 9%.
[857E] Union of India vs A.L. Raffia Ram, ; ; Champsey Bhara and Company vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company Ltd., [1932] L.R. 50 I.A. 324; Kanpur Nagar Mahapalika vs M/s Narain Das Haribansh, ; Allen Berry and Co. (P) Ltd. vs Union of India, New Delhi, ; and Hindustan Tea Co. vs K. Sashikant Co. and another, , referred to.
