While the respondent, alongwith another person, was being tried under sections 302 and 201 read with section 34 I.P.C., etc., for causing the death of his wife, the evidence re corded revealed the involvement of two police officials in the disposal of the dead body, and, they were also charged under section 201 read with section 34 I.P.C. and the trial was or dered to be held de novo against all the four accused.
However, the trial could not proceed as the two police officials whose plea that, being public servants, it was necessary to obtain a sanction for prosecution under section 197 Cr.
P.C. for impleading them as accused, was rejected, approached the High Court in Revision and obtained stay of the trial.
The respondent applied for bail under section 439(1), Cr.
P.C. contending that the trial was unduly protracted, and on its rejection, approached the High Court in Revision.
A Single Judge of the High Court rejected the application for bail, vacated the stay granted by the High Court earlier insofar as the respondent and the other person who was originally accused with him was concerned and directed the Sessions Judge to proceed with the trial as against them only.
Allowing the appeal, and, directing continuance of stay of the trial till the disposal of the Revision filed by the two police officials, HELD: It is somewhat strange that the learned Single Judge should have made a direction at all requiring the learned Sessions Judge to proceed with the trial as against the respondent and the other accused merely because there was stay granted by the High Court in the Revision preferred by the two police officials.
If he felt that the stay would prejudicially affect the respondent and the other accused and subject them to a protracted trial, the proper course was to have heard and disposed of the Revision filed by the two police officials rather than make a direction of this kind which would, result in the splitting up of the trial and is apt to cause miscarriage of justice, besides serious pre 969 judice to the prosecution.
From the nature of the prosecu tion case, it is quite apparent that the evidence to be led by the prosecution would be more or less common as it re lates to the same occurrence.
It could not be said that merely because the proceedings were held up due to stay granted by the High Court the learned Single Judge could have taken recourse to the inherent powers of the High Court under section 482, Cr. P.C., or that it was necessary to do so either to prevent abuse of the process of Court or otherwise to secure ends of justice.
[971C F]
