Section 3 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and En forcement) Act, 1961, which is analogous to section 34 of the Indian , provides that, if any party to an agreement to which article 1I of the convention set forth in the Schedule thereto applies, commences any legal proceed ings in any court against any other party to the agreement in respect of any matter agreed to be referred to arbitra tion in such agreement, any party to such legal proceedings may, at any time after appearance and before filing a writ ten statement or taking any other step in the proceedings, apply to the court to stay the proceedings and the court, unless satisfied that the agreement is null and void, inop erative or incapable of being performed or that there is not, in fact, any dispute between the parties with regard to the matter agreed to be referred, shall make an order stay ing the proceedings.
The appellant (GEC), a multi national company, which had entered into a contract with the respondent (Renusagar), an Indian company, regarding sale of equipment for a thermal plant, submitted certain disputes between them for arbitra tion to the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), where upon, the respondent filed a suit in the Bombay High Court for a declaration that the claims were not arbitrable in terms of the contract.
On an application filed by the appel lant, the High Court stayed further proceedings in the suit in terms of section 3 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961.
Appeals filed by the respondent against that order were dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court and this Court holding that the claims were arbitrable.
Meanwhile, the appellant had filed a suit against a bank in the Calcutta High Court for enforcement of a bank 859 guarantee given by it at the instance of the respondent, following which, the respondent had also filed a suit the suit from which the present appeal arose in the Court of Civil Judge, Mirzapur praying for a declaration that the guarantee given by the bank stood discharged and had become ineffective and unenforceable.
A number of applications were filed by the appellant during the proceedings of the suit.
In application 7 C, the appellant purported to put on record its complaint that it had not received the annexures to the plaint.
In application 8 C, it prayed for rejection of the plaint and the suit under section 20 and O.VII, r. 11 read with section 151 C.P.C.
In application 10 C, the appellant requested the court to call upon the respondent to furnish a complete record of the suit and annexures.
On the date fixed for filing of written statement, the appellant filed applications 1c, 12 C and 13 C: 11 C was an application under O.VIII r. 9 and section 151 C.P.C. seeking postponement of the striking of issues, 12 C was an application under O.VIII, r.9 to grant leave to the appellant to file a subsequent pleading as written statement on merits if the court rejected the objections taken in the 'preliminary written statement '; 13 C, which was, referred to as the 'preliminary written statement ' in 11 C and 12 C, was an application styled as "Objections by the defendant to the jurisdiction of the Court to entertain this suit for declaration and injunction" setting forth seven reasons in support of the objections raised, the seventh ground assert ing that the suit was liable to be stayed inter alia under section 3 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961 and/or section 34 of the Indian .
In application 30 C, the appellant requested the court to decide the issues regarding maintainability of the suit and the jurisdiction of the court before proceeding with the suit.
In application 65 C, the appellant reiterated that the two issues referred to in 30 C should be heard first and decided before the case was proceeded upon on merits.
The Civil Judge rejected application 65 C commenting that such a request was being repeatedly made.
The appellant challenged that order by a petition under article 227 which was dismissed by the High Court in limine with the direction that the appellant should make a fresh application setting out the relevant facts in the spirit of section 3 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act and the Civil Judge should dispose of the same in accordance with law.
Accordingly, the appellant filed application 83 C 'praying for stay of the suit in terms of section 3 of the said Act which was rejected by the Civil Judge who held that the objection raised on the basis of that provision must, in the circumstances of the case, be considered to have been abandoned and the appellant considered to have elected to proceed with the suit.
The revision application 860 filed against that order was dismissed by the High Court which held that the plaint as initially presented had been completely answered by the appellant in application 13 C which was clearly in the nature of a written statement in the case.
Allowing the appeal and staying the suit, HELD: Application 13 C contained a prayer for the stay of the suit under section 3 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961 and it was made before the writ ten statement was filed and before any step in the proceed ing was taken.
Looking to the substance of the matter and ignoring technicalities, we are firmly of the view that the defendant sought a stay of the suit before filing a written statement or taking any other step in the suit and that he never abandoned his right to have the suit stayed.
[883A C] (i) While section 34 of the Indian vests in the Court the discretion to stay or not to stay the proceed ings, section 3 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforce ment) Act vests no such discretion in the Court.
Under the latter Act it is mandatory that the proceedings should be stayed if the conditions prescribed are fulfilled.
But, whether it is a defendant who invokes the discretion of the Court under section 34 of the Indian or whether it is a defendant who seeks to enforce the right under section 3 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, it is necessary that he should not have disentitled himself, from doing so either by filing a written statement or by taking any other step in the proceedings.
His application to the Court, be it under section 34 of the Indian or section 3 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act may be filed "before filing a written statement or taking any other step in the proceedings.
" It is competent then only and not thereafter.
[871G H; 872A C] (ii) A step in the proceeding which would disentitle the defendant from invoking section 34 of the should be a step in aid of the progress of the suit or submission to the jurisdiction of the court for the purpose of adjudi cation of the merits of the controversy in the suit.
The step must be such as to manifest the intention of the party unequivocally to abandon the right under the arbitration agreement and instead to opt to have the dispute resolved on merits in the suit.
The step must be such as to indicate an election or affirmation in favour of the suit in the place of the arbitration.
The election or affirmation may be by express choice or by necessary implication by acquiescence.
The broad and general right of a person to seek redressal of his grievance in a 861 court of law is subject to the right of the parties to have the disputes settled by a forum of mutual choice.
Neither right is insubstantial and neither right can be allowed to be defeated by any manner of technicality.
The right to have the dispute adjudicated by a Civil Court cannot be allowed to be defeated by vague or amorphous mis called agreements to refer to 'arbitration '.
On the other hand, if the agree ment to refer to arbitration is established, the right to have the dispute settled by arbitration cannot be allowed to be defeated on technical grounds.
[879A D] (iii) (a) In the present case, in application 7 C, GEC purported to put on record their complaint that they had not received the annexures to the plaint.
By no stretch of imagination could it possibly be said that 7 C indicated either an abandonment of arbitration or an affirmation of the suit.
8 C was an application requesting the court to reject the plaint and the suit for the reasons set forth in the application.
One of the grounds urged was that the Mirzapur Court had no territorial jurisdiction.
Another ground was that the plaint was insufficiently stamped.
Yet another ground was that the plaint disclosed no cause of action.
Every one of the objections was in the nature of a preliminary objection to the trial of the suit on the merits of the dispute between the parties.
Every one of the objec tions was what may be called a threshold objection pleaded as a bar to any further hearing of the suit.
None of the objections invited an adjudication on the merits of the controversy.
[879E G] (b) The expression 'merits of the controversy in the suit ' does not occur either under section 34 of the or section 3 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforce ment) Act.
The words occur in the decision of this court in State of Uttar Pradesh vs Janki Saran Kailash Chandra where the court said, "taking other steps in the suit proceedings connotes the idea of doing something in aid of the progress of the suit or submitting to the jurisdiction of the Court for the purpose of adjudication of the merits of the contro versy in the suit.
" The words "adjudication of the merits of the controversy in the suit" were not used to take in every adjudication which brought to an end the proceeding before the court in whatever manner but were meant to cover only ' such adjudication as touched upon the real dispute between the parties which gave rise to the action.
Objections to adjudication of the disputes between the parties, on whatev er ground, are in truth not aids to the progress of the suit but hurdles to such progress.
Adjudication of such objec tions cannot be termed as adjudication of the mertis of the controversy in the suit.
An invitation to the court to reject a plaint or 862 dismiss a suit on a ground not touching the merits of the controversy between the parties, but on a ground such as insufficiency of the court fee paid, maintainability of suit, territorial jurisdiction, etc.
, is really to enable the proceeding before the arbitrator to go on and far from an election to abandon arbitration and continue the suit.
Every threshold bar to a suit set up by a defendant is a step to allow the arbitration to go on.
It is a step in aid of arbitration and not in aid of the progress of the suit.
In that view, 8 C can hardly be called an invitation to the court to adjudicate upon the merits of the controversy, when in fact it is designed to prevent the court from touching upon the merits of the controversy.
[880B G] (c) Applications 11 C, 12 C and 13 C have to be read together and reading them together it is clear that the defendant raised objections to the trial of the suit on merits, which were loosely described as 'objections to the jurisdiction of the Court and objections to the maintain ability of the suit ' and which were requested to be disposed of first, with a further request that if the objections were rejected the defendant may then be allowed to file a proper written statement on merits and issues struck thereafter.
The invitation to the court was not to proceed with the suit but to refrain from proceeding with the suit until the preliminary objections were first decided.
The preliminary objections were set out by the defendant in 8 C and 13 C and they were not of such a nature as to make adjudication on merits of any part of the real dispute between the parties necessary for deciding the preliminary objections.
While elaborating the preliminary objections, particularly in order to explain the contention that the plaint did not disclose a cause of action, the defendant did choose to controvert several factual averments made in the plaint.
We do not think that the circumstance that the defendant chose to deny in his application inviting decision on his prelimi nary objections the allegations of material facts made by the plaintiff in the plaint changes the character of the applications into a written statement any more than a reply to a notice of motion seeking an ad interim injunction acquires the character of a written statement merely because factual allegations made in the plaint are also dealt with in the reply.
A defendant may consider it necessary to deny the averments of fact in the plaint with a view to explain the preliminary objections raised by him or he may deny the averments of fact by way of abundant caution so as not to be understood as having admitted (by not denying) the plaint averments.
[881E H; 882A C] State of Uttar Pradesh vs Janki Saran Kailash Chandra, [1974] 1 S.C.R. 31, referred to.
863 Food Corporation of India vs Yadav Engineer, ; , relied on.
