The petitioners who are working in the Ministry of Defence, Department of Production, challenged the validity of The Defence Production (Directorate of Production and Inspection, Naval) Group A and Group B Technical Post Re cruitment Rules, 1976, on the grounds: (i) that the Rules discriminate between promotees and direct recruits; (ii) that their seniority is not taken into consideration while the seniority list is prepared and that the direct recruits are given seniority over them undeservedly by virtue of the operation of the method of recruitment contained in the rules; (iii) that the seniority lists dated 25.7.77, 3.9.77 and 7.9.77 prepared according to rules are purely arbitrary and ignore their length of service.
On the other hand, counsel for the respondents contended that the principle of fixing seniority on the basis of length of service and dates of confirmation is not an inflexible rule and it is possi ble in law that a direct recruit who is appointed later in point of time is senior to a promotee because of the working out of the quota rule and that in certain given cases, seniority based on length of service can be ignored.
Allowing the writ petition, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The grievance of the petitioners is justified in law.
The rules enabling the authorities to fill in vacan cies for direct recruits as and when recruitment is made and thereby destroying the chance of promotion to those who are already in service cannot but be viewed with 282 disfavour.
If the authorities want to adhere to the rules strictly all that is necessary is to be prompt in making the direct recruitment.
[287D E] 1.2 The respondents are directed to redraw the senority lists dated 25.7.77, 3.9.77 and 7.9.77 appended as Annexures C, D and E to the writ petition and prepare the list afresh giving the petitioners the positions they would have been entitled to, but for the offending portions of clauses 10 and 11 in the Schedule to the Rules.
1287H; 288A B] 2.
The manner in which the provision contained in col umns 10 and 11 of the Schedule to the Rules works to the detriment of the promotees is as follows.
The person who is working as a Senior Technical Officer must have a minimum service of five years in that grade for promotion to the higher post.
A direct recruit who joins service much later and who does not have the requisite five years service will be placed above him for promotion.
The posts to be filled in by direct recruitment are kept vacant and as when recruit ment is made, the names of direct recruits are inserted at the places reserved for them regardless of the fact that there are many others who had put in more years of service than they.
This method works an additional hardship to the promotees in that they will not be confirmed though the required probation period has been completed by them, only to allow the direct recruits to complete their period of probation.
The combined operation of clause 10 and 11 of the Schedule to the Rules causes a double damage to the peti tioners the promotees and the direct recruits consequently have double advantage.
[286C F] 3.
Delay in making appointments by direct recruitment should not visit the promotees with adverse consequences, denying them the benefit of their service.
[287E] A. Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; O.P. Singla and Anr.
vs Union of India and others; , ; G.S. Lamba & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; Narender Chadha vs Union of India, ; and G.K. Dudani and Ors.
vs S.D. Sharma and Ors., ; , relied upon.
