On the death of R, a Hindu jat, in April or May, 1920, the widow of his pre deceased son, H, took possession of the properties and on August 24, 1920, obtained a mutation of the settlement records showing her as the owner of the lands in the place of R. A gift of half of the properties by H to her daughter K 949 gave rise to disputes between them and the collaterals but the matter was settled on H executing a document on February 6, 1932, whereby, inter alia, she agreed that the lands would belong to her for her life and after her death to her daughter for the latter 's life and that none of them would be entitled to sell or mortgage the lands.
The document, however, was not registered.
In 1939 H made a gift of the entire lands to K who obtained a mutation of the settlement records showing her as the owner of the lands, and in 1945 a suit was filed by the collaterals challenging the transaction as not binding on them as the reversionary heirs of R. Under the general custom governing the parties as admitted by them a widow of a pre deceased son was entitled only to maintenance when there were collaterals, and as H was in possession of the properties since 1920 it was said by her and K that she had, at the date of the gift, acquired an absolute title by adverse possession.
It was contended for the plaintiffs, interalia, that the agreement of February, 1932, though not admissible in evidence to prove that H and K had only life estates in the lands, was admissible to show the nature of H 's possession and that it showed that her possession was not adverse.
Held, that the document dated February 6, 1932, was in admissible in evidence, in view Of section 49 of the Indian , as H had been in possession before the date of the document and to admit it in evidence to show the nature of her possession subsequent to it would be to treat it as operating to destroy the nature of the previous possession and to convert what had started as adverse possession into a permissive possession, and therefore, to give effect to the agreement contained in it.
Varatha Pillai vs jeevarathnammal, (1918) L.R. 46 I. A. 285, distinguished,
