On December 30, 1968, the appellant, then an under graduate, was appointed to the post of Reserve Sub Inspector of Police.
During his service in that pest, he passed the B.A. Examination in April, 1971, whereafter he applied for the post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil) pursuant to an advertisement in the newspaper.
He was selected and appoint ed to the pest of Sub Inspector on December 14, 1976, on probation for two years along with thirty seven others, and was confirmed in the post on November 29, 1978.
The appellant made a representation to the Government that the period of his service as Reserve Sub Inspector of Police should be taken into account in computing his senior ity in the new post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil).
The Government by its order dated June 11, 1982, took the view that the entire period of service of the appellant as Re serve Sub Inspector of Police should be counted under Rule 15(c) of the Andhra Pradesh Police Subordinate Service Rules, and directed inter alia that the appellant would be accorded seniority from the date of his first appointment to the post of Reserve Sub Inspector of Police, that is, from December 30, 1968, and further that the order would not become a precedent for others.
Aggrieved by the above said Government order, a number of Sub Inspectors of Police (Civil) moved the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal under paragraph 7 of the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal Order, 1975, challenging the validity of the said Government Order.
The Tribunal passed an order, striking down the Government order in question and directing (i) that the appellant would be accorded seniority from the date when he joined the post of the SubInspector, of Police (Civil), treating him as a direct recruit, and (ii) that the promotional benefits given to the appellant would be regulated on 1011 and from the date he joined the said post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil).
The appellant appealed to this Court by special leave against the order of the Tribunal above said.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: The principal question that was involved in the case was whether the appellant was appointed to the post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil) as a direct recruit or was recruited in that post by transfer or was simply transferred to that post from the post of Reserve Sub Inspector of Police following his selection as a direct recruit.
[1014B C] The Tribunal took the view that the appointment of the appellant to the post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil) was not by way of transfer under Rule 15(c), nor was it by way of recruitment by transfer; it was pointed out by the Tribu nal, and rightly; that Annexure I read with Rule 2(a) of the Andhra Pradesh Police Subordinate Service Rules provided for two modes of appointment, viz., (1) by promotion, and (2) by direct recruitment or recruitment by transfer from any other service.
[1014F H] The Sub Inspectors of Police (Civil) and the Reserve SubInspectors of Police both belonged to the Andhra Pradesh Police Subordinate Service.
Recruitment by transfer could only be made from "any other service".
As both the said posts were under the same service, the question of recruit ment in the post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil) by transfer from the post of Reserve Sub Inspector of Police did not arise.
Therefore, the only question left before the Court was whether the appellant 's appointment was by way of direct recruitment or it was really a case of transfer from the post of Reserve Sub Inspector of Police to that of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil).
[1014H, 1015A C] The appellant had applied for the post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil) pursuant to an advertisement in the news papers, issued by the Police Department, inviting applica tions for appointment to the said post by direct recruit ment.
The appellant had to undergo the entire procedure (like, preliminary interview, written test, final interview, production of certificates, etc) for selection of direct recruits.
Also, he was appointed on probation and after the satisfactory completion of his probationary period, he was confirmed in the post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil).
In view of the manner in which the appellant was appointed to the post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil), it was diffi cult 1012 to accept any contention that the appellant was transferred to that.
When a Government servant is transferred from one post to another, the question of his selection after a written test and a viva voce test does not arise.
If the appellant had been transferred simpliciter, he would not have been directed to appear at the written test and inter view for selection along with other candidates who had applied for the post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil) pursuant to the advertisement in the newspaper.
The Court was, therefore, unable to accept the contention that the appellant 's was a case of transfer and not of direct re cruitment.
It was true that the Government had the power to transfer under Rule 15(c) of the Andhra Pradesh Subordinate Police Service Rules, but such a transfer could be made only in public interest, and there was no question of any public interest so far as the appellant was concerned.
The Govern ment had directed in its order that order would not be treated as a precedent; there was no necessity for this direction if the appellant 's appointment to the post of Sub Inspector of Police (Civil) was by way of transfer in exercise of power under Rule 15(c).
The Government order impugned had not been made by the Government out of its own but on the representation of the appellant.
[1015D H, 1016A B] The appellant contended that he did not submit any resignation from the post of Reserve Sub Inspector of Police and that he was allowed to draw last pay as Reserve Sub Inspector even on his appointment as the Sub Inspector of Police (Civil), but merely because of the presence of these circumstances, it would not justify a finding that the appellant had been transferred, having regard to the manner in which he came to be appointed to the post of Sub Inspec tor of Police (Civil).
[1016F G] The Tribunal was perfectly justified in holding that the appellant was directly recruited to the post of Sub Inspec tor of Police (Civil) and that his seniority should be computed from the date of such appointment.
This judgment, however, would not affect the present position of the appel lant and the emoluments being paid to him.
[1017B D]
