The petitioners filed a writ petition in the High Court, challenging the legality and propriety of the grant of a licence by the Calcutta Municipal Corporation of the sub soil of Satyanarayan Park to respondent No. 14 Messrs.
Happy Homes & Hotels Private Limited for a period of 30 years for the implementation of a development scheme, name ly, construction of a two storeyed air conditioned under ground basement market and parking place.
The High Court (Single Judge) repelled the contentions of the petitioners and dismissed the writ petition.
Against the judgment and order of the Single Judge, the petitioners preferred an appeal before the Division Bench of the High Court.
The Division Bench dismissed the appeal.
Aggrieved by the deci sion of the High Court, the petitioners filed petitions for special leave before this Court for relief.
Disposing of the petitions, the Court, HELD: In these petitions, two questions mainly arose, namely, (i) whether the grant of licence by the Municipal Corporation in favour of respondent No. 14, Messrs. Happy Homes and Hotels Pvt. Ltd., of the sub soil of Satyanarayan Park for the implementation of a development scheme, namely, to hold the said market for 30 years on payment of a premium of Rs.30 lakhs and a licence fee of Rs.40,000 per month on certain terms and conditions, was in breach of its statutory powers under sub section
(2) of section 353, read with the Explanation thereto of the Calcutta Municipal Corporation Act, 1980, and (ii) should the expression 'development work ' in section 353 (2) of the said Act, read with the Explanation thereto be con strued to mean development work qua the park, i.e., such development work must be confined to the proper and better utilisation of the park? [991G H; 992A C] 988 Counsel for the petitioners assailed the action of the Municipal Corporation substantially on two grounds briefly stated as (i) The Municipal Corporation had no power to alienate or part with possession of any public street, park, square or garden or the sub soil thereof for the purpose of implementation of any development work, etc., and (ii) On a true construction of sub section
(2) of section 353, read with the Explanation thereto, the development work either underground or on the surface of a public street, park, square or gar den, must be for development and improvement by way of proper and adequate or better utilisation of any such public street, park, etc.
[992D F] Shri Somnath Chatterjee, counsel for respondent No. 14, contended that the grant of licence by the Municipal Corpo ration of the sub soil of Satyanarayan Park was a bona fide exercise of its statutory powers, and the construction of the underground market would not destroy its intrinsic character as a park and there was no warrant to give a restrictive meaning to the expression 'development work ' in section 353(2) of the Act, read with the Explanation thereto.
He drew attention of the Court to a supplementary affidavit filed by his client, showing that the structural work of the underground market had been completed and the concrete roof had been laid, and all that remained was the laying of a park.
It appeared therefrom that the value of the work done so far was Rs.2.30 crores out of the estimated cost of Rs.4.50 crores, and the underground air conditioned market was likely to be commissioned within a couple of months, and also that the respondent No. 14 had entered into a contract with Joshi & Associates, Architects, for the re development and relaying of the Satyanarayan Park as a terrace garden; a letter of the Agri Horticultural Society of India gave a detailed scheme for such re location of the park as a ter race garden, etc.
[992H; 993A C] The material on record clearly showed that the intrinsic character of the Satyanarayan Park as public park would not be destroyed by the construction of the underground market which with its raised height at 6 feet from the road level was to have a terrace garden.
Under the scheme, there would be no construction on the park; the underground market would be under the park and not over the park, and the Satyanaray an Park would become a real park with a lush green garden, tail trees and shrubs, etc.
It was significant that the Division Bench had issued a writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to restore Satyanarayan Park as a public part as stipulated in the deed of licence and to maintain it as a public park.
The High Court (Single Judge) gave the finding that the development scheme would not create any ecological 989 imbalance, but would ensure the creation of a green belt.
There would thus be a 'patch of green ' in the thickly con gested Burrabazar area which would tend to improve the ecological balance and provide a place of recreation for all.
[993D G; 994A C] In the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court was justified in holding that the implementation of the development scheme would squarely fall within the ambit of sub section
(2) of section 353 of the Calcutta Municipal Corpora tion Act, 1980 and the construction of the underground market was not intended and meant to destroy the intrinsic character of the Satyanarayan Park as a public park; on the contrary, the scheme was to re locate and re develop the part as a public park.
There was no justification whatever to interfere with the judgment of the High Court.
[994C D] The Court directed that the grant of a fully air condi tioned market on a premium of Rs.30 lakhs and a rent of Rs.40,000 per month, which was revisable at the end of 30 years had to be altered.
It was clearly against the public interest to grant the market on a rent of Rs.40,000 per month, having regard to the spiral rise of rents of commer cial premises in all urban areas.
The Court directed the parties to revise the terms and posted the case for further directions on August 12, 1987.
On that day, Shri Som Nath Chatterjee filed on affidavit on behalf of his client, giving an undertaking to the following effect: (1) M/s. Happy Homes & Hotels Pvt. Ltd. shall pay licence fee @Rs.75,000 per month which shall be revisable at the end of the every three years; (2) It shall maintain the underground market in proper state of affairs and the air conditioning plant therein in proper workman like condition until the expiry or determination of the licence; (3) It shall re locate and re develop Satyanarayan Park as a public park at its own expense as provided in the deed of licence for which it has entered into a contract with Agri Horticultural Society of India, and it shall maintain properly the said park as a public park throughout the entire period of 30 years.
[994E H; 995A] The Special Leave Petitions were dismissed subject to this modification.
[995B] Attorney General vs Corporation of Sunderland LR , referred to.
