One Kesharimal Porwal, who had one of his businesses as gold and silver shop, died on October 7, 1952 leaving behind surviving a widow Ratanbai, a daughter Shantabai and a son Nem Kumar.
Kesharimal left a will whereby he bequeathed gold and silver.to his grandsons sons of Shantabai and Nem Kumar providing that each grandson would receive 500 tolas of gold at the time of marriage and the remaining gold would be equally divided among them.
The genuineness and validity of the will were not challenged at any stage.
On July 9, 1968, the officers of the Central Excise, Nagpur, searched the residential premises of Nem Kumar and seized 10 slabs and 9 pieces of gold and 230 gold coins having at that time a market value of Rs.7,63,000.
The gold seized was primary gold.
The officials of the Central Excise separately recorded the statements of Ratanbai and Nem Kumar.
Ratanbai stated that the seized gold was the 'self earned property ' of her late husband, and had been kept in the iron safe about 8/9 years ago, and that keys of the shelf had all along remained in her possession.
Nem Kumar in his statement denied any knowledge of the gold and said that he had come to know of the existence of the gold for the first time during the search.
A declaration in respect of the seized gold was filed by Ratanbai with the Central Excise.
The Collector of Central Excise served separate notices on Ratanbai and Nem Kumar, calling upon them to show cause why the seized gold should not be confiscated and a penalty imposed for violation of the provision of paragraph 9(1)(i) of the Gold Control Ordinance, 1968.
The notices were re plied by both.
The Collector came to the finding that Ratan bai had full knowledge of the gold and was in conscious possession of it for at least 8/9 years.
As for Nem Kumar, the Collector held that it was difficult to sustain the charge of possession and custody of the gold against him.
Accordingly, the Collector, held that only Ratanbai had violated the provision of paragraph 9(1)(i) of the 1117 Gold Control Ordinance, 1968, and directed the confiscation of the gold and imposition of a penalty of Rs.38,000 on Ratanbai under paragraph 75 of the Gold Control Ordinance, 1968, which was replaced by the Gold Control Act, 1968.
Nem Kumar was acquitted.
An appeal preferred by Ratanbai against the order of the Collector was dismissed by the Administrator under the Gold Control Act, Ratanbai then filed an application for revision before the Central Government, challenging the order of the Administrator.
The appellant No. 1, Sushil Kumar son of Nem Kumar, who had by then attained majority, also filed a revisional application before the Central Government.
Both the revisional applications were dismissed.
Thereupon, the appellants Nos. 1 to 5 and Surendra Kumar since deceased, son of Shantabai, filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court (Single Judge) quashed the order of confisca tion and penalty and directed the return of the gold to the petitioners.
The respondents preferred an appeal to the Division Bench of the High Court.
The Division Bench did not agree with the interpretation of the learned Single Judge on section 71(1) of the Gold Control Act, including the proviso thereto, and set aside the judgment of the Single Judge.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellants moved this court for relief by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: The ground that weighed with the Central Excise Authorities in confiscating the gold was that the acquisi tion, possession, custody or control of primary gold in question by Ratanbai became illegal and liable to confisca tion, as she had not filed any declaration required under rule 126 1 of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, nor had she disposed of the gold by sale or converted the gold into ornaments in contravention of clause (i) of sub rule (I B), but had possessed the same in violation of sub rule (I A) of Rule 126 H of the Defence of India (Fourth Amendment) Rules, 1966.
But, after the amendment of section 71(1) of the Gold Control Act, 1968, by addition of a proviso, the appellants placed reliance upon the proviso.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that Ratanbai by her omission to dispose of the gold by sale or to convert the same into ornaments in accordance with the provision of rule 126 H, as amended by the Defence of India (Fourth Amendment) Rules, 1966 rendered the gold liable to confiscation without the knowledge or connivance of the owners of the gold, namely, the grandsons of Kesharimal Porwal, but the same could not be 1118 confiscated in view of the proviso to section 71(1) of the Gold Control Act.
The Learned Single Judge of the High Court had upheld the contention and directed the release of the gold in favour of the appellants.
[1122F H; 1123G H] The principal question that fell for the consideration of this Court was whether the proviso to section 71(1) also related to primary gold.
[1124D] Power of confiscation of gold including primary gold is conferred by sub section (1) of section 71.
The expression "any gold" refers to all kinds of gold, including primary gold.
In view of section 8(1) of the Gold Control Act, no person can acquire or retain possession, custody or control of primary gold.
Under clause (i) of sub rule (I B) of rule 126 H of the Defence of India (Fourth Amendment) Rules, 1966, the owner in possession, custody or control of primary gold is bound to either sell such primary gold to a licensed refiner or dealer or deliver the same to a licensed or certified dealer or goldsmith for conversion thereof into ornaments within a period of six months from September 1, 1967, the date of the Commencement of the said Rules, Sub rule (1 A) of Rule 126 H prohibits the possession, custody or control of any primary gold after the expiry of the said period of six months.
[1124D E; 1125B C] In this case, it was Ratanbai who had failed to either sell or convert the primary gold within the grace period of six months without the knowledge and connivance of the owners thereof, that is, the grandsons of Kesharimal Porwal.
If the contention of the respondents was accepted, it would mean that the owner of the primary gold had to lose the same on account of default committed by somebody who was not the owner.
It was also difficult to accept the contention that while the substantive provision of sub section (1) of sec tion 71 related to all kinds of gold, including primary gold, the proviso, a part of the substantive provision, would not include primary gold within its scope and ambit.
The proviso lays down the circumstances under which any gold which is liable to confiscation will not be confiscated.
Where primary gold is not to be confiscated in view of the proviso to section 71(1), the owner thereof gets it back, but it does not mean that he will be entitled to retain possession of such primary gold which is forbidden by sec tion 8(1) of the Gold Control Act.
Thus there would be no difficulty in not confiscating the primary gold under the proviso, for after such release the owner of the primary gold will have to dispose it of or convert the same into ornaments.
The Court did not agree with the view expressed by the Division Bench of the High Court that the proviso to section 71(1) of the 1119 Gold Control Act did not relate to primary Gold.
The inter pretation put on section 71 (1) by the Court would not run counter to the provision of section 8(1) as the primary gold, not confiscated, would not be allowed to be possessed by the owner but had to be disposed of by him or converted into ornaments in the manner mentioned above or as directed by order date 30.7.76 of the Administrator under the Gold Control Act.
[1125D G; 1127A B] The Court set aside the order of the Division Bench and modified the order of the Single Judge of the High Court, directing that the seized primary gold should be released in favour of the appellants and the appellants would either sell the same to a licensed dealer or deliver possession thereof to a licensed dealer or a certified goldsmith, as might be specified by the Administrator, immediately on the release of such primary gold.
[1127C] Badri Prasad vs Collector of Central Excise, [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 254, referred to.
