The petitioner No. 1 and petitioners Nos. 2 to 5, were convicted in two separate incidents for offence under Sec.
302 Indian Penal Code and were undergoing life imprisonment awarded to them.
They were directed to be released on bail by the High Court during the pendency of their appeals.
The appeal of the first petitioner was dismissed on 28.9.78 and he was arrested on 29.1.79.
The appeal of the petitioners Nos. 2 to 5 was also dismissed on 8.12.78 and they surren dered before the Magistrate on 16.2.79 for serving out the remaining part of their sentence.
By an order dated August 14, 1977, special remission was granted by the Governor of Haryana to prisoners who were in confinement on 14th August, 1977 on the occasion of the first visit of the then Chief Minister of the State to jail, and who had been subsequently released on bail.
All the petitioners were given remissions of 19 months and 12 days during the period they remained on bail.
The petitioners were informed by the third respondent, by letter dated 24.4.1985 to the second respondent that the convicts who were on bail and whose sentences were suspended would be excluded from the remissions purported to have been earned by them while they were on bail.
In the writ petition, the petitioners assailed the guidelines and instructions laid down in the impugned letter as contrary to the provisions contained in Para 637 of the Punjab Jail Manual.
They contended that since they surren dered themselves before the jail authority after 1108 the dismissal of their appeal by the High Court they were entitled to have the period of remissions earned by them during the period they were on bail to be counted for con sidering the total period of sentence undergone for their premature release, under the aforesaid para.
A counter affidavit affirmed by the second respondent was filed stating that no remission of period of sentence was permissible under paragraph 637 or any other provision of the Punjab Jail Manual, as applicable in Haryana, for the period that the convict remained on bail or his sentence was otherwise under suspension, that the special remission under State Government orders on visit of Minister for Jails was allowed only to those prisoners who were convicted before the visit and released on bail subsequently and the convicts surrendered to undergo the unexpired period of sentence and that the petitioners were not entitled to the benefit claimed as they had not surrendered in the jail.
Dismissing the writ petition, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The impugned letter of the third respondent is quite in accordance with the Government order made on 11/14 January, 1985 and, therefore, cannot be challenged as in violation of paragraph 637 of the Punjab Jail Manual nor it is contrary to the directions contained in the aforesaid order.
[1115B C] The remissions that were inadvertently given to the petitioners cannot be taken into account in considering the total period of sentence undergone by them while considering their premature release from imprisonment under para 637 of the Punjab Jail Manual.
[1112H, 1113A] 1.2 On a reading of para 637 of the Punjab Jail Manual, it is manifest that a prisoner who was released on bail or whose sentence was temporarily suspended and was re admitted in jail afterwards would be brought under the remission system on the first day of the calendar month next following his readmission.
In other words, a prisoner is not eligible for remission of sentence during the period he was on bail or his sentence was temporarily suspended.
[ 1112F G] 1.3 The special remission was granted by the order of the Governor dated 14th August, 1977, to only those peti tioners who were in confinement on 14th August, 1977 on the occasion of the first visit of the then Chief Minister of the State to jail, and who had been subsequently released on bail.
It is clear and evident from the letter dated 11/14th January, 1985 issued by the Governor that convicts who were 1109 on parole from jail on the date and time of the visit of the Chief Minister to the Jail will be granted remissions on condition that they surrender at the jail on the due date after expiry of parole period for undergoing the unexpired period of their sentence.
In order to get the benefit of remission as directed by the said order issued under Article 161 of the Constitution of India, a convict has to surrender voluntarily after expiry of bail at the jail.
[1113B, 1114G] In the instant case, the petitioners, though convicted prior to the visit to the jail of the Chief Minister, were granted bail before the said date.
Further, all the peti tioners did not surrender in jail immediately after their appeals were dismissed.
While petitioner No. 1 did not surrender till he was arrested after four months in pursu ance of the warrant issued by the Court, petitioners No. 2 to 5 surrendered themselves to the Magistrate only after 2 months.
Therefore, they were not eligible for remissions as envisaged in the Government orders dated 14.8.1977 and 11/14th January, 1985.
[1113D F]
