The petitioner had secured 470 marks out of 950 in the written examination conducted by the Orissa Public Service Commission for the post of Probationary Munsifs for the year 1982 83.
In the viva voce test he was given 30 marks out of 200.
But he did not find a place in the merit list though candidates with less number of aggregate marks had been selected.
In the writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution he challenged the validity of selection on the ground, among others, that it was arbitrary and contrary to rules.
For the respondents it was submitted that the Commission had taken a decision on the advice of the High Court Judge who was present at the viva voce test as provided under r. 17 of the Orissa Judicial Service Rules, 1964, that a candidate to be suitable for the post of Munsif should secure at least 30 per cent marks at the viva voce test, and that the petition er did not secure the minimum qualifying marks so pre scribed.
Allowing the writ petition, HELD: 1.
The decision of the Orissa Public Service Commission to prescribe the minimum marks to be secured at the viva voce test for the post of Probationary Munsifs in the State Judicial Service was illegal and without authori ty.
[1106B] 2.1 The Orissa Judicial Service Rules, 1964 flamed under the proviso to Article 309 read with Article 234 of the Constitution, have been made by the Governor of the State after consultation with the State 1098 Public Service Commission and the State High Court.
The Commission, which has been constituted under the Rules must, therefore, faithfully follow the Rules.
It must select candidates in accordance with the Rules.
It cannot prescribe additional requirements for selection either as to eligibil ity or as to suitability.
[1105G H; 1106A] 2.2 Rule 16 of the Rules requires a candidate to secure a minimum of 30 per cent marks in the written examination to qualify.
The candidates who have secured more than that minimum would alone be called for viva voce test.
The Rules do not prescribe any such minimum marks to be secured at the viva voce test.
Rule 18 mandates the Commission to add the marks obtained at the written examination and the viva voce test together, no matter what the marks at the viva voce test.
On the basis of the aggregate marks in both the tests, the names of candidates will have to be arranged in order of merit.
The list so prepared is then to be forwarded to the Government under Rule 19.
[1101D E; F] The Commission, therefore, had no power to exclude the name of any candidate from the select list merely because he had secured less marks at the viva voce test.
[1101G] P.K. Ramchandra Iyer & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; and Umesh Chandra Shukla etc.
vs Union of India, [1985] Supp. 2 SCR 367, referred to.
Even if the minimum qualifying marks were fixed for the viva voce test by the Commission on the advice of the High Court Judge, present at the viva voce test in accord ance with r. 17 of the Rules, that cannot validate the action of the Commission, for he had no power to add any thing to the Rules of recruitment.
Rule 17 itself proceeds to state that such a Judge shall not be responsible for selection of candidates.
He may advise the Commission as to the special qualities required for judicial appointments.
His advice may be in regard to the range of subjects in respect of which the viva voce shall be conducted.
It may also cover the type and standard of questions to be put to candidates or the acceptance of the answers given thereof.
But his advice cannot run counter to the statutory Rules.
[1104F H; 1105F] Ashok Kumar Yadav and Ors.
vs State of Haryana and Ors. etc.
etc., [1985] Supp. 1 SCR 657, referred to. 4.
The Orissa Public Service Commission is directed to re do the select list on the basis of the aggregate marks obtained by the candidates 1099 in the written examination and at the viva voce test.
The list so prepared to be forwarded to the Government as re quired under r. 19 of the Rules for appointments as Munsifs.
The persons who fall within the revised list, if already in service need not be disturbed.
Their inter se seniority to be regulated as per the rankings in the revised list.
[1106B D]
