The petitioner, aged about 18 years, was convicted for an offence u/s 302/34 I.P.C. and sentenced to life imprison ment by judgment and order dated 22nd May, 1980, and being admittedly below 21 years of age at the time of commission of the offence, was sent to Borstal Institution in accord ance with the provisions of the Punjab Borstal Act, 1926.
The Petitioner filed this writ petition in this Court, stating that the total period of detention under gone by him, together with the remissions earned by him, came to over ten years, and he was entitled to be released both under the Punjab Borstal Act as well as under paragraph 516 B of the Punjab Jail Manual.
The petitioner, therefore, prayed for his premature release as provided under the Punjab Borstal Act and the paragraph 516 B of the Punjab Jail Manual.
On behalf of the respondents, a counter affidavit was filed by the Superintendent, Rohtak District Jail, where the petitioner was first sent after his conviction and sentence u/s 302/34 I.P.C., and where he was brought again from the Borstal Institute in connection with another case and was now being kept, as he had attained the age of 21 years.
Allowing the writ petition, the Court, HELD: The petitioner was sent to Borstal Institute at Hissar as he was admittedly adolescent at the time of his conviction, and was subsequently transferred to the District Jail at Rohtak to undergo the sentence of imprisonment for life.
[1064C] It appears from the objects and reasons of the Punjab Borstal Act, 1926, that the object of the Act is to provide for the segregation of the adolescent prisoners from those of more mature age, and their subsequent training in sepa rate Borstal Institutions meant for detaining the adolescent offenders and for imparting to them industrial training and 1062 subjecting them to such disciplinary and moral influence as will conduce to their reformation.
[1064C E] Under section 5 of the Act above said, either a Sessions Judge or a Magistrate of first class or a Magistrate spe cially empowered under section 30 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, after convicting any male person, less than twenty one years of age, of an offence punishable with imprisonment for life or transportation or other rigorous imprisonment, or in the case of a convict who is ordered to give security for good behaviour and he fails to give such security, may in lieu of passing a sentence of transporta tion or rigorous imprisonment pass an order of detention which shall not be less than two years and more than seven years when an order is passed by a Court of Sessions or a Magistrate.
The petitioner, when he was convicted u/s 302/34 I.P.C. and sentenced to imprisonment for life, was adoles cent being less than twenty one years of age and was sent to the Borstal Institute in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Borstal Act, 1926.
On his attaining the age of about twenty one years, he was transferred back to the jail.
There is no provision except section 20 in the said Act for transferring back an adolescent convict on his attaining the age of twenty one years from the Borstal Institute to jail for undergoing the unexpired term of imprisonment.
On the other hand, under section 5 of the Act an adolescent convict under twenty one years of age, after the expiry of his period of detention, has to be released from detention and he is not to be transferred to jail for undergoing the unexpired period of his sentence of imprisonment.
Section 20 empowers the State Government ' to commute the residue of the term of detention of an inmate of the Borstal Institute, and also order his transfer to any jail in Punjab to complete the said term of imprisonment when such an inmate is report ed to be incorrigible or is exercising bad influence on the other inmates of the Institution or has committed a major Borstal Institution offence as provided in the rules.
There was nothing to show that the petitioner had been even found to be incorrigible or to be exercising a bad influence on the other inmates of the Institution, etc., as stated above, and the State Government had not passed any order for his transfer to the jail as mentioned above.
[1065E H; 1066A, D F] On a conspectus of the decision of this Court in the State of Andhra Pradesh vs Vallabhapuram Rani, ; , and on a consideration of the facts and circum stances of the case, the only conclusion that followed was that the petitioner, who had already undergone actual im prisonment for seven years, was entitled to be released from detention and imprisonment.
Paragraph 516 B of the Punjab Jail 1063 Manual was not applicable in this case.
The Court directed the respondents to release the petitioner from imprisonment forthwith.
[1067C D; G] State of Andhra Pradesh vs Vallabhapuram Rani, [1984]4S.C.C. 410, referred to.
