The appellant offered to resign voluntarily from his service by letter dated 24th December.
1980 with effect from 31st March, 1981 under Rule 48A of the Central Civil Serv ices (Pension) Rules, 1972, having rendered by then more than 20 years service.
The notice period of three months was to commence from 1st January, 1981.
By an order dated 20th January, 1981 he was allowed to retire voluntarily prospec tively with effect from the afternoon of 31st March, 1981.
On account of personal requests from the staff members the appellant, however, changed his mind and by his letter dated 31st January, 1981 requested the authorities that his resignation might be treated as cancelled and the notice given by him be treated as withdrawn.
He was not allowed to do so and was relieved by an order dated 31st March, 1981.
The respondent No. 2 informed him that in view of the activ ities of the appellant in his capacity as the Secretary of the Employees ' Association it has been found appropriate to ease him out from service.
The High Court dismissed the appellant 's writ petition on the ground that sub rule (4) of Rule 48A of the Pension Rules enables the Government servant to withdraw his appli cation for voluntary retirement only with the approval of the Government.
The approval having not been given the rule had been complied with.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellant that if Rule 48(A) be read as consistent with the constitutional requirements of reasonableness, which is a well accepted rule of construction, then the Government could not withhold approval to the withdrawal of 1174 resignation without any rhyme or reason.
For the respondents it was contended that a Government servant was not entitled to demand as of right permission to withdraw the letter of Voluntary retirement, it could only be given as a matter of grace, that it was not in the knowledge of the respondent as to what prompted the appellant to request the withdrawal, that the application for withdrawal was considered in the light of the guidelines laid down by O.M. No. 24(57) E V 32 dated 24th December, 1952 for considering and deciding in the matter of accepting or refusing the withdrawals of notice of voluntary retirement and the request was turned down appropriately, and that once the notice was given it became operative immediately.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 There was no valid reason for withholding the permission by the respondent to the appellant to withdraw his notice of voluntary retirement.
[1182H 1183A] 1.2 On the principle of general law that in the absence of a legal, contractual or constitutional bar an intimation in writing sent to the appropriate authority by an incum bent, of his intention or proposal to resign his office/post from a future specified date, can be withdrawn by him at any time before it effects termination of the tenure of the office/post or employment, the offer of relinquishment in the instant case, could have been withdrawn by the appellant before the date it became effective if sub rule (4) of Rule 48 A was not there.
[1180G 1181A] Union of India vs Shri Gopal Chandra Misra and others; , , referred to.
1.3 Sub rule (4) of Role 48 A of the Pension Rules enjoins that a Government servant shall be precluded from withdrawing his notice except with the specific approval of the appointing authority.
The proviso to that sub rule stipulates that the request for withdrawal shall be made before the intended date of his retirement.
That had been done in the instant case.
[1178H 1179A] 1.4 Approval under r. 48A(4) is not ipse dixit of the approving authority.
The approving authority who has the statutory authority must act reasonably and rationally.
The guidelines laid down by O.M. No. 24(57) E V 32 dated 24.12.1952 for considering and deciding in the matter of accepting or refusing the withdrawal of notices of voluntary 1175 retirement are that ordinarily permission should not be granted unless the officer concerned is in a position to show that there has been a material change in the circum stances in consideration of which the notice was originally given.
There has been compliance with these guidelines in the instant case, because the appellant has indicated that there was a change in the circumstances.
In the notice for resignation he had not given any reason.
There was nothing wrong in this.
He has stated that the persistent and person al requests from the staff members and relations had changed his attitude towards continuing in Government service and induced him to withdraw the notice.
This was not an unrea sonable reason.
[1181G, 1179FG, 1182E, 1183AB, 1182F, 1181H] 2.
It cannot be said that once notice was given it became operative immediately, if it was received by the Government and automatically brought about the dissolution of contract after the expiry of notice period.
The dissolu tion in the instant case, would have been brought about only on the date indicated in the notice, i.e. 31st March, 1981, upto which the appellant was and is a Government employee.
There could be no unilateral termination of the same prior thereto.
He was at liberty, and entitled independently without sub rule (4) of Rule 48 A of the Pension Rules, as a Government servant to withdraw his notice of voluntary retirement.
In this respect it stands at par with letter of resignation.
[1180A C] 3.
In the modern age the Court should not put embargo upon people 's choice or freedom.
If the administration had made arrangements acting on his resignation or letter of retirement to make other employee available for his job, that would have been another matter but the appellant 's offer to retire and withdrawal of the same happened in so quick succession that it cannot be said that any administra tive set up or arrangement was affected.
[1182FG] Raj Kumar vs Union of India, , referred to. 4.
There should not be arbitrariness and hostile dis crimination in Government 's approach to its employees.
The Court cannot but condemn circuitous ways to ease out uncom fortable employees.
As a model employer the Government must conduct itself with high probity and candour with its em ployees.
In the modern and uncertain age it is very diffi cult to arrange one 's future with any amount of certainty, a certain amount of flexibility is required, and if such flexibility does not jeopardize Government or administra tion, administration should be graceful enough to respond and acknowledge the flexibility of human mind and attitude.
[1181BC, 1183C, B] 1176 Air India etc.
vs Nergesh Meerza & Ors.
; , , referred to.
The appellant in the instant case, is entitled to be put back to his job with all the consequential benefits being treated as in the job from 31st of March, 1981.
[1183DE]
