The appellant landlord.
a medical practitioner, filed a suit for recovery of possession of the 2nd floor.
rear portion of premises, 248, C.I.T. Road, Calcutta, let out to the respondent defendant, on the ground of the reasonable requirement of the landlord for his own occupation as he had no other reasonably suitable accommodation in the town.
The appellant contended that he had been residing in Ghana, Africa, where he had been temporarily appointed as a Physi cian, and he wanted to come back to India after retirement and settle down in medical practice in the locality where his house was situated.
The trial court granted the decree for eviction in accordance with the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956.
The first appellate court the Court of the Additional District Judge maintained the decree in favour of the appellant by its judgment dated September 29, 1978.
During the pendency of this litigation, the appellant had entered into an agreement with some construction company for a flat in South Calcutta, and got the flat in October, 1978.
This flat was on the 13th floor in South Calcutta, a posh locality.
The respondent tenant preferred a second appeal before the High Court against the judgment of the first appellate court. 'During the pendency of this appeal, the respondent tenant submitted an application for consideration of the subsequent events, i.e. the acquisition of a flat by the landlord suggesting that the need of the appellant landlord had been satisfied, etc.
The High Court permitted this application for amendment and permitted the parties to lead additional evidence, and in consequence, the appellant landlord also was examined once again.
On consideration of the evidence, the High Court came to the conclu 1165 sion that now as alternative accommodation The flat in South Calcutta was available, and, therefore, it set aside the decree of eviction.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellant landlord appealed to this Court for relief by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: It is well settled that the alternative accommoda tion must be reasonably suitable and if it is not so, then, the mere availability of the alternative accommodation will not be a ground to refuse a decree for eviction, if other wise, the courts are satisfied about the genuine requirement of the landlord, and to this, counsel for both the parties also agreed, but the main contention was whether on the facts appearing in evidence in the case, the inference could be drawn that the flat on the 13th floor in South Calcutta was reasonably suitable to satisfy the need of the appellant landlord.
Counsel for the appellant had contended inter alia that for the appellant, who had lived and practised (as a doctor) in the suit premises in the C.I.T. Road, it was not possible at that stage in life to start practice in South Calcutta on the 13th floor.
Counsel for the parties conceded that from C.I.T. Road where the premises in question were situated, the place where the flat was situated in South Calcutta, would be a distant place.
As regards evidence it was no doubt true that after these facts were pleaded in the statement of the appellant, the only statement in regard to suitability was "the flat is not suitable for my purpose.
" Counsel for the respondent emphasised that the above quoted statement was the only statement made by the appellant in the additional evidence.
It was no doubt true that this was the only statement made by the appellant when he was exam ined afresh after these facts were brought in the pleading by way of additional evidence, but it could not be doubted that whatever was in evidence earlier could not be brushed aside and it was also clear that on the basis of evidence recorded earlier, the two courts of facts came to the con clusion that the appellant plaintiff had established his genuine requirement.
On the basis of the facts, the genuine requirement of the appellant plaintiff was held to have been proved and the High Court also had accepted this concurrent finding of fact.
The only consideration which weighed with the High Court was the acquisition of the flat on the 13th floor in South Calcutta.
[1170A G] It could not be disputed that if a medical practitioner is an old resident of a particular locality and had prac tised in that locality, it would not be easy for him at a stage in life after retirement to start practice afresh in some new area and that too on 13th floor in a modern 1166 flat.
There was nothing in the evidence on the basis of which it could be said that the flat in South Calcutta was reasonably suitable for the appellant.
In the context of the facts and circumstances of the case, it could not be held that the flat in South Calcutta on the 13th floor could be said to be a reasonably suitable accommodation for the requirement of the appellant landlord.
[1170H; 1171A C] The High Court was not justified in the second appeal to interfere with the finding of fact unless there were facts established to hold that alternative accommodation acquired after the decree of eviction in favour of the appellant was reasonably suitable.
The High Court omitted to consider the positive evidence and a positive statement, not challenged, that this fiat (in South Calcutta) was not suitable for the purpose of the appellant landlord.
[1172B C] Judgment of the High Court was set aside.
Decree of eviction passed by the two courts below was maintained.
The court directed in the circumstances of the case that the decree for eviction would not be executed against the re spondent upto 31.3.88 on the respondent 's filing an under taking in the usual form and also paying the rents and mesne profits upto date within four weeks, and that if the re spondent failed to deliver possession on or before 31.3.88, the appellant would be entitled to execute the decree for eviction.
[1172D E]
