The trial court took cognizance of a complaint by the State Government under section 500 I.P.C. filed on the basis of a sanction granted by the State Government under section 199(2) Cr.
P.C., as one of the persons defamed was the Director General of Police, and issued process against the appellants.
In the revision petition preferred by the appellants under sections 397 and 401 Cr.
P.C. against that order, in addition to respond ent 1, the appellants also joined respondent 2, the Director General of Police, and respondent 3, the Chief Minister of the State, as parties.
The High Court admitted the petition and ordered issue of notice to the respondents, but directed deletion of the names of respondents 2 and 3 holding that they were not necessary parties to the proceedings.
In the appeal by special leave assailing the order of the High Court it was contended for the appellants that since the prosecution was instituted by sanction from the State Government, and the news item and the allegation which formed the basis of the complaint pertained to the two respondents they were necessary parties before the High Court.
The High Court, therefore in exercise of its juris diction under section 401(2) Cr.
P.C. was not right in deleting the names of these two respondents.
For the respondents, it was contended that the High Court was right in deleting the names of respondents 2 and 3 as they were not parties in the criminal case pending before the trial court, nor were they necessary parties to the proceedings before the High Court, that under sections 397 and 401 Cr.
P.C. what the High Court was expected to see in revision against the issue of process was as to whether the complaint and the papers filed alongwith it were sufficient to justify the order passed by the trial court and whether it was a proceeding which deserves to continue or it could be quashed.
1129 Dismissing the appeal by special leave, HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in deleting the names of the two respondents.
[1137F G] 2.
When the issue of process is challenged in revision petition before the High Court and the record is called for under section 397 Cr.
P.C., what it is expected to see only is as to whether the complaint and the papers accompanying it prima facie indicate that an offence is made out.
If the complaint and the papers in the opinion of the High Court are such which do not prima facie disclose an offence then it will be open to the High Court to entertain the revision and quash the proceedings.
Except this the High Court is not expected to go into the matter at all.
[1137C D] 3.
Section 401(2) Cr.
P.C. contemplates a situation where a person may not be an accused person before the court below but one who might have been discharged and therefore if the revisional court after exercising jurisdiction under section 401 wants to pass an order to the prejudice of such a person, it is necessary that that person should be given an opportunity of hearing but it does not contemplate any contingency of hearing of any person who is neither party in the proceed ings in the court below nor is expected at any stage even after the revision to be joined as party.
[1136B D] In the instant case the prosecution was launched by the State Government and before the trial court the only parties were the petitioners, who were accused persons, and the State Government, which stood in the place of a complainant.
There were prosecution witnesses and there might even be defence witnesses.
But the witnesses are not parties to the proceedings.
The two respondents were not parties before the court below.
They could not, therefore, be joined as parties before the High Court.
[1135B C] 4.
The question about anyone else being instrumental in getting the prosecution launched or questions which are foreign are not to be considered in a revision where the issue of process is being challenged and therefore the further question in the instant case as to whether the party against whom an allegation is made is or is not a necessary party in the proceedings also is not relevant.
[1137E F] Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Ram Kishan Rohtagi & Ors., ; referred to.
1130 Thakur Ram vs The State of Bihar, ; , distinguished.
