An application was filed seeking eviction of the tenant appellant by the landlord respondent on various grounds.
The Rent Controller granted an order for eviction only under Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act for bona fide use and occupation.
The order of the Rent Controller for eviction was confirmed in appeal by the Tribunal.
Before the High Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that as the lease of the plot on which the build ing stood was cancelled by the DDA, the landlord respondent ceased to be the owner thereof and, therefore, the require ment of Section 14(1)(e) was not satisfied and the respond ent was not entitled to the decree for eviction.
The High Court held that the landlord, whose lease had been terminat ed, but was in possession, continued to be a tenant holding over and, therefore, he continued to be the owner, and maintained the decree for eviction.
In the appeal before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that in order to get a decree for eviction on the ground of bona fide requirement, the land lord must establish that he was the owner of such property, that where the property was built up on a plot of land taken on lease from the Delhi Development Authority, it could not be said that the landlord was the owner of the property and that as the lease had been terminated, the landlord could not claim to be the owner of the property, and, therefore, the decree for eviction on ground of bona fide requirement could not be maintained.
1076 On behalf of the respondent it was contended that al though notice was issued, but subsequently the matter re mained stayed and the respondent landlord continued to be in possession and did not cease to be the owner of the proper ty, that whole of the premises in question did not stand on the plot, lease of which had been cancelled by DDA and a major part of.
the premises stood on another plot which continued to be on lease in favour of the respondent, and that the tenant was estopped from challenging the title of the landlord, as the relationship of the landlord and tenant was admitted and it was not open to the tenant to contend that the respondent landlord had no title to the property.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: The word "owner" has not been defined in the Delhi Rent Control Act.
[1081E] The term "owner" has to be understood in the context of the background of the law and what is contemplated in the scheme of the Act.
The Act has been enacted for protection of the tenants.
But, at the same time, it has provided that the landlord under certain circumstances will be entitled to eviction and bona fide requirement is one of such grounds.
[1081G H; 1082D] Ordinarily, the concept of the ownership may be abso lute ownership in the land as well as of the structure standing thereon.
But in the modern context, where all lands belong to the State, the persons who hold properties will only be lessees or the persons holding the land on some term from the Government or the authorities constituted by the State.
The legislature, when it used the term "owner" in section 14(1)(e), did not think of ownership as absolute ownership.
[1081F G] The meaning of the term "owner" is vis a vis the tenant i.e. the owner should be something more than the tenant.
In cases where the plot of land is taken on lease, the struc ture is built by the landlord and he is the owner of the structure.
So far as the land is concerned, he holds the long lease and as against the tenant he will fail within the ambit of the meaning of the term "owner" as contemplated under section 14(1)(e).
[1082B C] In the instant case, although there were some proceed ings for the cancellation of the lease, the lease had not come to an end.
No steps have been taken for dispossesion and only the formality of depositing the penalities and filing of the Indemnity Bond remained to be done, on ful filling which the lease would he restored in the name of the legal 1077 representatives.
Therefore, it could not be said that the respondent landlord had ceased to be the owner of the prem ises.
[1085G H, 1086B] T.C. Rekhi vs Smt.
Usha Gujaral, [1971] Rent Control Journal Page 322 at 326, referred to.
