The petitioner was the owner of a bus being run as a stage carriage.
On 24.7.78 while carrying passengers this bus met with an accident, as a result of which one passenger died.
The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal held that the accident took place due to the negligence on the part of the driver and awarded compensation of Rs.56,800 to the legal representatives of the deceased.
It further held that the liability of the insurer to indemnify the petitioner was limited to Rs.5,000 as the policy specifically limited the insurer 's liability to what had been provided by section 95(2)(b)(ii)(2) and (4) of .
The appeal filed by the Petitioner was dismissed by the High Court.
In the Special Leave Petition before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that the insurer was liable to indemnify the petitioner upto a limit of Rs.75,000 under section 95(2)(b)(ii)(2) of the and that the further limit mentioned in section 95(2)(b) (ii)(4) was inapplicable to the case of the petitioner.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
Having regard to the as it stood prior to the amendments by Act 47 of 1982.
the insurer was liable to pay upto Rs.10,000 for each individual passenger where the vehicle involved was a motor cab and upto Rs.5,000 for each individual passenger in any other case.
[1161F] 2.1 Section 95(2)(b) as it existed before its amendment in 1982 1150 dealt with the limits of the liability of an insurer in the case of motor vehicles in which passengers were carried for hire or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of employment.
[1155H; 1156A] Sub clause (i) of section 95(2)(b) provided that in respect of death of or injury to persons other than passen gers carried for hire or reward, a limit of Rs.50,000 in all was the limit of the liability of the insurer.
[1156A] Under sub clause (ii) there were two specific limits on the liability of the insurer in the case of motor vehicles carrying passengers.
The first limit related to the aggre gate liability of the insurer in any one accident.
It was fixed at Rs.50,000 in all where the vehicle was registered to carry not more than thirty passengers, at Rs.75,000 in all where the vehicle was registered to carry more than thirty but not more than sixty passengers and at Rs.1,00,000 in all where the vehicle was registered to carry more than sixty passengers.
The other limit was in respect of each passenger, which provided that subject to the limits afore said as regards the aggregate liability, the liability extended up to Rs.10,000 for each individual passenger where the vehicle was a motor cab and Rs.5,000 for each individual passenger in any other case.
Neither of the two limits can be ignored.
[1156B D] 2.2 The limit prescribed in section 95(2)(b)(ii)(4) cannot be said to be only the minimum liability prescribed by law.
The amount mentioned in that provision provides the maximum amount payable by an insurer in respect of each passenger who has suffered on account of an accident.
This is a fair construction of section 95(2) of the Act as it existed at the time when the accident took place.
[1156E] 2.3 After the 1982 amendment the liability of the insur er in respect of each individual passenger is Rs.15,000 as against Rs.10,000 in the case of each individual passenger where the vehicle was a motor cab and Rs.5,000 for each individual passenger in other cases, prior to the said amendment.
This shows that Parliament never intended that the aggregate liability of the insurer mentioned in sub clauses (1), (2) and (3) of section 95(2)(b)(ii) would be the liability of the insurer even when one passenger had died or suffered injury on account of an accident.
Such liability was always further limited by sub clause (4) of section 95(2)(b)(ii).
[1159F G] 2.4 In the instant case, the vehicle in question being a bus carrying passengers for hire or reward registered to carry more than thirty 1151 but not more than sixty passengers, the limit of the aggre gate liability of the insurer in any one accident was Rs.75,000 and subject to the said limit the liability in respect of each passenger was Rs.5,000.
[1156D] 2.5 As the law stands today the insurer is liable to pay upto Rs.15,000 in respect of death of any passenger or any injury caused to him.
Having regard to the large number of motor vehicle accidents which are taking place on roads and also to the fact that a large number of public service vehicles carrying passengers are involved in them, limit of Rs.15,000 fixed in the case of each passenger appears to be still meagre.
[1159E; 1160E] 3.
The following suggestions in respect of certain provisions of the are made for considera tion of the Central Government: (i) The limits of compensation in respect of death or permanent disablement payable in the event of there being no proof of fault have become unrealistic in view of inflation ary pressures and consequent loss of purchasing power of the rupee.
These limits should, therefore, be raised adequately.
[1162B C] (ii) There is no justification for continuing the dis tinction between public service vehicles and other vehicles and also between passengers and third parties with regard to the liability of the insurer to pay compensation.
Even among the public service vehicles a distinction is made between vehicles used as goods carriages and those used for carrying passengers.
It may be considered whether it is necessary to continue these distinctions and also whether the limits of liability of the insurer should not be altered suitably.
[1162D E] (iii) The society and the State which are responsible for a large number of motor vehicles being put on road should carry also the responsibility of protecting the interests of innocent victims of hit and run motor accidents which are increasing in number.
The amounts of Rs.5,000 and Rs.1,000 provided as compensation in respect of death or grievous hurt respectively appear to be highly inadequate.
It may be considered whether these figures should not be increased in an appropriate manner.
[1162F G] (iv) The expression "legal representative" has not been defined in the Act and it has led to serious doubts in the course of judicial proceedings.
It may be considered whether it would not be advisable to define the said expression for purposes of making claims before Claims 1152 Tribunals where death has resulted from a motor vehicle accident in the same way in which the English Law has been amended.
[1163A C] Motor Owners Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Jadavji Keshavji Modi Northern India Transport Insurance Co., [1971] Supp.
SCR 20; Manjusri Raha & Ors.
B.L. Gupta & Ors.
; , ; P.B. Kader & Ors.
vs Thatchamma and Ors., AIR 1970 Kerala 241; K.R. Sivagami, Proprietor, Rajendran Tourist vs Mahaboob Nisa Bi and others, ; Madras Motor and General Insurance Co. Ltd. by its successor: The United Fire and General Insurance Co. Ltd. and others vs
V.P. Ba lakrishnan and others, ; New India Assurance Co. Ltd. vs Mahmood Ahmad and others, ; Shiva hari Rama Tiloli and another vs Kashi Vishnu Agarwadekar and others, ; National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shanim Ahmad and others, ; Tara Pada Roy vs Dwijendra Nath Sen and others, ; Noor Mohammad and another vs Phoola Rani and others, ; Raghib Nasim and another vs Naseem Ahmad and others, and Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation, Ahme dabad vs Ramanbhai Prabhatbhai and Another, ; , referred to.
