Fundamental Rule 54 requires that when a Government servant who had been dismissed, removed or suspended is reinstated, the authority competent to order reinstatement has to make a specific order (a) regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the Government servant for the period of his absence from duty, and (b) directing whether or not the period of suspension shall be treated as a period spent on duty.
Fundamental Rule 25 lays down that the increment next above the efficiency bar in a time scale shall not be given to a Government servant without the specific sanction of the authority empowered to withhold increment under R.24.
The Government of India, Ministry of Finance 's decision dated September 21, 1967, as clarified by Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Personnel & Administrative Reforms Memorandum dated April 6, 1979, stated that if after the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings, the Government servant is completely 28 exonerated, he may be allowed to cross the efficiency bar with effect from the due date retrospectively, unless the competent authority decides otherwise.
Rule 2.636 of the C.P.W.D. Manual, Vol.
I, 1956 edn., laid down that Divisional and Sub Divisional Officers who fail to pass the departmental examination should not ordinarily be considered either for promotion or for crossing the efficiency bar.
The appellant, an Assistant Engineer in the Central Public Works Department was placed under suspension on September 3, 1959 pending a departmental enquiry.
That order was revoked by the Chief Engineer on May 8, 1970, and he was reinstated in service on May 25, 1970 but the departmental proceedings were kept alive.
Immediately thereafter, the appellant made a representation to the department to pass an order under FR. 54 for payment of full pay and allowances for the period of suspension, which was rejected on the ground that the departmental enquiry was still pending.
Thereafter, the appellant was compulsorily retired by an order of the Chief Engineer dated April 25, 1972 under FR.
56(j).
In the writ petition filed by the appellant under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the order of compulsory retirement, and seeking directions in terms of FR 54 for payment of full pay and allowances for the period of suspension and also for payment of all increments to which he was entitled, a Single Judge of the High Court found the order of compulsory retirement bad in law, quashed it, and held that the appellant shall be deemed to have continued in service till March 31, 1978, the date when he attained the normal age of superannuation.
It was further held that the suspension of the appellant was not justified, and the period of suspension must be regarded as spent on duty and therefore the appellant under FR 54(2) was entitled to full pay and allowances and the increments for that period, and that r.9(2)(b) of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 was not attracted, and accordingly quashed the departmental proceedings.
The Division Bench declined to interfere.
Thereafter the Director General of Works on September 17, 1982 passed an order on the recommendation of the departmental promotion board declaring the appellant unfit to cross the efficiency bar at the stage of Rs.590 in the grade Rs.350 900 with effect from October 5, 1966.
In the contempt proceedings taken by the appellant, the government stated that there were two conditions for an Assistant Engineer to 29 cross efficiency bar namely, (i) that he should have passed the departmental examination in Accounts, and (ii) he should have obtained good reports for the preceding five years.
The Single Judge declined to interfere with the governmental order.
The Division Bench dismissed the appeal and reiterated that a writ petition should be filed.
The appellant thereupon filed the present writ petition on July 10, 1985 under Article 226 of the Constitution to enforce his right to increments after crossing of the efficiency bar and also for grant of interest on delayed payment of pension.
The High Court held that the crossing of the efficiency bar depends on the satisfaction of the competent authority under FR 25 and also on the passing of the departmental examination under r. 2.636 of the C.P.W.D. Manual, Vol. 1, 1956 edn.
and that if the authority concerned had chosen not to give the sanction under FR 25, the Court had no jurisdiction to interfere particularly as the appellant was not actually in office for such a long period of time.
In this appeal by special leave, on the questions: (i) was the Union of India justified in passing the oder in terms of FR 25 declaring the appellant unfit to cross the efficiency bar, and (ii) was the appellant entitled to interest on the delayed payment of his pension? Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.1 The order passed by the competent authority under FR 25, prejudicial to the interest of the appellant must be subject to the power of judicial review.
[44AB] 1.2 The stoppage of increment at the efficiency bar during the pendency of a departmental proceeding is not by way of punishment, and therefore the government servant facing a departmental inquiry is not entitled to a hearing.
The court does not come into the picture at that stage.
But where despite the fact that the departmental inquiry against the government officer had been quashed, and it had been held by the High Court that the suspension was wholly without justification, there was no occasion for the competent authority to enforce the bar against him under FR 25, particularly after his retirement, unless it was by way of punishment.
[43G 44A] 1.3 It is a fundamental rule of law that no decision must be taken which will affect the rights of any person without first giving him an opportunity of putting forward his case.
Strict adherence to this rule is mandatory where a public authority or body has to deal with rights.
30 There is always the duty to act judicially in such cases.
There is, therefore, the insistence upon the requirement of a fair hearing.
There is no reason why the power of the Government under FR 25 should not be subject to the same limitations.
[41G, 42B,C] 1.4 The note beneath Government of India, Ministry of Finance Memorandum dated April 23, 1962, as amended from time to time enjoins that the cases of government servants for crossing of the efficiency bar in the time scale of pay should be considered at the appropriate time and in case the decision is to enforce the bar against the government servant, he should be informed of the decision.
In enforcing the bar under FR 25 against the appellant the competent authority acted in flagrant breach of these instructions.
[44FG] 1.5 There was no question of the appellant having adverse record for five years preceding his compulsory retirement since for three years he was under suspension and for the next two years there was nothing blameworthy against him.
Furthermore, he having compulsorily retired on July 28, 1972 and also having reached his normal age of superannuation on March 31, 1978, his failure to pass the departmental examination under r. 2.636 could not be treated as a ground for denying him the benefit of crossing the efficiency bar under FR 25.
The word 'ordinary ' in r. 2.636 must be given its plain meaning as in normal circumstances.
[44CE] 2.1 Suspension where there is no question of inflicting any departmental punishment prima facie tantamounts to imposition of penalty which is manifestly repugnant to the principles of natural justice and fairplay in action.
The conditions of service are within the executive power of the State or its legislative power under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution, but even so such rules have to be reasonable and fair and not grossly unjust.
It is a clear principle of natural justice that the delinquent officer when placed under suspension is entitled to represent that the departmental proceedings should be concluded with reasonable diligence and within a reasonable period of time.
If such a principle were not recognised, it would imply that the executive is being vested with a totally arbitrary and unfettered power of placing its officers under disability and distress for an indefinite duration.
[41DF] 2.2 There is no presumption that the Government always acts in a manner which is just and fair.
In the instant ease, there was no occasion whatever to protract the departmental inquiry for a period of 20 years 31 and keeping the appellant under suspension for a period of 11 years unless it was actuated with the mala fide intention of subjecting him to harassment.
[40F] 2.3 The public interest in maintaining the efficiency of the services requires that civil servants should not be unfairly dealt with.
The Government must view with concern that a departmental inquiry against the civil servant should have been kept alive for so long as 20 years or more and that he should have been placed under suspension without any lawful justification for as many as 11 years, without any progress being made in the departmental inquiry.
It should also view with concern that a decision should have been taken by the competent authority to enforce the bar under FR 25 against the civil servant long after his retirement without affording him an opportunity of a hearing with a view to cause him financial loss.
[45AB] 3.
The Court, as a settled practice has been making direction for payment of interest at 12% on delayed payment of pension.
There is no reason for it to depart from that practice in the facts of the present case.
[45E] 4.
The Director General of Works is directed to make an order in terms of FR 25 allowing the appellant to cross the efficiency bar according to the decision of the Government of India, Ministry of Finance dated September 21, 1967 as later clarified by the Ministry of Home Affairs Memorandum dated April 6, 1979 and to re fix his pension accordingly.
The appellant would be entitled to interest at 12% per annum on the difference in salary as well as in pension.
[45G 46A] Ridge vs Baldwin, LR [1964] AC40; M. Gopala Krishna Naidu vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; B.D. Gupta vs State of Haryana, ; ; Khem Chand vs Union of India; , and Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay v Dilip Kumar Raghavendranath Nadkarni & Ors., , referred to.
