The premises in question had been let out in April, 1968 to the appellant at a monthly rent of Rs.340 by the husband of respondent No. 1 and the father of respondents Nos. 2 to 8.
In July, 1977 the landlord filed an eviction petition against the appellant on the ground of bona fide require ment.
In September, 1978 appellant 's wife was allotted a Government quarter due to her employment as a teacher In the Government school.
In March, 1986 the first respondent filed a petition before the Rent Controller that the wife of the appellant having been allotted a residential quarter came within the mischief of clause (h) of Section 14(1) of the Act and was, therefore, liable for eviction.
The appellant contended that he had not acquired any house and that the quarter in question was allotted to his wife on joint allotment basis on compassionate grounds and that the same had been surrendered and, therefore, the appellant was not liable to be evicted.
It was further contended that the allotted accommodation could not be treated as alternative accommodation for the appellant and his family.
The Additional Rent Controller held that having regard to the provisions of law, as the tenant had acquired vacant possession for residence, he became disentitled to retain the premises in question and, therefore, passed an order of eviction.
The Rent Control Tribunal dismissed the appeal of the appellant.
The High Court rejected the second appeal.
In the appeal to this Court, the question for considera tion was: whether under clause (h) of Section 14(1) of the Act allotment of a house to the wife, who was a Government employee, in all circumstances disentitled the tenant to retain the tenanted premises.
1185 Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The premises in question which the wife occu pied was indisputably not the matrimonial home.
The husband would not, therefore, have any statutory or legal right against the Government to use and enjoy the allotted prem ises to the wife of the tenant because of her job.
The tenant cannot be made to lose his tenancy because of the wife acquiring possession of a flat or allotment of a flat because of her official duties over which the husband has no right or domain or occupation.
[1194C D] 2.1 The purpose of the Delhi Rent Control Act is to control rents and evictions; in other words, to control unreasonable evictions and to ensure that in an atmosphere of acute shortage of accommodation, there is proper enjoy ment of available spaces by those who want and deserve.
[1189G H] 2.2 Unless acquisition of a premises or allotment of a premises or a part of a premises by the tenant in which he has domain which he can reasonably and alternatively use as substitute for the place he is using in the tenancy, it cannot lead to forfeiture of his right to occupy his tenant ed premises.
The case would be otherwise, however, if a tenant comes into possession of a premises or is allotted a piece of residence or acquires vacant possession of the premises then such a tenant cannot prevent, if other condi tions are fulfilled under Section 14(1)(h) of the Act being liable to forfeiture of his tenancy.
[1190B C] 2.3 Tenancy is a right vested in the tenant.
The main purpose of the Act is the protection of tenants from evic tion.
The various provisos to sub section (1) of section 14 laid down the exception to this rule.
The intention of the Legislature in divesting the tenant of his right was based upon the fact that the tenant had legally acquired another residence as of right.
There is no law according to which husband and wife could be deemed to be one person.
[1191E F] 2.4 The acquisition of other residence must be by the tenant himself before proviso (h) of sub section
(1) of section 14 of the Act would apply.
[1191D] 2.5 If a wife or husband acquires a property and the other spouse if he/she is the tenant, has a legal right by virtue of such acquisition and stay there, then only can such acquisition or allotment of premises would disentitle or attract the provisions of cl.
(h) of section 14(1) of the Act, otherwise the whole purpose would be defeated.
That is the rationale behind the scheme.
[1191F G] 1186 2.6 From the fact that the wife of the tenant was allot ted a temporary Government accommodation, it cannot be said that there was admission by virtue of which the tenant could lose his tenancy that the wife has acquired a house which is available to the husband over which the husband has a domain which could be a substitute to the tenanted premises.
This fact of acquisition or allotment of fiat in the name of wife (which incidentally she has lost having given up the job) can be in certain circumstances a factor in judging the bona fide needs of the landlord; but the same indisputably cannot be any ground to evict the tenant on the ground that he has acquired vacant possession or allotted residence in terms of cl.
(h) of section 14(1).
[1192E F, 1193A B] 3.
The rights, if any, of the parties in the eviction petition on the ground of bona fide need of the landlord will not in any manner be prejudicially affected.
[1194F] [In England the rights of the spouses to the matrimonial home are now governed by the provisions of the Matrimonial Homes Act, 1967.
Where one spouse is entitled to occupy a dwelling house by virtue of any estate or interest or con tract or by virtue of any enactment giving him or her the right to remain in occupation, and the other spouse is not so entitled, then the spouse not so entitled has the certain rights (known as "rights of occupation"), that is to say, if in occupation, a right not to be evicted or excluded from the dwelling house or any part of it by the other spouse except with the leave of the court given by an order; if not in occupation, a right with the leave of the court so given to enter into and occupy the dwelling house.
[1193D G] Such rights are not granted in India.
But with the change of situation and complex problems arising, it is high time to give the wife or the spouse a right of occupation in a truly matrimonial home, in case of marriage breaking up or in case of strained relationship between the husband and the wife.] [1193G] Prem Chand and another vs Sher Singh, [1981] Delhi Rent Judgment 287; Smt.
Revti Devi vs Kishan Lal, ; Phiroze Bamanji Desai vs Chandrakant M. Patel and others; , ; Galanan Dattatraya vs Sherbanu Hosang Patel and others, [1976] 1 SCR 535 and Halsbury 's Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Vol.
22 page 650, referred to.
