There was 'much ado about nothing ' about these Writ Petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution.
The petitions sought to challenge the Vires of sections 14(1)(b), 16(2) and, incidentally, sec.
30(ii) of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 on the ground of being arbitrary, discriminatory and unreasonable.
The different petitions had different facts, and it was considered appropriate to deal with the facts of the writ petition filed by Prabhakaran Nair (Writ Petition No. 506 of 1986) as a typical case to appreciate the points in issue.
In that case, the respondents landlords, after purchasing the premises in dispute from the erstwhile owner, filed an application for the eviction of the petitioner from the said premises on the grounds of non payment of rent under section 10(2)(1), unlawful sub letting under section 10(2)(ii)(a), causing damages to the premises under section 10(2)(iii) and demolition and reconstruction of the premises under section 14(1)(b) of the Tamil Nadu Rent Act.
The Trial Court ordered eviction only under section 14(1)(b) of the Act for demolition and reconstruction, rejecting the other grounds.
The appellate court dismissed the appeal of the petitioner.
The High Court also dismissed the civil revision petition of the petitioner.
The petitioner then filed a petition for Special Leave in this Court against the judgment and order of the High Court.
In the meanwhile, the City Civil Court, on January 29, 1983, granted interim injunction, restraining the respondents landlords from demolishing the building till the disposal of an application filed by the petitioner in the suit, against the erstwhile owner and the present landlords for specific performance of an agreement to sell the premises to the petitioner.
The injunction was stated to have been confirmed and was still continuing as the said application for specific performance was still pending in the City Civil Court.
2 This Court dismissed the petition for special leave, observing that the petitioner would be at liberty to file, if so advised, a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, challenging the validity of section 14(1)(b) of the Act.
The petitioner filed this writ petition, challenging the validity of sections 14(1)(b) and 16(2) of the Tamil Nadu Rent Act as being arbitrary, discriminatory, unreasonable and unconstitutional, and contending consequently that the eviction order passed against him under section 14(1)(b) was illegal.
Several of the other writ petitions were on this issue.
Dismissing the Writ Petitions, the Court, ^ HELD: In this case, the Court was not concerned with clause (ii) of section 30 of the Tamil Nadu Act, a challenge to the validity of which had been accepted by the Court in Rattan Arya and others vs State of Tamil Nadu and another; , and the section 30(ii) had been struck down as violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[10E] Under section 14(1)(b) of the Act, a landlord could make an application to the Rent Controller for possession of a building, and the Rent Controller, if satisfied that the building was bona fide required by the landlord for the immediate purpose of demolition and such demolition was for the purpose of erecting a new building on the site of the building sought to be demolished, might pass an order, directing the tenant to deliver possession of the building to the landlord before a specified date.
Under the provisions of the Act, the landlord has to commence the work of demolition not later than one month and the entire demolition work shall be completed before the expiry of three months from the date he recovers possession of the entire building, and in the case of massive buildings, demolition can take six months or even a year, in which case, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the controller may allow further period.
During that period a tenant was bound to have found some other suitable alternative accommodation.
In the case of a building vacated for repairs under section 14(1)(a) of the Act, a tenant may arrange for a temporary accommodation for a few months and then return to the building.
It was not practicable and would be anomalous to expect a landlord to take back a tenant for a re constructed building after a long lapse of time during which the tenant must necessarily have found some other suitable accommodation.
This was the true purpose behind section 14(1)(b) read with section 14(2)(b).
In that view of the matter, the Court was unable to accept the submission that in providing for the re induction of the tenant in the case of repairs and not in the 3 case of re construction, there was any unreasonable and irrational classification without any basis.
The absence of the provision for reinduction does not ipso facto make the provisions of the Act unfair or make the Act self defeating.
[11G, 12A C,D G, 18E] As regards the submission that in most of the Rent Acts, there was a provision for re induction of the tenant after re construction, but in the case of the Tamil Nadu Act, there was no such provision and this was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, Article 14 of the Constitution does not authorise the striking down of a law of one State on the ground that in contrast with a law of another State on the same subjects, its provisions are discriminatory, and nor does it contemplate a law of the centre or of the State dealing with similar subjects being held to be unconstitutional by a process of comparative study of the provisions of two enactments; the source of authority for the two statutes being different, Article 14 could have no application, as observed by a Constitution Bench of this Court in the State of Madhya Pradesh vs G.C. Mandawar; , [12G, 13A C] The Act sought to restore the balance in the scale which is otherwise weighted in favour of the stronger party which had larger bargaining power.
The Act balances the scales and regulates the rights of the parties fairly and cannot be construed only in favour of the tenant.
The main provision of section 14(1)(b) enables a landlord to make an application to the rent controller for possession of the building for demolition for re construction of a new building in its place.
If the Rent Controller is satisfied with the bona fide need of the landlord, he may pass an order, directing the tenant to deliver possession of the building to the landlord before a specified date.
There must be a bona fide need of the landlord.
It could not be said that section 14(1)(b) was arbitrary and that excessive powers had been given to the landlords.
[16G H, 17D E] The provisions of the Act imposed restrictions on the landlord 's right under the common law or the Transfer of Property Act to evict the tenant after the termination of his tenancy.
The nature, the form and the extent of the restrictions to be imposed on the landlord 's right and consequent extent of the protection to be given to the tenants is a matter of legislative policy and judgment.
It is inevitably bound to vary from one State to another according to the local, peculiar conditions prevailing in each State.
When the Courts are confronted with the problem of a legislation being violative of Article 14, the Courts are not concerned with the unwisdom of the legislation.
"In short, unconstitutionality and not unwisdom of a legislation is the narrow area of judicial review" 4 observations of Krishna Iyer, J. in Murthy Match Works, etc., vs Asstt.
Collector of Central Excise, etc., [1974]3 S.C.R. 121, may be seen in this connection.
[18F H,19G] The purpose underlying section 14(1)(b) read with section 16(2) of the Act is to remove or mitigate the disinclination on the part of the landlords to expend moneys for demolition of the dilapidated buildings and reconstruct new buildings in their places.
It is a matter of which judicial notice can be taken that the return from the old and dilapidated buildings is very meagre, and in several cases, such buildings prove uneconomic for the landlords, resulting in the deterioration of the condition of the buildings, and there are even collapses of such buildings.
It is for this purpose that the landlord is given by section 14(1)(b), read with section 16, an incentive in the form of exemption from the provisions of the Act for five years in respect of the reconstructed building.
The principle underlying such exemption is not discriminatory against the tenants, nor is it against the policy of the Act.
It only serves as an incentive to the landlord for creation of additional accommodation to meet the growing housing needs.
These provisions providing for exemption of the new buildings from the provisions of the Rent Act for a period of five years or ten years were upheld vide the decision of this Court in Punjab Tin Supply Co., Chandigarh and Ors.
vs The Central Govt.
& Ors.
, ; at 216, 217.
[20C G] The Court was unable to accept the submission that the absence of the right of induction of the tenants in the reconstructed premises was either arbitrary or unreasonable.
The Act must be so construed that it harmonises the rights of the landlords and at the same time protects the tenants and also serves best the purpose of the Act, and one of the purposes of the Act is to solve the acute shortage of accommodation by making rational basis for eviction and encouraging building and re building which is at the root of all causes of shortage of accommodation.
[23D;24E F] OBITER: There is an acute shortage of housing.
The laws relating to letting and landlord and tenant in the different States have from different States ' angles tried to grapple with the problem.
Yet, in view of the magnitude of the problem, the problem has become insoluble and the litigations abound and people suffer.
More houses, therefore, must be built and more accommodation must be made available for the people to live in.
The laws of the landlord and tenant must be made rational, humane, certain and capable of being quickly implemented.
The landlords having premises in their control should be induced and 5 encouraged to part with the available accommodation on certain safe guards which will strictly ensure their recovery when wanted.
Men with money should be given proper and meaningful incentives, as in some European countries, to build houses.
Tax holidays for new houses can be encouraged.
The tenants should also be given protection and security and certain amount of reasonableness in the rent.
Escalation of prices in the urban properties, land, materials and houses must be rationably checked.
The country very vitally and urgently requires a National Housing Policy if we want to prevent a major breakdown of law and gradual disillusionment of the people.
After all shelter is one of our fundamental rights.
The New National Housing Policy must attract new buildings, rationalise the rent structure and the rent provisions and bring certain amount of uniformity, leaving scope for sufficient flexibility amongst the States to adjust such legislation according to their needs.
This Court and the High Courts should also be relieved of the heavy burden of the rent litigations.
Tier of appeals should be curtailed.
Laws must be simple, rational and clear.
Litigation must come to an end quickly.
Such New Housing Policy must comprehend the present and anticipate the future.
The idea of a National Rent Tribunal on an All India basis should be examined.
This has become an urgent imperative of today 's revolution.
A fast changing society cannot operate with unchanging law and preconceived judicial attitude.
[25B H] Rattan Arya and others vs State of Tamil Nadu and another; , ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs G.C. Mandawar; , ; section Kannappa Pillai and another vs B. Venkatarathnam, 78 Law Weekly 363; P.J. Irani vs State of Madras, ; ; section Kandaswamy Chettiar vs State of Tamil Nadu and another; , ; Raval & Co. vs K.C. Ramachandran & Ors., ; ; Murlidhar Agarwal and another vs State of U.P. and others; , ; Shah Bhojraj Kuverji Oil Mills and Ginning Factory vs Subbash Chandra Yograj Sinha, ; ; Metalware & Co., etc.
vs Bansilal Sharma and Ors., etc.
; , ; Meta Ram vs Jiwan Lal, [1962] Suppl.
2.S.C.R. 623; Murthy Match Works, etc.
vs Asstt.
Collector of Central Excise, etc.; , ; In re: The Special Courts Bill, 1978, ; Punjab Tin Supply Co. Chandigarh & Ors.
vs The Central Govt.
State of Haryana and Anr., ; at 226, 227; Mehsin Bhai vs Hale and Company G. T. Madras, ; Metalware Co. etc.
vs Bansilal Sharma and others, etc.
; , at 1117, 1118 Punjab Tin Supply Co., Chandigarh etc.
vs The Central Govt.
and Ors.
, ; ; Motor General Traders and Anr. etc.
vs 6 State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. etc.
; , at 605; Atam Prakash vs State of Haryana and Ors., ; Panchamal Narayan Shenoy vs Basthi Venkatesha Shenoy, ; ; Jiwanlal & Co. and Ors.
vs Manot and Co., Ltd., 64 Calcutta Weekly Notes, 932 at 937 and M/s. Patel Road ways Private Limited, Madras vs State of Tamil Nadu and Ors., , referred to.
