The first respondent 's suit under Section 202 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1951 for possessing on payment of the mortgage money and ejectment of the appellants under Section 21(1)(d) of the Act was resist ed on the ground that the right of redemption stood extin guished in the year 1929 as the usufructuary mortgage which was executed when the Recovery of Rents (Bengal), Act, 1859 was in force, was a valid one and the mortgagors, the prede cessors in interest of the respondent had lost all their rights titles and interest in the land.
The Judicial Officer dismissed the suit.
On appeal, the Additional Commissioner decreed the first respondent plaintiff 's suit holding that the usufructuary mortgage of occupancy rights was valid only in a qualified sense in that the appellants were entitled to retain posses sion until the mortgage debt was paid and that no tenancy law right from the Recovery of Rents (Bengal) Act, 1859 to U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939 ever made the occupancy rights trans ferable.
The appeal to the Board of Revenue having been dis missed, the appellants moved the High Court under Article 226 and a Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition and upheld the order of the Board of Revenue.
596 On appeal, the Division Bench held that the transaction of the present kind was not a mortgage properly so called but yet was a mortgage within the meaning of Section 21(1)(d) of the Act.
In appeal to this Court, challenging the correctness of the view of the High Court, it was contended that both the Board of Revenue as well as the High Court failed to appre ciate that the usufructuary mortgage in question was execut ed at a time when the Recovery of Rents (Bengal) Act, 1859 was in force, and that a usufructuary mortgage was valid under Section 6 of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The settled law as administered in the then United Provinces was that a usufructuary mortgage of an occupancy holding was invalid and there was no transfer of an interest by the occupancy tenant and the mortgagee ac quired no right other than the right to retain possession and fail back upon the stipulation in the so called mortgage bond till his money was paid.
[599C D] 1.2 The view that a usufructuary mortgage by an occupan cy tenant was not valid in the eye of law has been accepted by the Legislature in clause (d) of Section 21(1) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1951 and the matter stands concluded by the doctrine of stare decisis.
To hold otherwise now would imply not only unsettling the law which has stood the test of time for over 100 years but would have the effect of reopening transactions past and closed and unsettling titles.
[599D E] 2.1 There is nothing in Section 6 of the Recovery of Rents (Bengal) Act to suggest that a usufructuary mortgage of an occupancy holding like the transaction in question was permissible.
[599F] 2.2 The right of occupancy tenant was not transferable under Section 6 of the Act and in case of such a transfer the tenant would he deemed to have abandoned the holding and, therefore, the right of an occupancy tenant cannot be set up by the purchaser in defence to a suit for ejectment by the zamindar.
[600B] 3.
In the instant case, the relationship of the parties was regulated by the stipulations contained in the mortgage bond and under the terms the appellants were entitled to retain possession till the mortgage debt was paid off.
Under the U.P. Debt Redemption Act, 1940, all 597 usufructuary mortgages became serf liquidating mortgages.
The mortgage money would be deemed to have been paid off.
[600F G] Narendra Narayan Roy Chowdhary vs Ishan Chandra Sen, [1974] 13 Bengal LR 278; Khiali Ram vs Nathu Lal, ILR [1893] 15 All 219 (FB); Samharu vs Dharamraj Pandey and Ors., [1969] All.
LJ 943 (FB); Barhu Singh & Ors.
vs Kharpattu & Ors., [1956], All LJ 87 and Ram Prasad vs Bishambhar Singh, AIR 1946 All 400, referred to.
