The petitioner, an active social worker, filed a petition before this Court complaining that neither the Government nor the people were giving adequate attention to stop the pollution of the river Ganga and it was, therefore, necessary to take steps for the purpose of protecting the cleanliness of the stream in the river Ganga which was in fact the life sustainer of a large part of the northern India, and sought the issue of a writ/order/direction in the nature of mandamus to the respondents other than respondents Nos. 1 and 7 to 9 restraining them from letting out the trade effluents into the river Ganga till such time they put necessary treatment plants for treating the trade effluents in order to arrest the pollution of water in the said river.
This Court directed issue of notice under order 1 Rule 8 of the 280 Code of Civil Procedure treating the case as a representative action by publishing the gist of the petition in the newspapers in circulation in northern India and calling upon industrialists and the municipal corporations and town municipal councils having jurisdiction over the areas through which the river Ganga flows to appear before the Court to show cause as to why direction should not be issued as prayed for by the petitioner asking them not to allow trade effluents and sewage into the river Ganga without appropriately treating them before discharging them into the river.
Pursuant to the aforesaid notice a large number of industrialists and legal bodies entered appearance.
Some filed counter affidavits ex plaining the steps taken by them for treating trade effluents before discharging them into the river.
The case against the tanneries at Jajmau, Kanpur, was first taken up by the Court for consideration.
Forty three respondents admitted in their counter affidavits that the tanneries discharged their trade effluents into the sewage nallah which led to the municipal sewage plant before they were thrown into the river Ganga.
The Court was informed that six of the tanneries had already set up and fourteen were engaged in construction of primary treatment plants, and some others pleaded for time to do so.
It was submitted on behalf of the respondents that it would not be possible for them to have secondary system for treating waste water in view of the enormous expenditure involved, which the tanneries would not be able to meet.
Some of the tanneries neither appeared nor were represented by counsel in this Court.
Issuing interim directions, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 Article 48 A of the Constitution provides that the State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country.
Article 51 A of the Constitution imposes as one of the fundamental duties on every citizen the duty to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life and to have campassion for living creatures.
[285C D] Realising the importance of the prevention and control of pollution of water for human existence, Parliament passed the , to provide for the 281 prevention and control of water pollution and the maintaining or restoring of wholesomeness of water, for the establishment, with a view to carrying out the purposes aforesaid of Boards for the prevention and control of water pollution, for conferring on and assigning to such Boards powers and functions relating thereto and for matters connected therewith Sections 16 and 17 of the Act describes the functions of the Central and the State Board.
The Act was adopted by the State of Uttar Pradesh.
In addition, Parliament also passed the Environmental (Prevention) Act, 1986 which came into effect from November, 1986 throughout India.
[288B D; 289A, F] 1.2 Notwithstanding the comprehensive provisions contained in the Act of 1974, no effective steps appear to have been taken by the State Board so far to prevent the discharge of effluents of the Jajmau near Kanpur to the river Ganga.
The fact that such effluents are being first discharged into the municipal sewerage does not absolve the tanneries from being proceeded against under the provisions of the law in force since ultimately the effluents reach the river Ganga from the sewerage system of the municipality.
Not much has been done even under the Act of 1986 by the Central Government to stop the grave public nuisance caused by the tanneries at Jajmau, Kanpur.
[289 E; 290C] 1.3 There is no doubt that the discharge of the trade effluents from the tanneries into the river Ganga has been causing considerable damage to the life of the people who use the water of the river and also to the aquatic life in the river.
The effluents discharged from a tannery is 10 times noxious when compared with the domestic sewage which flows into the river from any urban area on its banks.
The tanneries at Jajmau, Kanpur cannot be allowed to continue to carry on the industrial activity unless they take steps to establish primary treatment plant.
[298E F] No doubt it may not be possible for the tanneries to establish immediately the secondary system plant in view of the large expenses involved, but having regard to the adverse effect the effluents are having on the river water, the tanneries at Jajmau, Kanpur, should at least set up primary treatment plants, which is the minimum that the tanneries should do in the circumstances of the case.
The financial capacity of the tanneries should be considered as irrelevant while requiring them to establish primary treatment plants.
Just like an industry which cannot pay minimum wages to its workers cannot be allowed to exist, a tannery, which cannot set up a primary treatment plant, cannot be permitted to continue to be in existence for the adverse 282 effect on the public at large which is likely to ensue by the discharging of the trade effluents from the tannery to the river Ganga would be immense and it will outweigh any inconvenience that may be caused to the management and the labour employed by it on account of its closure.
Moreover, the tanneries involved in this case are not taken by surprise.
For several years they are being asked to take necessary steps to prevent the flow of untreated water from their factories into the river.
Some of them have already complied with the demand.
[298C E] 1.4 In cases of this nature this Court may issue appropriate directions if it finds that the public nuisance or other wrongful act affecting or likely to affect public is being committed and the statutory authorities which are charged with the duty to prevent it are not taking adequate steps to rectify the grivevance.
For every breach of right there should be a remedy.
[298F G] It is unfortunate that a number of tanneries at Jajmau even though they are aware of these proceedings have not cared even to enter appearance in this Court to express their willingness to take appropriate steps to establish the pretreatment plants.
So far as they are concerned, they are directed to stop running of their tanneries and also not to let out trade effluents either directly or indirectly into the river Ganga without subjecting the trade effluents to a pretreatment process by setting up primary treatment plants as approved by the State Board with effect from October 1, 1987.
Time granted till 31.3.1988 to other tanneries who are members of the Hindustan Chambers of Commerce and the other tanneries to establish primary treatment plants within six months.
If any of these tanneries does not set up a primary treatment plant within 31.3.1988 such a tannery will stop business with effect from 1.4.1988.
[298G H; 299D, G H; 300A] Such of those tanneries who have already put up primary treatment plants may continue running provided they keep the plants in sound working order.[299Fl The Central Government, the Uttar Pradesh Board, established under the provisions of the and the District Magistrate, Kanpur are directed to enforce this order.
[30OB l Per Singh, J: (supplementing) The pollution of the river Ganga is affecting the life, health and 283 ecology of the Indo Gangetic Plain.
The (Government as well as Parliament both have taken a number of steps to control the water pollution, but nothing substantial has been achieved.
No law or authority can succeed in removing the pollution unless the people cooperate.
It is the sacred duty of all those who reside or carry on business around the river Ganga to ensure the purity of Ganga.
Tanneries at Jajmau area near Kanpur have been polluting the Ganga in a big way.
Though notices were issued many industrialists have not bothered either to respond to the notice or to take elementary steps for the treatment of industrial effluent before discharging the same into the river.
Those tanneries which have failed to take minimum steps required for the primary treatment of industrial effluent are directed to be closed.
No doubt closure of tanneries may bring unemployment, loss of revenue, but life, health and ecology have greater importance to the people.
[301G H; 302A B]
