The Tamil Nadu Housing Board made Madras State Housing Board Service Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred under sections 17 and 19 of the Tamil Nadu State Housing Board Act, 1961.
The Board, by its Resolution No. 772 dated March 20, 1963, made and adopted the service regulations in regard to the service conditions of officers and servants of the Board and sent them to Government for approval under section 161(3) of the Act.
For promotion to the cadre of Assistant Engineers, the Board prescribed 5 years qualifying service in the case of Junior Engineers and 10 years in the case of Supervisors.
While the matter was pending with the Government.
For approval, the Board altered the period of 5 years ' qualifying service in the case of Junior Engineers to 3 years, by its Resolution No. 368 dated 8.12.1964 and forwarded the same to the Government.
Before the approval was received, the Board, by its Resolution No. 467 dated 8.11.1965, again prescribed the qualifying service of 5 years in respect of Junior Engineers, since, according to it, that would be in accordance with the rules governing the Madras Engineer ing Service in the Government.
By G.O. Ms. No. 156 (Housing) department of Labour dated 14.5.1969, the Government approved the regulations showing 3 years as qualifying service, but later issued a memorandum dated 26.2.1971, styled as an erratum, substituting the words "3 years" occurring under the sub head "by promotion of (i) Junior Engineers", by the words "5 years".
H 229 The appellants and other Supervisors who were working in the Engineering Subordinate Service of The Tamil Nadu Housing Board filed writ petitions challenging the promotions of respondents No. 2 to 11 and respondent No. 2 in the writ petitions in the High Court, who were working as Junior Engineers, to the cadre of Assistant Engineers, even though they had not put in 5 years ' service in the cadre of Junior Engineers, contrary to the regulations of the Board.
The writ petitions were opposed by the Tamil Nadu Housing Board and the Junior Engineers who had been impleaded as respondents in the writ petitions.
It was contended by the Junior Engineers who had been promoted as Assistant Engineers that the qualification prescribed by the regulations in respect of Junior Engineers was 3 years ' service as stated in the Government order dated 14.5.1969 and the memorandum dated 26.2.1971 which had been issued as an erratum was liable to be ignored since it had not been issued by following the procedure prescribed for modifying a regulation.
A Single Judge of the High Court directed the State Government to be impleaded as a party for ascertaining whether the memorandum dated 26.2.1971 was only an erratum for the purpose of correcting a clerical mistake that had crept into the Government order or whether it was in fact a modification of the earlier Government order.
The State Government filed an affidavit explaining the reasons for issuing the erratum.
The Single Judge concluded that the period of "3 years" mentioned in the Government order dated 14.5.1969 was as a result of clerical mistake, and that the memorandum dated 26.2.1971 was really an erratum and not a modification of the regulations as approved by the Government and held that the promotion of respondent Nos. 2 to 11 and respondent No. 2 in the writ petitions before the High Court from the cadre of Junior Engineers to the cadre of Assistant Engineers was contrary to the regulations as they had not completed 5 years ' service in the cadre of Junior Engineers when they were promoted as Assistant Engineers and, therefore, their promotions were liable to be set aside.
In the appeals before the Division Bench, a new plea was urged on behalf of the appellants that the petitioners in the writ petitions were not entitled to the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus on the basis of the regulations since the regulations had no force of law as they had not been published in the official gazette.
Setting aside the Judgment of the Single Judge, the Division Bench held that the regulations were not valid and had no force of law 230 as they had not been published in the official gazette, as required by sub section (1) of section 161 of the Act and, therefore, no mandamus could be issued even if it was established that the regulations had been contravened in making the promotions.
Appeals by special leave were filed in this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the respondent Board that even though under the regulations it was necessary that a Junior Engineer should have experience of 5 years in the cadre for being promoted to the cadre of Assistant Engineers the impugned promotions could not be questioned since under regulation 28(d), the qualification prescribed in respect of Junior Engineers had been relaxed by.
the Resolution passed by the Board dated January 20, 1972.
Allowing appeals by special leave, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The memorandum issued by the State Government on 26.2.71 was merely an erratum correcting a clerical mistake and not a 1:) modification of an earlier regulation.
[241B] 2.
In the context in which the words "subject to approval of the Government" appear in regulation 28(d), they have to be interpreted as meaning "conditional upon the approval of the Government", i.e., that unless approval is given by the Government, the relaxation would not be valid because the regulations themselves had been put into effect after obtaining the approval of the State Government earlier.
Even if those words are understood as meaning that it was possible to obtain ex post facto sanction of a decision already given by the Board, even then such an approval should have been given by the State Government within a reasonable time from the date on which the decision is taken by the Board.
[251A C] The impugned promotions have been made between 28.6.1971 and 7.2.1972.
The resolution relaxing the qualification was passed by the Board on 20th January, 1972.
The approval has not been given at all till now.
Hence it cannot be said that the power had been validly exer cised under regulation 28(d).
Since relaxation of the qualification has not been done in accordance with regulation 28(d) it would be wholly unjust to uphold the impugned promotions on the ground that there was a valid relaxation.
[247A B; 251D] 3.1 No doubt the regulations which had received the approval of the State Government had not been published in the offecial gazette 231 by the relevant dates as required by sections 3(19 A) of the Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891.
The Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act did not provide for any other mode of publication or notification.
By the time the impugned promotions took place the regulations had been made by the Board and had also received the approval of the State Government although they had not been published in the official gazette.
[241D El 3.2 The making of the regulations in the ordinary course of events occupies considerable time since they had to receive the approval and confirmation of the Government in order to be effective.
The Board passed the resolution adopting the regulations on 20.3.63.
The regulations were submitted to the Government for approval.
Until the regulations were approved by the State Government, the Board necessarily had to take decisions in accordance with the certain norms laid down by it as regards the modes of appointment of officers and staff of the Board.
Those decisions cannot be invalidated merely on the ground that the regulations had not been promulgated in accordance with law.
[242B D] 3.3 It was open to the Board to lay down appropriate norms in accordance with which it proposed to make appointments of its officers and staff.
The power of the Board under section 16 of the Act is similar to the power exercisable by State Government under Article 162 of the Constitution as regards appointment to State Public Service is concerned, and that power could be exercised by the Board in accordance with its own resolution, which had received approval of the State Government, until appropriate regulations were published by it in accordance with section 161 of the Act.
[245E, H; 246A B] 3.4 Having taken a decision as per its resolution dated 8.11.1965 laying down that the qualifying service which a Junior Engineer should possess for purposes of promotion to the cadre of Assistant Engineers should be 5 years, which had received the approval of the State Government, the Board was bound to follow faithfully the said decision while making promotions of Junior Engineers.
It could not have, therefore, departed from the norm prescribed by itself earlier without modifying it by another resolution and obtaining the approval of the State Government to it.
[246B Cl 3.5 Having once obtained the concurrence of the State Government to the regulations made by it, the Board could not act contrary to the said regulations ignoring the State Government altogether merely 232 because the regulations had not been published.
Any such action would be arbitrary in character.
Mere non publication of the regulations in the of official gazette was not fatal to the writ petitions.
[251E, GJ The impugned promotions are, therefore, set aside, and the Board directed to pass fresh orders of promotion after considering the case of all the Junior Engineers and the Supervisors as on the date on which the impugned promotions were made and to make promotion in accordance with the regulations which had been acted upon by the Board with the approval of the State Government.
[251E F] [The Judgment of the Division Bench set aside and that of the Single Judge restored.
If in the process of reviewing the promotions, it becomes necessary to revert any Junior Engineer from the post which he is now holding, he shall not be so reverted but shall be continued in the post which he is now holding, by creating a supernumerary post, until such time he becomes eligible to be promoted to the said post.
The continuance of such a Junior Engineer shall not, however, come in the way of the petitioners in the writ petitions or any other employee of the Board getting promotions due and the seniority entitled in accordance with law.] [251G H; 252A B] Dundee Harbour Trustees vs D. & J. Nicol, [1915] A.C. 550; Mysore State Road Transport Corporation vs Gopinath Gundachar Char, ; ; B.N. Nagarajan and ors.
vs State of Mysore and ors.
, and K.R.C.S. Balakrishna Chetty & Sons & Co. vs State of Madras, ; , referred to.
