The appellant Chhotu Singh, who had been granted C.L. III licence for vending country liquor in Village Sawli, applied for permission to shift his liquor shop from Village Sawli to Village Narsi Chaurasta as there was very little demand for country liquor in Sawli with a small population.
The Collector recommended the transfer of the shop of the appellant after making due enquiries contemplated in the guidelines laid down in the government circular dated April 27, 1984 for shifting shops.
The State Government granted the permission applied for by the appellant.
Upon the appellant 's shop being shifted to Narsi Chaurasta, the respondent No. S in the appeals, who already had a liquor shop in Narsi Chaurasta, challenged by a Writ Petition the permission granted by the Government to the appellant to shift his liquor shop to Narsi Chaurasta.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition, quashing the order of the Government granting permission for shifting the liquor shop, on the ground that the said permission had been granted without the criteria laid down in the Government circular dated March 18,1982 being duly considered.
A review petition against the order of the High Court, allowing the Writ Petition, was dismissed.
The appellant Chhotu Singh has moved the Court by special leave against the orders of the High Court, allowing the Writ Petition and dismissing the review application, and the only question for consideration in the matter is whether the permission granted by the State Government for shifting the appellant 's C.L. III liquor shop from Village Sawli to Village Narsi Chaurasta is supported by the guidelines laid down in the latest government circular dated April 27,1984, which has superseded all the previous such circulars.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, 304 ^ HELD: The Collector had recommended permission for shifting the liquor shop of the appellant from Village Sawli to Village Narsi Chaurasta after making due enquiries, with regard to the shifting of the said shop, in accordance with the guidelines contained in the latest government circular on the subject, dated April 27, 1984, which had superseded the guidelines in the previous such circulars.
The sanction accorded to the shifting of the appellant 's shop is not in breach of the said latest circular dated April 27, 1984 and it cannot be assailed as arbitrary.
[306G, B; 307E, B C]
