In the appeals by Special Leave to this Court the question for consideration was: whether an arbitrator to whom a reference was made without the intervention of the Court could award interest during the period prior to the reference and during the pendency of the arbitration: ^ HELD: 1.
The general statutory provisions in regard to the award of interest by the Court are contained in the Interest Act and the Civil Procedure Code.
[258F] 2.
The Interest Act of 1839 was repealed and a new Interest Act incorporated in 1978.
Both these Acts provide for the award of interest upto the date of the institution of the proceedings.
Neither the Interest Act of 1839 nor the Interest Act of 1978 provides for the award of pendente lite interest.
[260D] 3.
The award of pendente lite interest is provided for in Section 34 of the Civil Procedure Code.
Section 34 however, applies to arbitrations in suits for the simple reason that where a matter is referred to arbitration in a suit, the arbitrator will have all the powers of the Court in deciding the dispute.
Section 34 does not otherwise apply to arbitrations as arbitrators are not courts within the meaning of section 34 Civil Procedure Code.
[260E] 254 4.
While under the Interest Act of 1978 the expression 'court ' was defined to exclude an arbitrator, under the Interest Act of 1839 it was not so defined.
The result is that while in cases arising after the commencement of the Interest Act of 1978 an arbitrator has the same power to award interest upto the date of institution of proceedings, in cases which arose prior to commencement of the 1978 Act the arbitrator has no such power under the Interest Act of 1839.
[260G] 5.
Since the arbitrator is required to conduct himself and make the award in accordance with law, the substantive law has to be looked into for the power of the arbitrator to award interest before the commencement of the proceedings.
[260H 261A] 6.
If the agreement between the parties entitles the arbitrator to award interest no further question arises and the arbitrator may award interest.
Similarly, if there is a usage of trade having the force of law the arbitrator must award interest.
[261B] 7.
Again, there are other provisions of the substantive law enabling the award of interest by the arbitrator.
Section 80 of the Negotiable Instruments Act under which the court may award interest even in a case where no rate of interest is specified in the promissory note or bill of exchange, and Section 61(2) of the Sale of Goods Act which provides for the award of interest to the seller or the buyer under certain circumstances in suits filed by them.
[261C] 8.
There is also the instance of non performance of a contract of which equity could give specific performance and to award interest.
[261C] 9.
Where one of the parties is forced to pay interest to a third party say on an overdraft, consequent on the failure of the other party to the contract not fulfilling the obligation of paying the amount due to them, equity may compel the payment of interest.
[261C] 10.
Loss of interest in the place of the right to remain in possession may be rightfully claimed in equity by the owner of a property who has been dispossessed from it.
[261D] 11.
In the instant appeals, in those cases in which the references to arbitration were made prior to the commencement of the new Act which was on August 19, 1981 and the amount claimed was a certain sum payable at a certain time by virtue of a written instrument, interest is payable under the Interest Act for the period before the commencement of the proceeding.
[269H 270A] 255 12.
In regard to pendente lite interest, that is, interest from the date of reference to the date of the award, the claimants would not be entitled to the same for the simple reason that the arbitrator is not a court within the meaning of section 34 of the CPC, nor were the references to arbitration made in the course of suits.[1270C] 13.
In the remaining cases which arose before the commencement of the , the respondents are not entitled to claim interest either before the commencement of the proceedings or during the pendency of the arbitration.
They are not entitled to claim interest for the period prior to the commencement of the arbitration proceedings for the reason that the Interest Act, 1839 does not apply to their cases and there is no agreement to pay interest or any usage of trade having the force of law or any other provision of law under which the claimants were entitled to recover interest.
They are not entitled to claim pendente lite interest as the arbitrator is not a court nor were the references to arbitration made in suits.
[270D E] 14.
The arbitrator is bound to make his award in accordance with law.
If the arbitrator could not possibly have awarded interest on any permissible ground because such ground did not exist, it would be open to the court to set aside the award relating to the award of interest on the ground of an error apparition the record.
On the other hand, if there was the slightest possibility of the entitlement of the claimant to interest on one or other of the legally permissible grounds, it may not be open to the court to go behind the award and decide whether the award of interest was justifiable.
[270F G] Bengal Nagpur Railway Company Limited vs Ruttanji Ramji 6S Indian Appeals 66; Thawardas Pherumal vs The Union of India, ; Union of India vs Prem Chand Satnam Das, AIR 1951 Patna 20l; Nachiappa Chettiar vs Subramaniam Chettiar, ; ; Satinder Singh vs Amrao Singh, ; ; Firm Madanlal Roshanlal Mahajan vs Hukumchand Mills Ltd., [1967] 1 SCR lO5; Union of India vs Bungo Steel Furniture Pvt. Ltd., ; and State of Madhya Pradesh vs M/s. Saith & Skelton Pvt. Ltd., ; , referred to.
