Sequel to the main judgment delivered on June 22, 1984 by this Court in Dr. Pradeep Jain, etc., etc.
vs Union of India and others, [198413 SCR 942 regarding admission for fixed percentage of seats in different courses of study in the medical faculties on an All India basis, the question of finalising the scheme for holding the All India Examination to fill up 25% seats reserved on the basis of institutional preference for admission to the post graduate courses like MDS, MS etc. came up before this Court.
Laying down a detailed programme relating to selection examination, the Court, ^ HELD: Apart from finalising the schedule for holding of the selection examination, three aspects of the matter, viz. (1) structuring the Post Graduate courses, (2) the question of diploma being a qualification for admission to such courses as in Tamil Nadu, and (3) provision in regard to super specialities, like M.D. and other higher degrees require consideration.
[354D] In some States at present the post graduate course is for a term of two years with housemanship of one year while in other States it is a full term of three years.
If a common pattern is directed to be adopted immediately there may be some difficulty.
A uniform practice has to be evolved so that the discipline would be introduced.
The present arrangement will, therefore, continue for a period of five years.
i.e., upto 1992.
[354E F] For admission beginning from 1993, there would be only one pattern, namely, a three year course without any housemanship.
All 352 Universities and institutions shall take timely steps to bring about such A amendments as may be necessary in accord with this direction before the end of 1991 so that there may be no scope for raising of any dispute.
The uniform pattern has to be implemented for 1993.
[354F G] It is proper that one uniform system is brought into operation throughout the country.
The system now prevailing in the State of Tamil Nadu regarding the diploma shall continue until 1992 from 1993 there would be no necessity for the diploma to be a qualification for admission to post graduate courses.
[354G H; 355A] In regard to super specialities and other higher degrees, the number of such seats are not many and, therefore, there is no necessity to make any directions in regard to admissions therefor at present and until necessity arises it is not appropriate that the Court should consider that question.
[355B] The announcement for holding of examination for the selection of 1988 shall be made on October 1, 1987.
As already decided, the examination shall be conducted by the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
[355G ]
