Sub section (1) of section SO of the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961 confers revisional jurisdiction on the High Court in respect of orders passed or proceedings taken by the Court of Small Causes or the Court of Civil Judge under the Act while sub section
(2) empowers the District Judge to revise the orders passed or proceedings taken by the Court of Munsif and makes his order final.
A Full Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Krishnaji Venkatesh Shriodkar vs Gurupad Shivaram Kavalekar & ORS.
, (ILR , following the decisions of this Court in Chhagan Lal vs The Municipal Corporation.
Indore, ; and Krishnadas Bhatija vs A.S. Venkatachala Shetty, (SLP No. 913 of 1978 decided on 13th Feb., 1978) held that the fact that the order of the District Judge under section SO(2) of the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961 is made final, does not affect the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure to revise such orders of the District Judge, in the absence of any express words in the statute taking away such jurisdiction.
Later this Court, in Vishesh Kumar vs Shanti Prasad, ; while interpreting section 25 of the Provincial Small Causes Courts Act, as amended by the U.P. Amendment Act, 1978, under which the revisional jurisdiction was shared between the District Court and the High Court, took the view that the High Court was not vested with revisional jurisdiction under section 115 CPC in respect of a revisional order made by the District Court under that section.
A similar view was also 341 taken in Aundal Ammal vs Sadasivan Pillai, ; while construing section 20 of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965 .
Relying on the aforesaid two decision a Full Bench of the High Court of Karnataka in M.M. Yaragatti vs Vasant, (ILR took a contrary view to Krishnaji 's case.
The appellant 's revision petition having been dismissed by a Single Judge of the High Court following the Full Bench decision in Yaragatti 's case, he preferred an appeal to this Court by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
A revision application is maintainable under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure read with section 50(1) of the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961 when a District Judge has made an order in his revisional jurisdiction under section 50(2) of the Act.
Chhagan Lal vs The Municipal Corporation, Indore, ; and Krishnadas Bhatija vs A.S. Venkatachala Shetty, (S.L.P. No. 913 of 1978 decided on 13th of February, 1978, referred to.
Vishesh Kumar vs Shanti Prasad, ; ; Aundal Ammal vs Sadasivan Pillai, ; ; South Asia Industries Private Ltd. vs S.B. Sarup Singh & ors.
J and National Sewing Thread Co. Ltd. vs James Chadwick & Bros. Ltd., ; distinguished.
Krishnaji Venkatesh Shirodkar vs Gurupad Shivaram Kavalekar & ors.
ILR approved.
M.M. Yaragatti vs Vasant, ILR overruled.
The decision of a Full Bench of the High Court consisting of three Judges rendered in Krishnaji 's Case was binding on a bench of equal strength unless that decision had directly been overruled by this Court or by necessary implication became unsustainable.
There is no such overruling of Krishnaji 's decision by this Court.
It cannot also be said that by necessary implication the ratio therein supported by the direct authority of this Court stood superseded.
[349B C] 3.
Judicial propriety warrants that decisions of the Supreme 342 Court must be taken wholly binding on the High Courts.
That is the necessary outcome of the tier system.
Article 141 of the Costitution unequivocally states that the law declared by this Court shall be binding on all courts within the territory of India.
A coordinate Bench of the High Court, therefore, should not have chosen to overrule an earlier judgment of that Court based upon a decision of this Court.[349C F] Broom vs Cassell & Co., [19721 1 AER 801, referred to.
It is one of the essential requirements of the administration of justice that judgments rendered by superior courts and particularly with the approval of the apex court should not be frequently changed so as to unsettle settled positions.
The fact that the State Legislature has not thought it necessary to amend the law and set at naught the decisions in Krishnaji 's case or Bhatija 's case is indicative or the position that this Court had not taken a wrong view of the legislative intention [349H: 350A]
