Under section 171 read with section 40 of the United Provinces Tenancy Act, 1939, if a tenant sub lets the land to a 'sub tenant ' and the sub lease continues for more than five years, the 'land holder ' is entitled to eject both the tenant and the sub tanant from the land held by them.
How ever, tenants are entitled to retain possession of land for certain periods in terms of provisions of section 295 A of the Act and certain notifications issued by the State Government under section 10 of the Uttar Pradesh Agricultural Tenants (Acquisition of Privileges) (Amendment) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1950, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force.
The appellant, Hari Shanker, the 'land holder ' of the land in question, filed a suit under section 171 of the United Provinces Tenants Act, 1939 against his 'exproprietory tanant '.
Habib, on the ground that he had sub let the land for more than five years to a 'sub tenant ', Ida, in contravention of section 40 of the said Act.
The suit was decreed in favour of Hari Shanker and Habib was given the option to apply for ejectment of Ida and resume occupation of the land in terms of the proviso to section 171.
on an appeal filed by Ida, the Additional Commissioner set aside the decree and dismissed the suit.
Allowing the second appeal filed by Hari Shanker, the Board of Revenue restored the decree of the Trial Court.
Ida 's writ petition against that order was dismissed by a Single Judge of the High Court.
Meanwhile, Hari Shanker had applied for execution of the decree and the objection filed thereto by Ida was dismissed, though the application for execution itself was still pending.
Habib also filed an application against Ida as contemplated by the proviso to section 171 of the Act.
Ida 's appeal against the order aforesaid of the Single Judge and the writ petitions filed by Habib and Ida against orders passed in execution proceedings were heard together by the Division Bench of the High Court which allowed them and dismissed the suit of Hari Shanker.
329 Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: The Division Bench of the High Court mixed up the question of termination of the sub tenancy with the question of recovery of possession.
It is common ground that Habib was a "sub tenant" of Hari Shanker in respect of the suit land.
He granted a "sub tenancy" to Ida which was from year to year.
The "sub tenancy" was created in 1943 and it admittedly continued for a period of more than 5 years.
It is not disputed that the said "sub tenancy" was not terminated by Habib in spite of the provisions of section 40 of the United Provinces Tenancy Act, 1939.
It may be true that even if the sub tenancy had been terminated Habib might not have been able to recover possession of the suit land from Ida but that does not affect the question of the continuance of the "sub tenancy".
As the said "sub tenancy" contravened the provisions of section 40, Hari Shanker was clearly entitled to file a suit as contemplated by section 171 of the said act against Habib as well as Ida on the ground that the tenant Habib has sub let the suit land otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the said Act, namely, in excess of 5 years.
There is, on the record, no defence to that suit which was rightly decreed by the Board of Revenue.
[333D H I The question whether Habib is in a position to evict Ida and obtain possession of the suit land is a question which will have to be decided in the application filed by Habib against Ida for the eviction of Ida from the suit land and recovery of possession thereof.
Similarly, the question as to whether the appellant, Hari Shanker, has become entitled to execute the decree in the suit to which he is entitled will have to be disposed of in the application filed by Hari Shanker against Habib as well as Ida.
All these applications, we understand, are pending before the relevant authorities and they will have to be decided according to law.
However, in our opinion, there is no doubt that in the circumstances set out above.
Hari Shanker is entitled to the decree which the Board of Revenue passed in his favour and which was upheld by the learned Single Judge.
[333H; 334A C]
