The premises in question was taken on lease at a monthly rent of Rs.350 by the tenant Company.
The rent in respect of the said premises was being deposited in the bank.
Respondent No. 1 The landlady was living abroad and as she and her husband wanted to come back and settle down in India they required the said premises.
The landlady instituted proceedings against the tenant Company to which the appellant was not a party.
The husband of the appellant was an employee of the tenant Company and he retired in 1973.
The appellant filed an application for being impleaded as a party, contending that the rent was deposited on account of the appellant 's husband, and after his death on account of his heirs individually and not on account of or on behalf of the erstwhile tenant of the premises and the tenant did not oppose the eviction petition because the tenant had left the premises, and the appellant 's husband had become the tenant in his own right.
The application was rejected, and the order of eviction was passed against the tenant under section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
The appeal against the above decision was dismissed by the Rent Control Tribunal.
The High Court dismissed the appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: After the surrender of the tenancy by the Company, the appellant 's husband, or his heirs, after his death, had no locus standi, and had no right to be joined as party.
[366G ] The tenancy was originally entered into between the landlady or on her behalf and the Company of which the appellant 's husband was an employee.
Admittedly, the tenancy came to an end after the tenant 364 Company abondoned the premises.
The husband of the appellant or after his death his heirs could not continue unless there was a fresh agreement of tenancy in their favour or novation of the original agreement of tenancy.
There are no cogent or available materials to show that there was actually a new contract entered into between the husband of the appellant and the landlady, or novation of the original agreement.
[366C D] The High Court has found that there was no receipt in possession of the appellant regarding the payment of rent, and that there was genuine evidence to show that the landlady needed the premises bona fide.
There were concurrent findings of facts of the two courts below.
[366H] The appellant and her family have been residing in the premises for quite sometime.
The landlady herself has not yet arrived in India.
The husband is very much in India awaiting the vacancy of the house.
In the circumstances, the appellant and her family would be entitled to stay in the premises upto 15.6.1988.
[367C]
