The petitioner, a police officer, was charged by the Judicial Magistrate under sections 148/302/149/325/149 and under sections 323/149 of the Indian Penal Code for allegedly causing grievous injuries to the complainant and death of one of the alleged offenders during a raid and search for illicit liquor and unlicenced arms, and committed to the Court of Sessions for trial.
His contention was that under section 196 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the cognizance of the offence could not be taken nor the trial proceeded with without the sanction of the appropriate authorities under section 197 of that Code.
The Sessions Court took the view that unless cognizance was taken and the facts and the circumstances and the nature of the allegations involved in the case were gone into, it would not be possible to determine whether or not the raiding party exceeded its limits or power while acting in the discharge official duties.
The High Court dismissed the application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for staying further proceedings in the Sessions Court.
In the special leave petition to this Court on the question: Whether without the sanction under section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the proceedings could go on.
Dismissing the special leave petition, ^ HELD: l.
The order passed by the Sessions Court was proper and the High Court was right in not interfering with the same.
[455G] 2.
Criminal trials should not be stayed in all cases at the prelimi 451 nary stage because that will cause great damage to the evidence.
It is necessary to protect the public servants in the discharge of their duties.
They must be made immune from being harassed in criminal proceedings and prosecution, that is the rationale behind sections 196 and 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
But it is equally important that rights of the citizens should be protected and no excesses should be committed.
In the facts and circumstances of each case protection of public officers and public servants functioning in discharge of official duties and protection of private citizens have, therefore, to be balanced by finding out as to what extent and how far is a public servant working in discharge of his duties or purported discharge of his duties, and whether the public servant has exceeded his limit.
[455F,C E] Pukhraj vs State of Rajasthan and Anr., [1974] 1 S.C.R. 559, referred to In the instant case, it is alleged that grievous injuries were inflicted upon the complainant and as a result of injuries one of the alleged accused had died.
The question is while investigating and performing his duties as a police officer was it necessary for the petitioner to conduct himself in such a manner which would result in such consequences.
Therefore, the trial should proceed.
If necessary the question of sanction under section 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code may be agitated after some evidence have been noted by the Sessions Court.
[455C, H]
