In 1945 the first respondent Trustees of Port of Bombay, granted lease of plot owned by them for the purpose of erecting a godown for carrying on commercial activities at a monthly rent of Rs. 925.
In 1946 the lessee erected a permanent godown.
In 1958, he granted lease of the said godown to the petitioners.
The first respondent filed a suit against the heirs of the original lessee for eviction on the ground of termination of tenancy, and obtained a decree.
When warrant of possession was sought to be executed, the petitioners obstructed the execution of the decree.
The first respondent thereupon took out a Chamber Summons for removal of obstruction under order 21 Rule 97 101 C.P.C.
The petitioners contended that as they were lessees under the original lessee they were entitled to protection of the Bombay Rent, Hotel and Lodging Houses Rates (Control) Act, 1947 the Bombay Rent Act which applied to the building erected by a lessee from the local authority.
The trial court rejected the petitioners ' objection and allowed the Chamber Summons.
The appeal of the petitioners was dismissed by the Single Judge of the High Court holding that they were not entitled to the benefit of the Bombay Rent Act.
The contentions arising out of the Easement Act and alleged acquiescence of the first respondent were negatived.
The Letters Patent Appeal was also dismissed by the Division Bench.
On the question whether the petitioners were entitled to protection under section 4(1)(a) of the Bombay Rent Act.
484 dismissing the Special Leave Petition, ^ HELD: Where a building was erected by the lessee not pursuant to or not under any agreement with the lessor then the case did not fall under section 4(1)(a) of the Bombay Rent, Hotel and Lodging Houses Rates (Control) Act, 1947.
[486G] Section 4(1) gives immunity to the local authority in respect of the land which it has let out to the lessee and that immunity cannot be taken away merely because the lessor on his own volition and without being in obligation under any agreement choses to put up structures on that land.
Therefore, if the premises belonged to the Government or a local authority then the Act would not apply.
[486H; 487A, D] In the instant case, The lands belong to the local authority but the structures were put on by the lessees of the first respondent not under any building lease, and such protection cannot be claimed in respect of these premises.
In view of the fact that the original lease was only a monthly tenancy and not a building lease, the High Court was right in dismissing the objections on behalf of the petitioners.
Since the petitioners have been in possession of the premises for some time, the petitioners are allowed to continue to remain in the premises upto 15th September, 1988.
[489F, H] Kanji Manji vs The Trustees of the Port of Bombay, [1962] Suppl.
3 S.C.R. 461 applied.
