Respondent No. 1 who was functioning at the relevant time as the commissioner of Archives and Historical Research, Tamil Nadu, delivered a speech at a function held by the History Association of the Presidency College, Madras criticising the time capsule buried in the precincts of the Red Fort at Delhi which led to a furore both in Parliament as well as in the national press.
The Government, feeling greatly embarrassed by the controversy, started a disciplinary inquiry against him on the view that being a civil servant it was not desirable that he should have participated in a public discussion on the time capsule but later on dropped the same.
However, just a day before that, a signed news item appeared in a newspaper about the controversy regarding the time capsule stating that a Government spokesman had charged respondent No. 1 as trying to 'sabotage the civil services from within '.
Having failed in his efforts to ascertain from the Government the identity of its spokesman who had made this offending utterance against him or to induce it to issue a contradiction through the Press, respondent No. 1 addressed a letter to the correspondent of the newspaper asking him to disclose the name of the Government spokesman.
The correspondent, in his reply, stated that the Government spokesman was respondent No. 2, the Chief Secretary to the Government, who, during a telephonic conversation with him, had made the offending utterance.
Respondent No. 1 made a representation to the Government with regard to his grievance in this behalf but, finding that there was no response, applied for sanction of the Government under r. 17 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 seeking permission to institute a suit against respondent No. 2 for damages for defamation.
The Government refused to grant the permission and respondent No. 1 moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution against the order of refusal.
The writ petition was dismissed by a Single Judge, who inter alia in his judgment referred to a concession made by the Advocate 491 General appearing for the appellants that the act complained of was an official act and, therefore, the intended suit was to vindicate an official act which was the subject matter of a defamatory criticism.
Respondent No. 1 preferred an appeal under cl.
15 of the Letters Patent and a Division Bench allowed the appeal holding that the refusal of the State Government to grant the requisite permission under r. 17 could not be justified on the ground of public interest.
B Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: According to its plain terms, r. 17 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 is in the nature of a restraint on a member of the All India Services from bringing a suit for damages for defamation for an act done in the exercise of his official duties as a public servant or from going to the press in vindication of his official act or character.
Explanation to r. 17 seeks to restrict the scope and effect of the restraint placed by r. 17.
No member of the Service is prohibited from vindicating his private character or any act done by him in his private capacity.
Proviso thereto however casts on him a duty to report to the Government regarding such action.
[497B c l In the instant case, respondent No. 1 made a speech incidentally at a time when he was holding the post of the commissioner of Archives & Historical Research, at a function organised by the History Association of the Presidency College, Madras.
He was invited to make a speech on the occasion presumably for his attainments, in the field.
But the speech delivered by him on the occasion could not be treated to be an official act of his and therefore the suit brought by him against respondent No. 2, the then Chief Secretary of Tamil Nadu could not be treated to be a suit for the vindication of his official act.
It is common knowledge that persons of erudition and eminence are often times asked to grace such occasions or make a speech and when they do so, undoubtedly they give expression to their personal views on various subjects.
By no stretch of imagination can it be said that while doing so they act in the discharge of their official duties merely because they happen to hold public office.
[499A D] During the course of his judgment, the learned Single Judge adverts to paragraph 17 of the writ petition where respondent No. 1 has averred that his intended suit was to vindicate his private character and not to vindicate any official act.
The case of respondent No. 1 therefore throughout has been that r. 17 of the Rules was not attracted to the suit and indeed he specifically aver that he was entitled to file a suit even 492 without the permission of the Government under r. 17.
However, he goes on to say that if a suit were to be filed it might land him into trouble in that disciplinary proceedings might be taken against him for having instituted a suit without previous permission of the Government.
On the assumption that such sanction was necessary under r. 17, he moved the High Court for grant of an appropriate writ under article 226 of the Constitution, apparently by way of ex abundanti cautela.
The learned Single Judge did not deal with the scope and ambit of r. 17 in view of the concession made by the learned Advocate General.
We have no manner of doubt that the appellants are not bound by the concession made by the learned Advocate General before the learned Single Judge that the act complained of was an official act.
It is unfortunate that the State Government was not properly advised at the earlier stages of the proceedings in insisting upon the view that such permission was required under r. 17 and that it was justified in refusing to grant the permission prayed for.
The concession made by the learned Advocate General being on a matter of law is not binding.
[498D G]
