Rule 63 of the U.P. State Handloom Corporation Rules stipulates termination of temporary service on one month 's notice on either side.
Rule 68 provides that if the punishment of discharge or dismissal is imposed, an enquiry commensurate with requirements of natural justice is a condition precedent.
The appellant was employed in the aforesaid Corporation on temporary basis.
The order of appointment stated that his services were liable for termination with one month 's notice or one month 's pay in lieu of notice on either side.
He was placed under suspension in November 1982 on charges of misconduct, dereliction of duty, mismanagement and showing fictitious production entries.
That order, however, was revoked in November 1983 and his services terminated forthwith by notice entitling him to one month 's salary.
The High Court held that the termination was not punitive and the question of breach of principles of natural justice did not arise.
In this appeal by special leave it was contended that the appellant was entitled to the protection of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, that though his order of termination was innocuous, the setting in which it has been made clearly makes it an order of dismissal punitive in character and that as his service was determined by the order attaching stigma the appellant was entitled to a hearing commensurate with rules of natural justice and in the absence of the opportunity of being heard the order was liable to be quashed.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: As long as the adverse feature of the employee remains the motive and does not become transferred as the foundation of the order of termination, it is unexceptionable.
Whether 'motive ' has be 502 come the foundation has to be decided by the Court with reference to the facts of a given case.
[510 G] It is necessary for every employer to assess the service of the temporary incumbent in order to find out as to whether he should be confirmed in his appointment or his services should be terminated.
It may also be necessary to find out whether the officer should be tried for some more time on temporary basis.
Since both in regard to a temporary employee or an officiating employee in a higher post such an assessment would be necessary, merely because the appropriate authority proceeds to make an assessment and leaves a record of its views the same would not be available to be utilised to make the order of termination following such assessment punitive in character.
[509G H; 510A B] There may be cases where an enquiry is undertaken and prima facie material for serious charges are found; by disclosing the result of such preliminary enquiry, the officer concerned is put under suspension in contemplation of disciplinary action.
After such steps have been taken, the employer/appropriate authority decides not to continue the departmental proceedings but makes an order terminating the service.
[510C D] In the instant case the appellant was a temporary servant and had no right to the post.
Both under the contract of service as also the Service Rules governing him the employer had the right to terminate his services by giving him one month 's notice.
The order of termination was in innocuous terms.
It did not cast any stigma on him nor did it visit him with any evil consequences.
The order was, therefore, not open to challenge.
[S11C D] The appellant is not entitled to compensation under the law.
But since he has been put out of employment at an advanced age and it may be difficult for him to get an alternate employment, the Corporation to pay him a consolidated amount of Rs.25,000.
[511F] Purshotam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, ; ; Champaklal Chimanlal Shah vs The Union of India, ; Shamsher Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab, ; ; Regional Manager & Anr.
vs Pawan Kumar Dubey; ; ; State of U.P. vs Ram Chandra Trivedi, and State of Orissa & Anr.
vs Ram Narayan Dass, [19611 I SCR 606, referred to.
