% In a writ petition, the petitioner challenged the price fixation on the ground; that the State Government had not taken into consideration the guidelines in built in sub section 3C of section 3 of the , that the levy order was unreasonable or excessive restriction on the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 19(1)(g) and 14 of the Constitution, and that the levy was a colourable exercise of the power as the State Government sold the levy sugar by public auction realising large profit.
Dismissing the Writ Petition, ^ HELD: 1.1 The Court does not act like a Chartered Accountant nor acts like an Income Tax officer.
The Court is not concerned with any individual case of any particular problem.
The Court only examines whether the price determined was with due regard to considerations provided by the statute, and whether extraneous matters have been excluded from determination.
[580D E] Union of India vs Cynamide India Ltd. AIR 1987 Sept. SC 180 ' at 1805.
followed.
1.2 The primary consideration in the fixation of price would be 578 the interest of consumers rather than that of producers.
[581F] Since the petitioners in the instant case, are allowed to sell freely at any rate they like, the remaining 50% of the Sugar (after excluding the 50% which they have to give for levy) as also the produce by the second and third process, the loss if any caused to the petitioners would be minimal.
[581Gl New India Sugar Works vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., ; , relied.
1.3 It is clear from the Preamble, that the primary object of the was to control production, supply, and distribution of essential commodities, and to make such commodities available at a reasonable price.
The exercise provided under the Act was intended ultimately to serve the interest of consumers.
It is fundamental in the entire scheme of the Act.
But then, the interest of the industry as a whole cannot be left out.
It is also required to be borne in mind.
The levy price of sugar should ensure reasonable return to the industry.
That is one of the guidelines provided under sub section 3C of section 3 of the Act.
But that does not mean that the interest of producers should outweigh the interest of consumers.
It would be tilting the balance too much.
[582C F] 1.4 There is no colourable exercise of power.
There was every justification for the sale by public auction.
The petitioner and some other producers delivered inferior quality of Khandsari, which was found to be unacceptable to consumers at Fair Price Shops.
The State officers accordingly reported to the Government, which issued instructions to distribute the levy sugar liberally through permits for marriages and religious functions.
The consumers, however, could not come forward.
The Government then directed the disposal of levy sugar by public auction.
It was not with a view to earn profit, although incidentally the Government made some profit.
The levy sugar was brought to public sale only to prevent deterioration when the consumers refused to accept it.
[583A C] The Panipat Co operative Sugar mills vs Union of India [197312 SCR 860 and Anakapalle Coop.
& Industrial Society Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
