% Part III of the sets out the provisions relating to the settlement of disputes regarding elections to the offices of the President and the Vice President of India.
Section 14(3) thereof requires that an ekction petition should be presented in accordance with the provisions of that Part and of the rules made by this Court under article 145 of the Constitution.
The rules so made are contained in O.XXXIX of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966.
Rule 34 thereof provides that subject to the provisions of that order or any Special order or directions of the Court, the procedure on an election petition shall follow, as nearly as may be, the procedure in proceedings before the Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction, which procedure is set out in O.XXIII.
Rule 6 of o.
XXIII states inter alia that the plaint shall be rejected where it does not disclose a cause of action.
Respondent No. 1 was declared elected as the President of India at an election held in July, 1987.
The petitioner who had contested in the said election as a candidate filed this petition questioning the validity of the election of respondent No. 1 and praying for a declaration that he was the successful candidate at that election.
Rejecting the petition, ^ HELD: In the circumstances of this case the Court has no choice except to reject the petition as required under r. 6 of O.XXIII of 526 the Supreme Court Rules, 1966 as it does not disclose any cause of A action.
[537B] (i) Section 18 of the Presidential and Vice Presidential Elections Act, 1952 is exhaustive of the grounds on which the election of the President or the Vice President can be declared void.
An election may be set aside under cl.(a) of section 18(1) if it is established that the offence of bribery or undue influence, as explained in Chapter IXA of the Indian Penal Code had been committed by the returned candidate or by any person with the consent of the returned candidate.
In order to succeed on the grounds mentioned in section 18(1)(a) it has to be established that the offence of bribery or undue influence had been committed at the election by the returned candidate himself; or by any person with his consent.
[530G H: 531A R] (ii) The manner in which the present petition has been drafted is not in accordance with the Rules.
Ordinarily the petition should state in a narrative form succinctly and clearly all the facts as may be necessary to enable the respondents and the Court to understand the case of the petitioner.
This is not the case here.
The first part of the petition contains 13 questions and the answers given by the petitioner to those questions.
A reading of all these 13 questions and answers given there to be the petitioner shows that the only ground on which the petitioner wished to call in question the election of the 1st respondent is that the issue of a whip by the Congress (I) Party to its legislators on the eve of the ekction asking them to cast their votes in favour of the 1st respondent was in the nature of a threat amounting to undue influence which is one of the two grounds set out in section 18(1)(a).
The allegations made in this part of the petition suggest that the specific case of the petitioner is that the said act of the influence had been committed by the members of the Congress(I) Party.
There is no allegation that any act amounting to undue influence was committed either by respondent No. 1 himself or by any other person with his consent.
Even in the second part of the petition which is entitled 'Notable points ' and the third part of the petition containing grounds to declare the election of the returned candidate as void there is no averment that either the returned candidate himself had committed any act of undue influence or any other person had committed any act of undue influence with his consent.
[532A E] (iii) At the hearing after getting the entire petition read out the Court asked the petitioner to point out whether there was any allegation that the lst respondent had himself committed any undue influence or 527 any other person with the consent of the 1st respondent had committed such an act or any allegation which required to be tried and the petitioner was not able to point out any part of the petition in which such an allegation had been made.
In view of this infirmity we have not found it necessary to examine whether the issuing of the whip by any political party amounts to undue influence vitiating an election even when such an act is committed by the returned candidate or with his consent by some other person.
[536G H; 537A] (iv) The petitioner did not appear to be quite serious about his case.
At one stage he contended having himself filed the petition before the Court that this Court had no competence to hear the case and at another stage he wanted 51 Judges to hear his petition when the maximum permissible strength of this Court is about one half of tha number and the existing strength of this Court is less than one third of that number.
While we expect every conscientious citizen eligible to file an election petition to question an election on the grounds prescribed by the Act, we do not wish that any petitioner should make use of this Court as a forum to file a petition without giving adequate thought to its contents and also to the provisions of law governing the case merely to seek some cheap publicity.
[537C E] Charan Lal Sahu vs Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy, l1978] 3 S.C.R. 1 and Charan Lal SaJlu & O.R.S. vs Giani Zail Singh & Anr., ; relied on.
