% In the election to the Uttar Pradesh State Legislative Assembly from constituency No. 41 held in early March, 1985, 16 candidates contested.
Respondent No. 1 was declared elected having secured 23,006 votes.
Respondent No. 2 secured 20,735 votes being the next highest.
The difference of votes secured by them was in the order of 2,271 votes.
Respondent No. 8 who was working as a teacher in a college and who was one of the candidates secured 3,606 votes which were more than the difference between the votes secured by respondent No. 1 and 2.
The appellant who was an elector at the said election filed an election petition contending that respondent No. 8 was holding an 'office of profit ' under the State Government as he was working as a teacher in a college and therefore, the acceptance of his nomination by the returning officer was illegal, that since respondent No. 8 secured 3,606 votes which were higher than the difference between the votes secured by respondent No. 1 and respondent No. 2, the election of respondent No. 1 should be considered as having been materially affected by the wrongful acceptance of the nomination paper of respondent No. 8, and the election of the respondent No. 1 was, therefore, liable to be set aside.
Respondent No.1 contested the election petition pleading that the acceptance of the nomination paper of respondent No. 8 was not illegal since he was not holding an office of profit under the State Government, and that even if the acceptance was illegal the election could not be set aside since the result of the election was not materially affected thereby.
Dismissing the petition, the High Court held that the acceptance of the nomination paper of respondent No. 8 was not illegal as he was not holding an office of profit under the State Government and that 631 even if the acceptance of the nomination paper was illegal, the appellant had not established that the result of the election of respondent No. 1 had been materially affected on the facts and in the circumstances of the case.
In the appeal to this Court on the question: whether the appellant had established that the result of the election of respondent No. 1 had been materially affected by the wrongful acceptance of the nomination paper of respondent No. 8.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The appellant has not discharged the burden which clearly lay on him of proving that the result of the election had been materially affected, even assuming that the nomination of respondent No. 8 had been improperly accepted.
[640E] Section 100 of the Representation of the People Act makes a distinction between the effect of improper rejection of any nomination, and the effect of the improper acceptance of any nomination on the election.
If a nomination of any person at an election had been improperly rejected the election of the returned candidate is liable to be set aside without any further proof because it is difficult to visualise the number of votes which the person whose nomination has been rejected would have secured at the election and there is every likelihood of the returned candidate not securing the highest number of votes.
[634E G] Clause (c) of sub section (1) states that if the High Court is of the opinion that any nomination has been improperly rejected it shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void.
[634Gl Sub clause (i) of clause (d) of sub section (1) requires a petitioner in an election petition to establish two grounds in order to get the election of the returned candidate set aside.
namely (i) that there has been improper acceptance of any nomination and (ii) that by reason of entry of the candidate whose nomination has been improperly accepted into the contest the result of the election insofar as the returned candidate is concerned has been materially affected.
[635A B] Having regard to the facts of the instant case it is not possible to hold that the appellant has established that the result of the election of the returned candidate had been materially affected because the dif 632 ference between the votes secured by respondent No. 1, the returned candidate and respondent No. 2, the candidate who secured next highest votes was 2,271 votes.
Respondent No. 8, the validity of whose nomination was questioned, had secured only about 1/7th of the number of votes polled by respondent No. 1 and there were 15 candidates (excluding respondent No. 8) contesting the election.
It is not possible to reach a finding in this case by making a judicial guess that all the 3606 voters who had voted in favour of respondent No. 8 would have cast their votes in favour of respondent No. 2 alone.
Even if about 1350 of them had cast their votes in favour of any of the other 14 candidates (including the returned candidate) respondent No. 2 could not have become the candidate who had secured the highest number of votes at the election.
[639C E] The High Court was, therefore, right in taking the view that the appellant or any other party had not placed any satisfactory evidence to reach the conclusion that all or sufficient number of wasted votes which had been cast in favour of respondent No. 8 would have gone in favour of respondent No. 2, had respondent No. 8 not been one of the candidates at the election, that in the context particularly of the poll being heavy and the contestants being large in number, 16 in all It was unreasonable to guess that if the respondent No. 8 were excluded from the arena of contest the wasted votes would have gone to the respondent No. 2 thereby enabling him to succeed, and that the burden Iying upon the petitioner remained clearly undischarged and the speculative possibility did not attain the level of proof.
[640B D] Vashist Narain Sharma vs Dev Chandra and others, ]1955] 1 S.C.R. 509; Samant N. Balakrishna etc.
vs George Fernandez and Ors.
; , and Chhedi Ram vs Jhilmit Ram and others, p ] , referred to.
