% Respondent No. 1, Shri P.K. Mukerjee, filed an application under the U.P. Act No. 3 of 1947 (Temporary Control of Rent and Eviction Act) (OLD Act), seeking permission to file a suit for eviction of his tenant, Harbans Lal Soni, the father of the appellant, D.K. Soni, on the grounds of his bona fide requirement for his personal need.
The Rent Control and Eviction officer rejected the application, holding that the respondent 's requirement was not bona fide.
A revision was filed by the respondent No. 1 before the Commissioner who allowed the same.
The U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 (new Act) came into effect on July 15, 1972.
On August 2, 1972, the State Government rejected the representation of the tenant (father of the appellant) filed under section 7 of the old Act against the order of the Commissioner aforementioned.
The tenant then moved a writ petition in the High Court.
A Single Judge of the High Court allowed the petition and set aside the abovesaid orders of the Commissioner and the State Government.
Upon an appeal being filed by the respondent (No. 1) against the order of the Single Judge, a Division Bench of the High Court allowed the same, setting aside the order of the Single Judge and upholding the above said orders of the commissioner and the State Government, allowing the eviction of the tenant.
In September, 1978, the respondent No. 1 moved an application under section 21, read with section 43(2)(rr) of the new Act.
Thereafter, the respondent executed an agreement as vendor to sell the permises in dispute in favour of the vendee, the wife of the appellant, Smt.
Madhu Soni daughter in law of the tenant, Harbans Lal.
The agreement was dated November 7, 1978, and it mentioned therein that the landlord, respondent No. 1 had filed an application against the tenant above 617 named.
The father in law of the vendee for permission to file a suit for eviction of the tenant from the premises in dispute on account of the respondent 's personal need, and that the permission had been granted.
The agreement recited that a vacant portion of the land of the disputed premises, would be in the exclusive possession of the vendor and the rest of the property the disputed premises would be sold to the vendee, Smt.
Madhu Soni.
The agreement stipulated that the vendee or the other members of the family had no right over the portion of the land to be kept with the vendor, and that the appellant had given up his tenancy rights in respect of the same, and also that premises would be built on the said vacant land with the money to be obtained by selling the disputed house to Smt.
Madhu Soni.
The price of the house was settled at Rs.1,00,000 out of which a sum of Rs.5000 was paid as earnest money, and it was stipulated that the rest of the amount would be paid at the time of registration.
It was agreed that the parties would move the authorities for permission to transfer as early as possible and the saledeed would be executed within one month of the grant of permission and notice to the vendee.
It was stated that if the vendee failed to get the sale deed executed within the time stipulated, the earnest money of Rs.5000 would be forfeited and the property would stand released in favour of the vendor.
It was also stipulated that the need of the vendor for the premises subsisted and the agreement had been entered into to enable the vendor to get money out of the sale to construct a house for himself on the vacant piece of land.
On December 12, 1978, the father of the appellant, who was the tenant, died, leaving behind a widow, two sons, including the appellant, and a daughter.
On December 22, 1978, the appellant informed the Prescribed Authority before whom the application under section 21(1)(a) of the New Act, read with section 43(2)(rr), was pending, about the death of the tenant, Shri Harbans Lal Soni.
On March 23, 1979, the respondent No. 1 filed an application (in Case No. 53 of 1978) for substitution of the legal heirs of the deceased tenant, along with an application under section 5 of the Limitation Act.
The Prescribed Authority rejected the application for substitution on grounds of delay.
On December 11, 1979, the respondent No. 1 moved a second application under section 21(1)(a), read with section 43(2)(rr) of the new Act (on the ground as in his earlier application), which was registered as Case No. 68 of 1979.
On March 12, 1981, the respondent No. 1 executed two separate agreements for sale of the property in dispute, in favour of R.P. Kanodia and P.K. Kanodia, respectively.
618 The Prescribed Authority decided the Case No. 68 of 1979 abovementioned on July 7, 1981, directing the tenant to be evicted from the premises in dispute.
The Additional District Judge dismissed the appeal against the order of eviction passed by the Prescribed Authority.
On March 11, 1983, the appellant 's wife, Smt.
Madhu Soni filed a suit for injunction, restraining the respondent No. 1 from dispossessing her from the premises in dispute on the strength of the registered agreement, asserting that she resided in the premises in part performance of the agreement under section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act.
The trial Court dismissed the suit.
The High Court was then moved for relief by a writ petition against the orders of the Prescribed Authority for eviction and the order of the Additional District Judge.
The writ petition was dismissed, followed by the dismissal of a Review Petition too.
Aggrieved thereby the appellant has appealed to this Court by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The questions involved in the appeal are: Firstly, in view of the provisions of section 43(2)(rr), was the High Court right in its decision, in the facts and circumstances of the case, specially the factum of the death of the (original) tenant being alleged, and in view of the fact that the execution of the order for eviction had become final before the new Act came into operation? Secondly, how far do the subsequent events, namely, the agreements by the respondent No. 1 with the wife of one of the sons of the tenant and with the Kanodias to sell the property in dispute, demolish or destroy the case of a bona fide need of the landlord? [622G H; 623A] In substance, the need was there of the landlord for his occupation of his premises as he wanted to reside in his house after his retirement from Government service, and for this purpose he had sought eviction and obtained the order of eviction prior to the coming into operation of the new Act.
The object of the landlord was not defeated by the provisions of the New Act.
[626G H] Considering the subsequent events, namely, the refusal of permission by the Urban Ceiling Authorities, the escalation of building cost (upto 1987), failure on the part of the vendee to register and execute the document, it is not possible to hold that the subsequent events have so materially altered the position as to defeat the original order for possession passed in favour of the landlord.
The subsequent events do not in 619 any way affect the existence of the need of the landlord for possession of premises in question.
[627C E] There was no failure on the part of the landlord to take steps for the substitution.
Nothing was proved before the Court that the agreements with R.P. Kanodia and P.K. Kanodia were valid today or given effect to in view of the provision of the Land ceiling Act.
It was not proved to the satisfaction of the authorities below that any agreement to sell the premises to Kanodias had been given effect to and acted upon and in that view of the matter, the need of the landlord indubitably succeeds, and any allegations made do not merit any revision of the order which had become final.
Finality of the judicial decisions is one of the essential ingredients upon which the administration of justice must rest.
In that view of the matter, even if the contentions advanced on behalf of the respondents are taken into consideration and a new look is taken because of the subsequent events, which cannot be done in view of the specific provisions in clause (rr) of section 43(2) of the new Act, the appellant has no case.
The High Court was right in not interfering with the order of the Prescribed Authority.
Finality of the decisions of the authorities under the Act has to be given due reverence and place in the judicial administration.
[629A C] The appeal fails.
As the appellant had been staying in the premises for quite some time, time till April 30, 1988 granted to him to deliver vacant possession of the house to the landlord, subject to his filing usual undertaking within four weeks.
[629E F] Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu vs The motor and general Traders; , ; Pattersion vs State of Alabama, ; at 607; Ramji Dayawala and Sons(P) Ltd. vs Invest Import; , ; Hasmat Rai and Anr.
vs Raghunath Prasad; , ; Syed Asadullah Kazmi vs The Addl.
District Judge, Allahabad and Ors.
, ; ; Sher Singh and Ors.
vs The State of Punjab, ; ; Bansilal Sahu vs The Prescribed Authority and Anr, [1980] All L.J. 331; Smt.
Sarju Devi vs Prescribed Authority, Kanpur, [1977] All L.J. 251 and Tara Chand Khandelwal vs Prescribed Authority, Agra, [1976] All L.J. 708, referred to.
