% Under an agreement with the respondent landlord, the appellant had been appointed to do worshipping in a temple as pujari to look after the management of two dharamshalas and to cultivate three agricultural, lands, and for all these services, he had been allowed to take crop share the whole crop from the lands cultivated by him, instead of his being paid any wages in cash.
The respondent filed a suit for possession of the agricultural lands.
The appellant 's defence was that he was a deemed tenant as understood under section 6 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region) Act, 1958, and was in lawful cultivation of the lands.
The Naib Tahsildar, who decided the suit, passed an order, holding the appellant to be a tenant.
The Sub Divisional officer, in appeal by the respondent, set aside the order of the Naib Tahsildar and remanded the matter.
Against the order of the Sub Divisional officer, the appellant appealed in revision to the Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal.
The Revenue Tribunal set aside the order of the Sub Divisional officer and restored that of the Naib Tahsildar.
The respondent moved the High Court.
The High Court decided that the appellant was not entitled to claim the rights of a deemed tenant, and quashed the orders of the authorities below holding the contrary view.
The appellant appealed to this Court by Special Leave against the order of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The appellant was lawfully cultivating the lands, having been permitted to do so by the landlord.
He was not a member of the landlord 's family, nor was he his hired labourer.
The landlord did not belong to any of the classes specified in Sub Section (2) of section 41.
The appellant was rendering service as pujari and the service of looking after the dharamshalas, and for these services, he had been given the right to cultivate the lands and appropriate the crop share the entire 673 crop instead of being paid any wages in cash.
The appellant was not hit by the provisions of clause (b) of Sub section (1) of section 6 of the Act, and he must be held to be a deemed tenant under the provisions of section 6.
[676G H;677B C] Dahya Lal and others vs Rasul Mohammad Abdul Rahim, ; at 6, 7, referred to.
