% International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966: Article 7 Casual labour Justifiable classification for payment of wages Necessity of Non regularisation of service Not wise policy Necessity for absorption as permanent workers.
The petitioners who were working as 'Daily Rated Casual Labour ' in the Posts and Telegraphs Department, were categorised as unskilled, semi skilled and skilled workers.
By the orders of the D.G., Post and Telegraphs Department No. 28 II/77 SR/STM dated 15.5.80 and 10 4/83 R dated 26.7.84 they were further classified into (i) those who had not completed 720 days of service; (ii) those who had comp leted 720 days and not completed 1200 days of service, and (iii) those who had completed more than 1200 days of service, and were granted different rates of wages as laid down therein.
Aggrieved by these orders, the petitioners submitted a statement of demands through their federation to the authorities, claiming regularisation, payment of interim relief and bonus, supply of dresses, leave and medical facilities etc.
Not satisfied with the reply received by them, the petitioners filed writ petitions, for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus to the Union of India and to direct it to pay them same salary, allowances, and other benefits as were being paid to regular and permanent employees of the Union of India in corresponding cadres and to regularise the 599 service of the casual labour who had been in continuous service for more than 6 months.
Their principal complaint was that even though many of them had been working for the last ten years as casual labourers, the wages paid to them were very low and far less than the salary and allowances paid to regular employees of the Posts and Telegraphs Department belonging to the equivalent categories and, secondly that no scheme had been prepared by the Union of India to absorb them regularly in its service and they had been denied the benefits of increments, pension, leave facilities etc.
which were enjoyed by those who had been recruited regularly.
The petitioners were opposed by the respondents contending that since the petitioners belonged to the category of casual labour and were not being regularly employed, they were not entitled to the same privileges which regular employees were enjoying.
Disposing of the writ petitions, ^ HELD: 1.1 The classification of employees in the present case into casual employees and regularly recruited employees for the purpose of paying less than the minimum pay payable to employees in the corresponding regular cadres particularly in the lowest rungs of the department, where the pay scales are the lowest is not tenable.
The further classification of casual labourers into three categories, namely, (i) those who have not completed 720 days of service; (ii) those who have completed 720 days of service and not completed 1200 days of service, and (iii) those who have completed more than 1200 days of service for the purpose of payment of different rates of wages is equally untenable.
There is clearly no justification for doing so.
Such a classification is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It is also opposed to the spirit of Article 7 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966 which exhorts all States, parties to the Covenant to ensure fair wages and equal wages for equal work.
[608E H] 1.2 The State cannot deny at least the minimum pay in the pay scales of regularly employed workmen even though the Government may not be compelled to extend all benefits enjoyed by regularly recruited employees.
Such denial amounts to exploitation of labour.
[608Dl 1.3 The Government should be a model employer.
It cannot take advantage of its dominant position, and compel any worker to work 600 even as a casual labourer on starving wages.
It may be that the casual labourer has agreed to work on such low wages.
That he has done, because he has no other choice.
It is poverty that has driven him to that state.
[608E Fl 1.4 It may be that the petitioners have not been regularly recruited, but many of them have been working continuously for more than a year in the Department, and some of them have been engaged as casual labourers for nearly ten years.
They are rendering the same kind of service which is being rendered by the regular employees doing the same type of work.
[608A B] 1.5 Even though the Directive Principle contained in Article 38(2) may not be enforceable as such by virtue of Article 37 of the Constitution of India, it may be relied upon to show that they have been subjected to hostile discrimination.
[608C ] Dhirendra Chamoli and Another vs State of U.P., [1986] 1 SCC V 637, relied on.
2.1 Non regularisation of temporary employees or casual labour for a long period is not a wise policy.
610E F] 2.2 India is a socialist republic.
It implies the existence of cer tain important obligations which the State has to discharge.
Many rights like right to work, equal pay for equal work, security of work, etc.
have to be ensured by appropriate legislation and executive measured.
[609D E] 2.3 If a person does not have the feeling that he belongs to an organisation engaged in production, he will not put forward his best effort to produce more.
That sense of belonging arises only when he feels that he will not be turned out of employment the next day at the whim of management.
Security of work should as far as possible be assured to the employees so that they may contribute to the maximisation of production.
Managements and the Governmental agencies in particular should not allow workers to remain as casual labourers or temporary employees for an unreasonably long period of time.
[609G H; 610A] 2.4 The employees belonging to skilled, semi skilled and unskilled classes can be shifted from one department to another even if there is no work to be done in a given place.
Administrators should realise even as a casual labourer on starving wages.
It may be that the casual labourer has agreed to work on such low wages.
That he has done, because he has no other choice.
It is poverty that has driven him to that state.
[608E F] 601 that if any worker remains idle on any day, the country loses the wealth that he would have produced during that day.
Our wage structure is such that a worker is always paid less than what he produces.
[610B C] 3.
The Union of India and the other respondents are directed to pay wages to the workmen who are employed as casual labourers at the rate equivalent to the minimum pay in the pay scales of the regularly employed workers in the corresponding cadres but without any increments with effect from 5th of February, 1986 and corresponding Dearness Allowance and Addl.
Dearness Allowances, if any, payable thereon.
Other benefits which are now being enjoyed by the casual labourers shall continue to be extended to them.
The arrears of wages payable shall be paid within four months.
[609B C; 610G] The respondents are directed to prepare a scheme for absorbing as far as possible the casual labourers who have been continuously working for more than one year in the Posts and Telegraphs Departments 610 Fl
