% The appellants, registered firms under the Income Tax Act, 1961, filed delayed returns.
The Income Tax officer assessed the appellants under section 143(3) of the Act and determined the total incomes of the appellants and the amounts of the tax payable by them.
The Income Tax officer also determined and added, under sub section (4) of section 139 of the Act, the amounts of interest on the amounts of tax payable by the appellants.
The appellants challenged the charging of interest in the High Court by writ petitions.
The High Court dismissed all but some writ petitions which were allowed in part to the extent that the Income tax officer was directed to take into account the advance tax paid by the assessees while calculating the interest.
The appellants have filed Civil Appeals Nos.
1032 1036 of 1973, 1927 1933 of 1978 and 1288 and 1289 of 1980 against the decision of the High Court.
Allowing Civil Appeal No. 1035 of 1973 and dismissing all the other appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: Sub section (4) of section 139 of the Income Tax Act is a substantive provision, which does not provide for the making of an application to the Income Tax officer for extention of the date for furnishing return.
The sub section provides that even though a person does not furnish the return within the time allowed under sub section (1) or (2) of section 139, yet he may furnish the same before the end of four assessment years concerned.
The substantive provisions of subsections (1) and (2) specify the time within which the return has to be filed.
The provisos to the sub sections confer power on the Income tax officer to extend the date for filing the return on an application.
The expression "time allowed" in sub section (4) is not confined only to the extension of time granted by the Income tax officer but also to the time originally fixed for 690 filing the returns under sub section(1) and (2).
[694G H;695A D] The Income Tax officer is entitled to charge interest in accordance with the provisions of clause (iii) of the proviso to sub section (1) of section 139 in a case where time has been extended by the Income Tax officer to file returns on application made by the assessee and the return is not filed within the time allowed, and in a case where no such application has been made by the assessee, and the return is filed beyond the time allowed but before the end of the four assessment years concerned.
[695D F] Secondly, as decided by this Court in Central Provinces Manganese Ore Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; , and Commissioner of Income Tax A.P. vs Chandra Sekhar, ; , the interest is levied by way of compensation, and not by way of penalty as contended by the appellants.
[696A] The contention of the appellants that the provisions of Sub Section (4) of section 139, read with clause (iii) (a) of the proviso to Sub Section (1) of section 139 is discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution because Sub Section (4) has placed the registered firms in a separate category inasmuch as they have to pay interest calculated on the amount of tax payable by them as unregistered firms, and a registered firm is treated as an unregistered firm, for purposes of qualification of interest, is not comprehensible, Section 139 (4) read with clause (iii)(a) of the proviso to section 139(1), as it stood prior to April 1, 1971, has placed the registered firms and the unregistered firms on the same footing and is not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and is quite legal and valid.
[697H; 698A D] Where advance tax duly covers the entire amount of the tax assessed, there is no question of charging a registered firm with interest if the return is filed beyond the time allowed, regard being given to the fact that payment of interest is only compensatory in nature.
As the entire amount of the tax is paid by way of advance tax, the question of payment of any compensation does not arise, and accordingly, in the facts and circumstances of the case in the C.A. No. 1035 of 1973, the Income Tax of officer was not justifed in charging interest, and the assessee in that case is entitled to refund of the amount paid by way of interest.
[699B C, E] Commissioner of Income Tax, A .
P. vs M. Chandra Sekhar, ; , Central Provinces Manganese ore Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, [1986] 160 I.T.R. 961; Jain Brothers 691 and others vs Union of India and others, ; M. Nagappa vs Income Tax officer, Central Circle I, Bangalore, ; Mahendra Kumar Ishwarlal and Co. v, Union of India, and ; Chhotalal & Co. vs Income Tax officer; ; Jiwanmal Hospital vs Income Tax officer, ; Hindustan Steel Forges vs Commissioner of Income Tax, and Mohanlal Soni vs Union of India, , referred to.
