% The appellant 's Husband purchased the lands in dispute under exhibit P2 wherein it was recited that the property was not fetching any income, that irrigation from the tank had failed, and that as the property was a pit which required Rs.2,000 for filling it was sold for meeting certain family expenses.
The appellant, after the death of her husband, instituted a suit in High Court for recovery of the land purchased by her husband and for mesne profits and other connected reliefs, alleging that the property was in possession and enjoyment of her husband during his life time, and subsequently in her possession and enjoyment, and that the neighbouring land owner, i.e. respondent No. 1 had trespassed and encroached upon the suit property taking advantage of her helpless condition as a widow.
The suit was resisted by the respondents contending that the appellant had no title to the suit property and the suit was barred by time.
The respondents denied trespass or encroachment and set up title in themselves, contending that the appellant was not in possession at any time within 12 years next before the suit.
A Single Judge of the High Court, found that the appellant 's husband, during his life time, and the appellant after her husband 's death had been in possession and enjoyment of the suit property and held the title in her favour.
He also held that the respondent trespassed the suit property after measurement and demarcation of the land by the Tahsildar in Jan/Feb, 1984, and, therefore, the appellant was in possession within 12 years prior to the date of filing the suit.
The suit was accordingly decreed.
Aggrieved by the judgment, the respondents filed an appeal before the Division Bench which, while affirming the appellant 's title to 723 the property, held that the appellant had satisfactorily established title to the suit property.
On the question of possession, however, it observed that the appellant had not proved her possession of the suit property at any time within 12 years prior to the suit and the evidence adduced by her was vague and unacceptable.
At the same time, it held that the respondents had not perfected title by adverse possession.
In the appeal by special leave, it was contended that the appellate Court had no jurisdiction to reverse the finding of fact properly recorded by the trial Judge and that the suit property was a low lying area with deep pit where water stagnated during rainy reason and was seasonably submerged, making it incapable of use and enjoyment and the legal presumption was that possession continued with the title holder.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Possession continues with the title holder unless and until the defendant acquires title by adverse possession.
There would be no continuance of adverse possession when the land remains submerged and when it is put out of use and enjoyment.
In such a case the party having title could claim constructive possession provided the title had not been extinguished by adverse possession before the last submergence.
There is no difference in principle between seasonal submersion and one which continues for a length of time.
[730D E] Basanta Kumar Roy vs Secretary of State ILR Vol.
44 (1917) Calcutta series 858 at 871 2 and Sarkar on Evidence Vol. 2, 13th Edn.
p. 110 referred to.
In the instant case, the appellant has proved title to the property.
The respondents have not acquired title by adverse possession.
The property as described in the sale deed exhibit P 2 was a vacant land fetching no income.
It was called "Pallam" or pond that was seasonally submerged, but it makes little difference in the position of law.
As a general rule, possession of part is in law possession of the whole, if the whole is otherwise vacant.
[731D E] 2.
The appellate court does not reverse a finding of fact rested on proper appreciation of the oral evidence.
This is a rule of practice which has almost the force of law.
[728B C] Sarju Pershad vs Raja Jawaleshwari Pratap Narain Singh 724 ]1950] Vol.
I SCR 781 relied on.
In the instant case, the trial judge on a consideration of every material on record reached the conclusion that the appellant was in possession of the property and it was only in 1954 that she was dispossessed.
This conclusion was also based on the credibility of the witnesses examined by the parties.
The Division Bench reversed that finding without due regard to the probability of the case and the considerations which weighed with the trial judge.
[728G H] The Division Bench appears to have missed important features which have not been properly explained by the respondents, namely, about the western boundary of the property purchased by the respondents and the discrepancy in the area of the property purchased by first respondent which has been shown differently in Exs.
P6, P7 and P8, and the contradictory stand of DW 3, Secretary of the first respondent trust, who was the star witness in support of the respondents ' case, regarding the first respondent 's title and the appellant s possession of the disputed property.
While DW 3 denied in his written statement the appellant 's allegation that her land was encroached by the respondents in the early part of January February 1954, he stated before the Court that he did not investigate the title and could not take personal responsibility for the said statement.
This was the final blow to the respondents ' case, which the Division Bench has failed to appreciate.
[729F H; 730A]
