% Sub section (2) of section 9 of the makes the assessment procedure prescribed under the general sales tax law of the appropriate State applicable to the assessment to be made under the Central Act.
Section 13 of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957 requires the dealer to submit returns in such manner, within such period and to such authority as may be prescribed.
Sub section (1) of section 14 permits the assessing authority to assess the amount of tax due on the returns submitted under section 13 only within a period of four years from the expiry of the year to which the assessment relates.
Sub section (3) permits the assessing authority to make best judgment assessment where a dealer (i) fails to submit return before the date prescribed; (ii) produces the accounts registers and other documents after inspection and (iii) submits a return subsequent to the date of inspection, within a period of six years from the expiry of the year to which the assessment relates.
In the main appeal before this Court the assessee respondent filed its return relating to the quarter ending 31st March, 1969 on 7th August, 1969 under the .
The last date prescribed by law was 24th May, 1969.
The Commercial Tax officer passed the assessment order on 3rd August, 1973, beyond four years from 31st March, 1969, the last day of the assessment year 1968 69.
The assessee 's appeals against that order were dismissed by the Assistant Commissioner and the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal.
The High Court in revision, however, held that the assessment made after four years from the last day of the assessment year was not a valid assessment.
737 In the connected appeal the respondent who was the assessee filed the annual return in respect of the assessment year 1968 69 under the A provisions of the Central Act on 19th August, 1969 after the expiry of the prescribed date.
The order of assessment was passed on 2nd August, 1973 beyond four years from the last day of the assessment year 196869.
An appeal against that order was dismissed by the Assistant Commissioner.
The Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, however, allowed the appeal holding that the assessment had been passed beyond four years from the last day of the assessment year.
The revision petition preferred by the State was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
In the appeals by special leave filed by the State, it was contended for the respondent that since the returns in the cases had been accepted, even though they had filed been beyond the prescribed date, the assessments made thereon could not be considered as best judgment assessments and, therefore, sub section (3) of section 14 of the Act under which it is permissible to make best judgment assessments would be inapplicable.
Allowing the appeals.
D ^ HELD: 1.1 on a true construction of sub section
(1) and sub section (3) of section 14 of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957 it is apparent that where a return is not filed by a dealer before the date prescribed in that behalf under the Act the assessing authority has jurisdiction to complete the assessment within a period of six years from the expiry of the year to which the assessment relates.
[744C] 1.2 The two types of cases which fall under sub section
(1) and sub section
(3) of section 14 of the Act respectively are mutually exclusive.
The return on the basis of which an assessment is to be made under section 14(1) is a return filed within the prescribed period and in such a case the assessment has to be completed within a period of four years from the expiry of the period to which the assessment relates.
The Act confers a distinct advantage on such a dealer who is prompt in filing his return inasmuch as he acquires immunity against assessment on the expiry of the said period of four years.
All cases where the return is submitted beyond the prescribed date fall under sub section
(3) of section 14 of the Act.
Assessment in such cases may be completed within six years from the expiry of the year to which the assessment relates.
When once it is established in a case that a return has not been filed within the prescribed period such case falls outside section 14(1) of the Act and therefore the period of four years prescribed therein becomes automatically inapplicable.
It clearly falls under cl.
(i) of sub section
(3) of section 14 of the Act and assessment can be H 738 made in such a case within the expiry of the period of six years.
In the instant cases the returns were not filed within the prescribed dates.
The assessments have, therefore, been rightly made within six years from the expiry of the year to which the assessments relate.
[742G H; 743A B; 744C] 2.
Whether the assessment made is the best judgment or not has no bearing at all on the period within which an assessment can be made under the Act.
It depends upon the other conditions mentioned in sub section
(1) and (3) of section 14.
Best judgment assessment can be made even in a case falling under sub section
(1), as is evident from the latter part of that sub section which reads: "but if the return appears to him to be incorrect or incomplete he shall after giving the dealer a reasonable opportunity of proving the correctness and completeness of the return submitted by him and making such inquiry as he deems necessary, to assess to the best of his judgment, the amount of tax due from the dealer." Yet such best judgment assessment has to be completed within a period of four years from the expiry of the year to which the assessment relates.
Therefore, in the instant case merely because the assessments are not best judgment assessments, it cannot be said that sub section
(3) of section 14 is inapplicable.
Neither the High Court nor the Tribunal gave adequate attention to the words 'before the date prescribed in that behalf ' in cl.
(i) of sub section
(3) of section 14.
They laid emphasis only on the words 'fails to submit return ' in the said sub clause to arrive at a wrong conclusion.
[743C, H; 744A B] State of Andhra Pradesh vs Pyarelal Malhotra, (13 S.T.C. 946), and State of Madras vs S.G. Jayaraj Nadar & Sons, 28 S.T.C. 700, distinguished.
