% Sub section (1) of section 3 of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947 barred suits without the permission of the District Magistrate against tenants for eviction except on the grounds mentioned therein.
Sub section (2) provided for revision to the Commissioner, and sub section (4) made the order of the Commissioner final.
Section 7 F empowered the State Government to interfere with such orders.
That Act was repealed by the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972.
Section 43(2)(rr) of the new Act, inserted therein by U.P. Act 37 of 1972, provided that where any permission obtained under section 3 of the old Act had become final either before the commencement of the Act or in accordance with the provisions of the sub section after the commencement of the Act, the landlord may apply to the Prescribed Authority for tenant 's eviction.
This section was against amended in 1976 by insertion of the words "whether or not a suit for the eviction of the tenant has been instituted", and giving it retrospective operation.
The order of the Prescribed Authority in such cases was made final.
The landlord 's application under section 3 of the 1947 Act for eviction 'of the tenants appellants was granted by the Commissioner in April, 197I.
The revision preferred by them was rejected by the State Government in February, 1972 and the permission became final.
In pursuance 841 Of the said permission the landlord filed a suit for eviction of the appellants.
Thereafter in 1973 he filed an application for withdrawal of the said suit on the ground that as the 1972 Act had been amended, he would file an application for enforcement of the permission.
The Court of Small Causes found that as the cause of action on which the suit had been filed was rendered infructuous, the suit was liable to be dismissed.
The application filed by the landlord under section 43(2)(rr) of the new Act for eviction of the appellants, was rejected by the Prescribed Authority on the ground that since permission obtained under section 3 of the old Act had been exhausted, the application was not maintainable.
An appeal against that order was allowed by the District Judge.
In the writ petition filed by the appellants tenants under article 226 of the Constitution it was contended that the permission obtained by the landlord having been utilised by filing the suit, another proceeding on the basis of the said permission could not be initiated, and that no appeal lay from the decision of the Prescribed Authority to the District Judge.
The High Court held that the landlord had right to file the second application.
It took the view that dismissal of the first action taken by the landlord after obtaining permission under the old Act did not preclude him from taking the second action under section 43(2)(rr) of the Act.
It further held that since the first suit was not decided on merits subsequent action was not precluded.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD: 1.
Section 43(2)(rr) of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 as it stood in 1973, permitted a landlord to file an application for the enforcement of the permission obtained by him under section 3 of the 1947 Act.
After the aforesaid provision was amended in 1976, the landlord was not required to file a suit to avail of the permission.
The amendment was retrospective in operation.
[844G H] 2.
The Prescribed Authority was in error in taking the view that as the previous suit had been filed by the landlord on the basis of permission and the same had been dismissed, the application under section 43(2)(rr) of the 1972 Act was not maintainable.
Such a view would frustrate the very purpose of the express provision of the section which conferred a right on a landlord who had obtained permission under the old Act and has filed an application under the new provision, to get the 842 tenant evicted.
More so, when the permission granted had not been exhausted because the suit was dismissed on a technical plea and not on the merit of the contentions.
[846C D; 845C] Pahlad Das vs Ganga Saran and Another, AIR 1958 Allahabad 774, approved.
3.1 Finality of order in judicial proceeding is one of the essential principles which the scheme of the administration of justice must strive for.
[846D] D.K. Soni vs P.K. Mukherjee & Ors.
C.A. No. 6626 of 1983 decided on October 27, 1987.
referred to. 3.2 In the instant case, through no appeal lay before the District Judge, the High Court came to the conclusion that the order of the Prescribed Authority was invalid and improper.
On that ground it declined to interfere with the order of the District Judge in exercise of its jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution.
Since justice has been done by setting aside the improper order of the Prescribed Authority, no exception can be taken to the order of the High Court.
There is, therefore, no scope for interference under article 136 of the Constitution.
[847A B] 1 Shri Bhagwan and Anr.
vs Ram Chand and Anr., ; , inapplicable.
