% The detenu, a clearing and forwarding agent aged around 26 or 27 years, was detained under section 3(1)(i) of the COFEPOSA Act.
On the day the representation was heard by the Advisory Board the detaining authority was being assisted by a Deputy Collector and a Superintendent of Central Excise.
A specific request of the detenu to permit a retired Assistant Collector of Central Excise to assist him as a friend was turned down on the ground that he was not a friend of the detenu, though the person was inclined to assist the detenu because of his professional experience.
The detention order was confirmed on the recommendation of the Advisory Board.
In the writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the order of detention it was contended for the detenu that he had sought the assistance of the retired officer because the case before the Board involved certain facets which required acquaintance with the legal provisions and the procedure and practice adopted by the Customs authorities, with which he was not well versed.
The writ petition having been dismissed, the father of the detenu filed special leave to appeal to this Court.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.1 The detenu was entitled to the assistance of a friend.
The refusal of the Advisory Board to permit him to be assisted by the retired officer was bad and his continued detention became vitiated.
[793E F] 1.2 The detenu was not very much acquainted with the legal provisions and the procedure and practice adopted by the customs authorities.
If the retired officer had been permitted to assist him, 788 his case would have been better placed before the Advisory Board.
A Moreover, when the detaining authority had the assistance of the Deputy Collector and a Superintendent of Central Excise, who play the role of legal advisers, the Board had no justification to refuse the assistance sought for by the detenu.
There was, therefore, denial of a fair hearing before the Advisory Board.
[792G H] Nand Lal Bajaj vs State of Punjab, ; ; Smt.
Kavita vs State of Maharashtra, [ ; and A.K. Roy etc.
vs Union of India & Anr.
, ; , applied.
2.1 The term 'friend ' used in the judgments of this Court was more in the sense of 'an ally in a fight or cause, or a supporter ', than meaning 'a person known well to another and regarded with liking, affection and loyalty '.
A person not being a friend in the normal sense could be picked up by a detenu for rendering assistance before the Advisory Board within the frame of the law as settled by this Court.1793B C] 2.2 The advisory Board has, of course, to be careful in permitting assistance of a friend in order to ensure due observance of the policy of law that a detenu is not entitled to representation through a lawyer.
What cannot be permitted directly should not be allowed to be done in an indirect way.
[793C D] 3.
Matters relating to preventive detention are strict proceedings and warrant full compliance with the requirements of law.
It is not for this Court to examine and assess what prejudice has been caused to the detenu on account of denial of assistance.[1793D E] 4.
The order of detention is quashed.
The detenu be set at liberty forthwith.
