% These appeals and writ petitions raised common questions of law relating to the determination of seniority of Munsif appointed in the Uttar Pradesh Nyayik Seva as a result of competitive Examinations of 1970, 1972 and 1973 held under the Uttar Pradesh Civil Service (Judicial Branch) Rules, 1951 (the Rules).
Public Service Commission issued a notification dated September 3, 1970, for recruitment to 85 posts of Munsifs.
In the examination held for the purpose, 294 out of 918 candidates qualified in the written test and were called for viva voce test, and the Commission submitted to the State Government a list of 46 approved candidates list of 1970 examination for appointment to the service.
The Government requested the Commission to recommend some more candidates as there was a shortage of Munsifs, while suggesting that the minimum of 40 per cent marks in the aggregate be reduced to 35 per cent.
The Commission forwarded another list of 33 candidates the IInd list, comprising the candidates who had secured 35 per cent marks in the aggregate and 35 percent, in the Viva Voce.
All the 79 candidates of the two lists above said were appointed to service between May, 1972, and June, 1973, and in July, 1973, a notification was issued, determining inter seniority of the 79 persons appointed on the basis of the 1970 examination in accordance with their position in the lists prepared by the Commission under rule 19 of the Rules.
Meanwhile, the Public Service Commission held another competitive examination the 1972 examination for appointments to 150 posts of Munsifs, and forwarded a list of 150 successful candidates to the Government for appointment under Rule 19 above mentioned, and they were so appointed between 1975 and 1977.
The State Government, in view of the shortage of the Munsifs 795 as also the amendment of rule 19 in pursuance whereof it was no longer necessary for a candidate to qualify independently in the viva voce, requested the Commission to reconsider the result of the examination of 1967, 1968, 1969 and 1970 and approve all those candidates for appointment who might have obtained 40 per cent or more marks in the aggregate even if they might have failed to secure the minimum marks in the viva voce tests.
The Commission refused to consider this proposal as the minimum marks prescribed by it under the then existing proviso to Rule 19 could not be ignored.
The Government thereupon constituted a high level committee comprising the Chief Minister, the Chief Justice of the High Court and the Chairman of the Public Service Commission to consider this question, and the Committee decided that the Commission be requested to recommend candidates of the 1967, 1968, 1969 and 1970 examinations as above mentioned.
The Government wrote to the commission again for the purpose, conveying to it the decision of the High level committee above said, and asking it to forward the applications and the marks of the unsuccessful candidates of the Examinations above mentioned.
The Commission could forward a list of 37 such candidates of the 1970 Examination only the IIIrd list to the Government.
The IIlrd list contained the names of Refiquddin and 36 others, the "unplaced candidates" of the 1970 Examinations, unsuccessful due to failure in the viva voce.
Thereupon, the Government issued a notification, appointing 21 of the 37 candidates above mentioned as Munsifs, the remaining 16 having already again appeared in the 1972 Examination and selected and appointed to the service.
Upon a further request by the Government for 16 more candidates, the Commission forwarded another list of 16 candidates who had appeared in the l 972 Examination.
In March, 1977, the State Government published a seniority list of the successful candidates of the 1970 examination, whereupon, the "unplaced candidates" of the IIIrd list of the 1970 Examination submitted a representation for determination of their seniority under Rule 22 of the Rules on the footing that they were recruited in pursuance of the 1970 Examination, and, therefore, they were entitled to seniority as candidates of the examination held in 1970 irrespective of their appointment being made in 1975, thereby claiming seniority over those who had been recruited in pursuance of the 1972 Examination and those who had been recruited earlier to them in pursuance of the 1970 Examination and the Ist and IInd lists of the 1970 Examination.
The representation was rejected by the High Court (administratively) and the Government.
Then, Rafiquddin and 16 other "unplaced candidates" filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the writ peti 796 tion on the footing that the "unplaced candidates" were appointed on the basis of the result of the 1970 Examination, quashed the seniority list and issued directions for the preparation of the seniority list of the candidates of the 1970 Examination afresh in accordance with rule 22, read with rule 19 of the rules and for confirmation and promotion of the petitioners in accordance with the seniority list so drawn up.
The State of Uttar Pradesh appealed to this Court against the decision of the High Court.
Appellants Sushil Kumar Srivastava and others also preferred an appeal to this Court against the above said decision of the High Court.
D.P. Shukla and three other unsuccessful candidates of the 1970 Examination preferred an appeal to this Court against the judgment of the High Court dismissing the writ petition filed by them, raising the grievance that they were discriminated as they had not been appointed, and instead, 37 candidates "belonging to the lIlrd list" had been appointed although they had obtained lower marks.
Chandra Prakash Agrawal, an unsuccessful candidate at the 1970 Examination, Bled a writ petition in this Court, challenging the appointments of those who had secured less than 40 per cent marks in the aggregate.
Sushil Chand Srivastava, a member of the service appointed in pursuance of the 1972 Examination filed a writ petition in this Court, challenging the validity of the appointments of the "unplaced candidates" of the 1970 Examination belonging to the IIIrd list which included Kafiquddin and others, on the ground that their appointment was illegal and, therefore, they could not be treated as senior to him.
R.P. Lavaniya, a member of the service recruited in pursuance of the 1973 Examination filed a writ petition in this Court, claiming seniority over respondents 3 to 15 in the writ petition, recruited in pursuance of the 1972 Examination and appointed in service after the petitioners appointment.
P.N. Parasher and 11 others, recruited in pursuance of the 1972 Examination, filed a writ petition in the High Court, challenging the seniority list prepared in pursuance of the judgment of the High Court in the writ petition filed by Rafiquddin and others, afore mentioned on the ground that the "unplaced candidates" of the 1970 Examination were not entitled to seniority over the candidates of the 1972 Examina 797 tion, as they had been appointed to service earlier in time, that writ petition was transferred to this Court as the Transferred case.
Allowing the appeal filed by the State of U.P. and the appeal preferred by Sushil Kumar Srivastava and others and allowing in part the writ petition of Sushil Chand Srivastava and the Transferred case of P.N. Parashar and others, and dismissing the appeal of D.P. Shukla and others, and the writ petition of Chandra Prakash Agarwal and the writ petition of R.P. Lavaniya, the Court.
^ HELD: The High Court completely misconceived the relevant Rules, while rendering the judgment in the writ petition filed by the "unplaced candidates" Rafiquddin and 16 others in total disregard of the facts.
It committed a serious error in applying the principles of natural justice to a competitive examination.
[820E] The Rules entrust the Public Service Commission with the duty of holding competitive examinations and recommending the names of the suitable candidates for appointment to the service on the basis of the proficiency shown by the candidates.
Rule 19 provided that the list of the selected candidates should be arranged in order of merit on the basis of the aggregate marks of each candidate in the written as well as viva voce tests.
In pursuance of clause (i) to the proviso to rule 19, the commission had the power to fix minimum aggregate marks in the written test.
Similarly, clause (ii) of the proviso conferred power on the Commission to fix the minimum marks for the viva voce to judge the suitability of the candidates for the service.
The scheme underlying rule 19 and the proviso there to made it apparent that the obtaining of the minimum aggregate marks in the written test and the viva voce test, was the sine qua non before the Commission could make its recommendations in favour of the candidates for appointment to the service.
It is manifest that only those candidates could be appointed to the service who were included in the list prepared by the Commission under rule 19.
Appointments to the service are made from the list forwarded by the Commission to the State Government.
Seniority in the service is determined on the basis of the year of the examination irrespective of the date of the appointment and the inter se seniority of the candidates recruited is determined on the basis of their ranking in the merit list.
Seniority of a candidate appointed to the service would depend upon the result of the competitive examination and his position in the list prepared under rule 19.
The claim to seniority on the basis of the year of competitive examination as contemplated by rule 22 is available only to those candidates who are approved by the Commission on the basis of H 798 their marks in the written and viva voce tests.
The commission alone had the power to prescribe the minimum marks in the viva voce test for judging the suitability of a candidate for the service.
That is the clear meaning of the words in the proviso to rule 19.
[814B H] In the instant case, the. commission had fixed 35 per cent minimum marks for the viva voce test.
The viva voce test is a well recognised method of judging the suitability of a candidate for appointment to public services.
There is no constitutional, legal infirmity in the provision of clause (ii) of the proviso to rule 19, conferring power on the commission to fix minimum marks for the viva voce test, as aforesaid, and so long as the clause (ii) remained in force, the Commission had that power.
Even if a candidate had obtained higher aggregate marks in the written and viva voce test, his name could not be included in the list prepared by the Commission under rule 19.
None of the "unplaced candidates" of the 1970 examination (those included in the IIIrd list) had secured minimum marks of 35 per cent in the viva voce test, and for that reason they were not approved by the Commission.
The appointments of the "unplaced candidates" made in pursuance of the decision of the high level committee are not countenanced by the rules.
There is no escape for the conclusion that the "unplaced candidates" were appointed to service on the basis of the result of the competitive examination of 1970.
Their appointments were made in breach of the rules.
It is well settled that where recruitment to service is regulated by the statutory rules, the recruitment must be made in accordance with those rules, and any appointment made in breach of the rules, would be illegal.
The appointments of the 21 "unplaced candidates" made out of the third list were illegal as they were made in violation of the provisions of the rules.
The high level committee, even though constituted by highly placed persons, had no authority in law to take the decision it did as above said, as the rules do no contemplate any such committee and the decision taken by the committee could not be implemented.
The committee had no authority in law to disregard the rules and direct the Commission, which is a constitutional and independent authority, not sub servient to the directions of the Government, to make a recommendation to the Government in c; favour of the unsuccessful candidates by disregarding the minimum marks prescribed for the viva voce test.
Its view that after the amendment of the rule 19, the minimum qualifying marks fixed for viva voce could be ignored, was wholly wrong.
Rule 19 was amended in January 1972, but before that the 1970 examination had already been held, and the amendment was not retrospective.
Even if the Commission had made recommendations in favour of the "unplaced candidates" under 799 the directions of the government, the appointments of the said candidates would have been illegal as made in violation of the rules.
And there was no justification for the appointments of the unsuccessful candidates in 1975 because by then, the result of the 1972 examination had been announced and duly selected candidates were available.
[816F H; 822D H; 823C DJ There is no express provision in the rules as to for what period the list prepared under rule 19 can be utilised for making appointments to the service.
In the absence of any provision in the rules, a reasonable period must be followed during which the appointments on the basis of the result of a particular examination should be made.
The list prepared by the Commission on the basis of the competitive examination of a particular year could be utilized by the Government for making appointments before the declaration of the result of the subsequent examination.
If selected candidates are available for appointment on the basis of the competitive examinations of subsequent years, it would be unreasonable and unjust to revise the list of earlier examination by changing norms to fill up the vacancies, as that would adversely effect the rights of those selected at the subsequent examination in the matters relating to their seniority under rule 22.
The 1970 examination could not be utilised as a perennial source or an exhaustible reservoir for making appointments indefinitely.
The result of a particular examination must come to an end at some point of time, like a "dead ball" in cricket.
The practice of revising the list prepared by the Commission under rule 19 at the behest of the government by lowering down fixed standards and norms, is subversive of the rule of law.
This practice is fraught with dangers of favouritism and nepotism and it would open back door entry to the service.
Once the result of the subsequent examination of 1972 was declared, the Commission could not revise the list of approved candidates of 1970 examination prepared by it under rule 19 at the behest of the Government by lowering down the standard_ fixed by it.
The procedure adopted in appointing the unplaced candidates of 1970 examination was unauthorised by law and it practised discrimination in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[824B H; 826H] The "unplaced candidates" were appointed to the service in breach of the rules and they form a separate class.
They cannot be equated with those appointed from the first and the second lists of the 1970 examination as their appointments were made on the recommendation of the Commission.
Similarly, the candidates appointed to the service on the basis of the result of the competitive examination of 1972 before the "unPlaced candidates" were appointed, formed a separate 800 class as they were also appointed in accordance with the rules.
The "unplaced candidates" could not claim seniority over them on the basis of rule 22, as their appointments were not made on the basis of the list approved by the Commission under rule 19.
[827A C] Even though the 21 "unplaced candidates" of 1970 examination have been found to have been appointed to the service illegally in breach of the rules, yet the judgments and others passed by them are not rendered invalid; they were appointed by competent authority with the concurrence of the High Court.
They have been working in the judicial service all these years and some of them have been promoted also; they have performed their functions as de facto judicial officers.
The judgments and orders of a de facto judge cannot be challenged on the ground of his ineligibility for appointment.
Keeping in view the period of 12 years that has elapsed, the Court did not propose to strike down the appointments of the "unplaced candidates".
Having regard to all the facts and circumstances, it would be just and proper to assign seniority to the "unplaced candidates" of the 1970 examination at the bottom of the list of the 1972 candidates.
The 16 "unplaced candidates" out of the total of 37, who were successful in the 1972 examination and were approved and included by the Commission in the list prepared under rule 19, are entitled to seniority of 1972 examination on the basis of their positions in the merit list of that examination.
[827D G; 828F H] The appeal of the State of U.P. and the appeal of Sushil Kumar Srivastava and others allowed.
Judgment of the High Court set aside.
The High Court and State Government shall determine the seniority of the 21 "upheld candidates" as directed by the Court.
[829F G] In the Appeal filed by D.P. Shukla and others, directed against another judgment of the High Court, the view of the High Court was consistent with the view of this Court.
The appellants had appeared at the 1970 examination but were unsuccessful as they had failed to secure 35 per cent minimum marks at the viva voce test, although they had secured higher marks in the aggregate than those selected and appointed.
They had challenged the selection made in pursuance of the 1970 examination.
[830A B] In the writ petition filed in this Court by Chandra Prakash Aggarwal, as the petitioner had failed to obtain the minimum marks prescribed for the viva voce test although he had obtained more than 40 per cent marks in the aggregate, he could not be granted the relief of appointment to the service.
He was also, 801 disentitled to any relief on the ground of inordinate delay, there being no plausible explanation for the delay in .
challenging the validity of the 1970 examination in 1982.
L830C D] In the writ petition filed in this Court by Sushil Chand Srivastava and in the transferred case of P.N. Parasher and others, the petitioners, recruited to the service on the basis of the 1972 examination, were aggrieved by the decision of the High Court in Rafiquddin 's case as their seniority was affected adversely.
This Court has already taken the view that the "unplaced candidates" of the 1970 examination could not be senior to the candidates appointed as a result of the 1972 examination, and the petitioners were covered by that decision of the Court to get relief to that extent.
[830G] In the writ petition filed in this Court by R.P. Lavania, the petitioner was appointed to the service in November, 1976 on the basis of the result of the 1973 examination.
His grievance was that the respondents Nos. 3 to 15 in the petition had been shown senior to him; although they had been appointed later in time on the basis of the 1972 examination, and that the selection and appointment of the said respondents were against the rules and they were not entitled to seniority over him as he was a regularly selected candidate.
There was no merit in the petitioner 's case.
Rule 22 directs that seniority shall be determined on the basis of the year of examination, which means that a person recruited to the service in pursuance of the result of a particular year of examination would rank senior to a candidate who is recruited in pursuance of the result of a subsequent year of examination, although he might have been actually appointed earlier in time, as, after the selection of the candidates, several formalities, like medical examination, character and antecedents verification, etc., are followed before the appointments are made under rule 21.
Many a time, this process of formalities causes delay in the making of the actual appointment, with the result that sometimes persons selected on the basis of subsequent examination are appointed before the successful candidates of the earlier examination.
But under rule 22, the latter shall be senior to the former, irrespective of the date of appointment.
The petitioner was appointed in the service on the basis of the result of the 1973 examination while the respondents Nos. 3 to 15 were recruited to service on the basis of the result of the 1972 examination.
Therefore, under rule 22, the validity of which has not been challenged, the respondents Nos. 3 to 15 are entitled to be senior to the petitioner.
There was no illegality in the appointments of the respondents 802 Nos. 3 to 15.
Their appointments in the service were made by the A State Government on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission made under Rule 19, as they had obtained the requisite aggregate marks in the written and the viva voce tests.
They were appointed in accordance with the rules and were entitled to seniority in terms of rule 22.
[831 A H] The Public Service Commission has been changing the norms fixed by it at the behest of the Government after the declaration of the results.
The Commission is an independent, expert body.
It has to act in an independent manner.
It may consult the State Government and the High Court in prescribing the norms for judging the suitability of the candidates if no norms are prescribed in the Rules.
Once the Commission determines the norms and makes selection on the conclusion of a competitive examination and submits the list of the suitable candidates to the Government, it should not re open the selection by lowering down the norms at the instance of the Government.
If the practice of revising the results of competitive examinations by changing the norms is followed there will be confusion and the people will loss faith in the institution of the Public Service Commission and the authenticity of the selections.
The Commission should take a firm stand in these matters, uninfluenced by the directions of the State Government unsupported by the Rules.
[833A D] (ii) The practice of appointing a retired Judge of the High Court as an expert to assist the Commission in making selections for appointments to the judicial service, is not desirable.
A sitting Judge of the High Court should be nominated by the Chief Justice of the State to participate in the interviews as an expert; he would be in a better position to give advice to the Commission in the selection of suitable candidates and his advice would be binding on the Commission unless there are strong and cogent reasons for not accepting such advice, which must be recorded in writing by the Chairman and Members of the Commission, as observed by a Constitution Bench of this Court in A. K. Yadav vs State of Haryana, ; The Constitution Bench had issued directions to the Public Service Commission of every state to follow this direction, but it appears that in the State of U.P., this direction is not being followed.
In future, the selections for appointments to the judicial service shall be made by the Commission on the expert advice of a sitting judge of the High Court nominated by the Chief Justice.
[833E H;834A] (iii) It has been noticed that generally, there is a considerable 803 interregnum between the holding of the examination and the appointments of the selected candidates in these cases, no system was followed in making the appointments, as some of the candidates selected in the subsequent examination were appointed earlier than those selected in the earlier examination, and those appointed later in time are made senior to those appointed earlier in time under Rule 22.
This causes heart burning and other complications.
To avoid this situation, it is necessary that every effort should be made to appoint the successful candidates of a particular examination before any candidate of a subsequent examination is appointed.
[834B D] K.N. Chandrasekhra & Ors.
vs State of Mysore and Ors.
, A.I.R. ; T.N. Manjula Devi vs State of Karnataka, [1982] Labour and Industrial Cases, 759; Durga Charan Misra vs State of orissa, W.P. 1123 of 1986, decided on 27.8.1987; Lila Dhar vs State of Rajasthan, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 320; A.K. Yadav vs State of Haryana, [1985] 4 S.C.C. 417; Umash Chandra Shukla vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Shitla Prasad Shukla vs State of U.P. & Ors., [1986] Supp.
S.C.C. 185 and Achanti Sreenivasa Rao & Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh, referred to.
