% The University of Gujarat held election of 28 members of the Court of the University out of 42 members, as the election with regard to the 14 seats had been stayed by an order of the High Court.
The respondents teachers filed a writ petition in the High Court for setting aside the election of the 28 members and holding fresh election for all the seats.
The High Court set aside the election to the 28 seats and directed the holding of fresh election for all the 42 seats.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court in the writ petition, the appellant appealed to this Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The High Court committed an error in entertaining the writ petition and interfering with the election.
Election to the membership of the court of the University and the determination of the disputes relating thereto, are regulated by the provisions of the Gujarat University Act, 1949.
Under section 58 as substituted by the Gujarat Act 9 of 1983.
Under the provisions of the Act, if a dispute arises with regard inter alia to the election of any member of any authority or other body of the University, it shall be referred to the State Government, which shall decide the matter and the decision of the Government shall be final.
It is well settled that where a statute provides for an election and a machinery or forum to determine any dispute arising out of that election, the aggrieved person should pursue his remedy before the forum provided by the statute.
It is not permissible to invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court by a writ petition, by passing the machinery provided by the Act for the determination of the election dispute.
The remedy provided by the statute must be followed except where exceptional, extraordinary circumstances exist to justify the by passing of the alternative remedies.
In the present case, there existed no circumstance, justifying departure from this rule and the High Court was not right in entertaining the writ petition.
[902B; 903B C, G H; 904B] 900 K.K Shrivastava etc.
vs Bhupendra Kumar Jain & Ors., AIR 1977 SC 1703; Ramjibhai Ukabhai Parmar vs Manilal Purushottam Solanki & Anr., , referred to.
