% The appellant wife, a post graduate in biological sciences, married the respondent husband, a medical doctor on December 19, 1982.
Soon after, relations between them became bitter.
Ultimately, the appellant wife moved the court for divorce on the ground of cruelty.
Her main complaint was about the dowry demanded by the husband or his parents.
The trial court rejected the appellant 's case on the ground that there was no satisfactory evidence that the demands were such as to border on harassment.
The High Court also rejected her case and held that the appellant appeared to be hypersensitive and imagined too much and too unnatural things, that the demand for money had to be viewed from a proper angle, and that there was nothing wrong in the respondent, who was a doctor, asking his rich wife to spare some money.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD: 1.1 In order to curb the evil practice of dowry, the Parliament enacted the prohibiting the giving or taking of dowry.
But, as the pernicious practice continued in some communities, the Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 1984 was enac 1011 ted with considerable changes in the parent Act.
Likewise, the Indian Penal Code, 1860 was amended by introducing an entirely new offence with regard to criminal jurisdiction.
Section 498A was introduced providing for punishment to the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjecting her to cruelty.
[1015F H] new dimension has been given to the concept of cruelty.
Explanation to section 498A of the Indian Penal Code provides that any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive a woman to commit suicide or likely to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical of the woman), and harassment of the woman with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security would constitute cruelty.
[1016E F] 1.2 Cruelty simpliciter is a ground for divorce under section 13 of the .
However, the word `cruelty ' has not been defined.
Indeed, it could not have been defined.
It has been used in relation to or in respect of matrimonial duties and obligations.
It is a course of conduct of one which is adversely affecting the other.
The cruelty may be mental or physical, intentional or unintentional.
If it is physical, the Court will have no problem to determine it.
It is a question of fact and degree.
If it is mental, the enquiry must begin as to the nature of cruel treatment and the impact of such treatment in the mind of the spouse, whether it caused reasonable apprehension that it would be harmful or injurious to live with the other.
Ultimately, it is a matter of inference to be drawn by taking into account the nature of the conduct and its effect on the complaining spouse.
There may, however, be cases where the conduct complained of itself is bad enough and per se unlawful or illegal.
Then the impact or injurious effect on the other spouse need not be enquired into or considered.
In such cases, the cruelty will be established if the conduct itself is proved or admitted.
[1013E H; 1014A] 1.3 The matrimonial conduct which constitutes cruelty as a ground for dissolution of marriage, if not admitted, requires to be proved on the preponderance of probabilities as in civil cases and not beyond a reasonable doubt as in criminal cases.
[1016G] 1.4 Evidence as to harassment to the wife to meet any unlawful demand for money is necessary to constitute cruelty in criminal law.
This is the requirement of the offence of cruelty defined under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code.
It is not so under section 13(1)(i a) of the Hindu 1012 Marriage Act, 1955.
The cruelty need not be only intentional, wilful or deliberate.
It is not necessary to prove the intention in matrimonial offence.
From the context and the set up in which the words `cruelty ' has been used in section 13(1)(i a), intention is not a necessary element in cruelty.
That word has to be understood in the ordinary sense of the term in matrimonial affairs.
If the intention to harm, harass or hurt could be inferred by the nature of the conduct or brutal act complained or, cruelty could be easily established.
But the absence of intention should not make any difference in the case, if by ordinary sense in human affairs, the act complained of could otherwise be regarded as cruelty.
The relief to the party cannot be denied on the ground that there has been deliberate or wilful ill treatment.
[1020F H; 1021A C] 1.5 The matrimonial duties and responsibilities are of varying degrees from house to house or person to person.
Therefore, when a spouse makes complaint about the treatment of cruelty by the partner in life or relations, the Court should not search for standard in life.
In matrimonial cases, the Court is not concerned with the ideals in family life.
It has only to understand the spouses concerned as nature made them, and consider their particular grievance.
[1014B,F] Sheldon vs Sheldon, , 259, Gollins vs Gollins, ; 1972 and Narayan Ganesh Dastane vs Sucheta Narayan Dastane, ; 1978, referred to.
