% The State Government of Gujarat Appellant, issued a Notification dated March 31,1976 published in the Government Gazette dated April 8, 1976 under Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 stating that the Lands of the respondents were likely to be needed for the public purpose of providing housing accommodation for the employees of the Municipal Corporation, and that after making an enquiry under section 5 A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 the State Government had issued a declaration under section 6 of the said Act declaring that the aforesaid lands along with other lands were needed for the said public purpose.
In the meanwhile the Urban Land Ceiling and Regulation Act, 1976 came into force with effect from 17.2.1976.
The respondents filed statements before the Competent Authority under section 6 of the 1976 Act including the lands to be acquired which were in excess of the ceiling limit which each of the respondents could retain after the coming into force of the 1976 Act.
Thereafter, the respondents filed writ petitions contending that the acquisition proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 should be proceeded with and the acquisition proceedings to the extent it related to the surplus land under the ceiling law should be dropped.
The applicability of the provisions of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 insofar as they were applicable within the limits of the Municipal Corporation were questioned contending that: (i) the Act was beyond the legislative competence of Parliament insofar as the State Government of Gujarat was concerned; (ii) that the lands in question were not 'vacant lands ' as defined in the Act and, therefore the proceedings instituted in respect of them under the Act were liable to be quashed, and (iii) that the land acquisition proceedings under the Land 998 Acquisition Act 1894 which were initiated should be completed, and the Land Acquisition Officer should be directed to pass awards in favour of the respondents.
These writ petitions were contested by the appellants State.
The High Court though negativing the contentions of the respondents regarding the legislative competence of Parliament to pass the Urban Land Act, quashed the proceedings instituted under the Act.
It, however, declined to issue a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the Land Acquisition Officer before whom the proceedings were commenced under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 as he was not made a party to the writ proceedings, but made a declaration that the land acquisition proceedings did not suffer from any infirmity.
The State Government aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court filed Special Leave Petitions to this Court.
On the question whether; the lands of the respondents are lands to which the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 would apply.
Allowing the Appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The finding of the High Court that by virtue of section 29(1)(a) of the Bombay Town Planning Act, 1954 the lands fell outside the definition of 'vacant land ' in the Urban Land Act, 1976 is unsustainable.
The High Court omitted to notice that the owners were entitled to construct buildings on the lands after the permission was accorded by the local authority.
[1005C] 2.
The object of the Urban Land Act, 1976 is to provide for the imposition of a ceiling on 'vacant land ' in urban agglomerations for the acquisition of such land in excess of the ceiling limit and to regulate the construction of buildings on such land and to bring about an equitable distribution of land in urban agglomerations to subserve the common good.
[1000G] 3.
The question whether a piece of land is a 'vacant land ' or not does not depend upon the fact whether a prudent man would put up a building on that land or not after the issue of a notification under section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
Nor a land will cease to be a 'vacant land ' merely because the permission of certain authorities is to be taken to put up a building thereon.
[1006G H] 999 4.
The proceedings under the land Acquisition Act, 1894 cannot have any bearing on the question whether the lands in question are 'vacant lands ' or not for the purposes of the ceiling law contained in the Urban Land Act, 1976.
When the lands in question or bulk of them are likely to be acquired under the ceiling law by paying a compensation as provided therein, it would not be proper to compel the Government to acquire them under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
[1007D] 5.
Sub clause (i) of clause (q) of section 2 of the Urban Land Act 1976 does not provide that a land on which the owner cannot construct a building will cease to be 'vacant land ' for the purposes of the Act.
[1007F] 6.
As long as construction of a building can be done on a land by some person or authority, the land does not get excluded from the definition of the expression 'vacant land ' under the Act.
The lands in the instant case, therefore, are 'vacant lands. ' [1007G] Smt.
Shanti Devi vs The Competent Authority under U.L. (C.R.) Act, 1976 Delhi and others, AIR 1980 Delhi 106, overruled.
Prabhakar Narhar Pawar vs State of Maharashtra and Another, AIR 1984 Bombay 122 and The State of U.P. and another vs Radha Raman Agarwal and another, AIR 1987 Allahabad 272, approved.
