The appellant, a public limited company, was a lessee of four cinema houses situated within the municipal limits of Poona City where it used to exhibit cinematograph films.
The respondent, the Municipal Corporation of Poona, in exercise of its power under section 59(1) (XI) of the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901, levied with effect from October 1, 1920 a tax of Rs. 2 per day as license fee on the owners and lessees of cinema houses.
That Act governed the Municipality till 1926 and thereafter it was governed by the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925.
The tax was enhanced to Re. 1 per show on June 3, 1941, and to Rs. 5 per show on June 9, 1948.
By the suit, out of which the present appeal arose, the appellant sought for a declaration that the levy of the said tax, the rules framed in connection therewith and the enhancement of the tax as aforesaid were illegal and ultra vires.
The trial court decreed the suit in part but the High Court in appeal reversed the decision of the trial court 72 and dismissed the suit.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that (1) the tax was not one covered by Entry 50 in List 11 of Seventh Schedule to the Government of India Act, 1935, but was one on trade or calling covered by Entry 46 thereof, and, was as such governed by section 142A of the said Act and that (2) section 59(1)(XI) Of the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901, was unconstitutional in that the legislature had thereby delegated essential legislative power to the Municipality to determine the nature of the tax to be imposed on the rate payers and completely abdicated its function, leaving such power wholly unguided.
Held, that both the contentions must fail.
The first point was covered by the decision given in the appellant 's other appeal, Civil Appeal No. 145 Of 1955 which must also govern this case.
It was not correct to contend that the power delegated to the Municipality under section 59(1)(XI) Of the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901, was unguided.
That section authorised the imposition of such taxes alone as were necessary for the purposes of the Act.
The obligations and functions cast upon the Municipalities by ch.
VII of the Act showed that taxes could be levied only for implementing those purposes and none others.
Nor could it be said that the Provincial Legislature had abdicated its function in favour of the Municipality.
The taxing power of the Municipality was made subject to the approval of the Governor in Council by the section itself.
The marginal note to a section could not affect the construction of the section if its language was otherwise clear and unambiguous and the word 'modify ' connoted not merely reduction but also other kinds of alteration including enlargement.
The substitution of the word I reduce ' by the word I modify ' in the body of section 6o of the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925, notwithstanding the omission to do so in the marginal note, therefore, clearly indicated the intention of the Legislature to widen the scope of that section and, consequently, it could not be said that the enhancement of the tax was not sustainable thereunder.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay vs Ahmedbhai Umarbhai & Co., Bombay, ; and Stevens vs The General Steam Navigation Company, Ltd., , referred to.
