% The respondent, a State Government Corporation obtained decree for certain amount against the appellant and in execution proceedings a tea estate was brought for sale by court auction in 1969, but in the absence of a bidder the respondent itself had to purchase it at a higher price.
The respondent, however, could take possession of the estate only in 1982.
It then invited tenders for the sale of the estate.
The appellant offered Rs.6,00,000.
The next best offer was for Rs.4,15,550 and the third for Rs.2,07,451.
The highest offer was accepted, but the appellant could not pay the amount except the earnest money, even after repeated extension of time and offer to receive the balance in instalments.
The respondent then negotiated with the next highest bidder, who enhanced the offer to Rs.4,50,000 which was accepted by the respondent.
The property, however, was sold to a partnership firm in which the said bidder was a partner.
The appellant thereupon moved the High Court complaining that the respondent in selling the property to the firm had deviated from the normal practice of inviting the tenders from the public and that the Corporation being a public authority was bound to act reasonably and fairly and it ought not be have arbitrarily selected the purchaser.
The High Court declined to interfere.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The action of the respondent in offering the property to the person next in order by private negotiations and selling the same at 1080 his request to the partnership firm was perfectly justified.
[1087G] The public property owned by the State or by any instrumentality of the State should be generally sold by public auction or by inviting tenders, not only to get the highest price for the property but also to ensure fairness in the activities of the State and public authorities.
They should act fairly.
Their actions should be legitimate.
Their dealings should be above board.
Their transactions should be without aversion or affection and should not be suggestive of discrimination, bias, favouritism or nepotism.
Ordinarily these facts would be absent if the matter is brought to public auction or sale by tenders.
Though that is the ordinary rule, it is not an invariable rule.
There may be situations necessitating departure from the rule, but then such instances must be justified by compelling reasons and not by just convenience.
[1086H; 1087A C] In the instant case, the respondent dealt with the property in all fairness.
It invited tenders for the sale of the property under the notification.
The appellant submitted the highest tender in response to the said notification.
He was granted all concessions and facilities for payment by instalments but he failed.
If the appellant could not act according to his tender, there was no reason why the property should not be offered to the person who was next in order.
The respondent, therefore, did not do anything unfair with the second bidder after it had got the tender amount raised substantially.
[1087D F] K.N. Guruswamy vs The State of Mysore & Ors., ; at 312; Mohinder Singh Gill & Anr.
vs The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi & Ors., ; R.D. Shetty vs The International Airport Authority of India State of Jammu and Kashmir & Anr., ; ; Fertilizer Corporation Kamagar Union vs Union of India, ; ; Ram and Shyam Company vs State of Haryana & Ors., and Shri Sachidanand Pandey vs State of W. B. ; , applied.
