% Coal lying at the Pusauli Railway Station was fraudulently removed by some person, giving out his name as Shambhu Tiwari, a coal contractor.
A criminal case was registered, but on account of absence of reliable evidence final report was submitted.
During the preliminary enquiry held by the Department, it was found that Chandrama Tewari, the appellant, who was posted as a fireman at Moghulsarai in the Northern Railway, had removed the coal posing himself as Shambhu Tiwari.
A charge sheet was issued to the appellant.
An Enquiry Officer was appointed before whom evidence was recorded.
The appellant was afforded full opportunity of cross examining the witnesses.
The Enquiry Officer held the appellant guilty of the charges framed against him.
The punishing authority accepted the report of the enquiry officer and passed orders, dismissing the appellant from service.
The appellant filed a civil suit for a declaration that the punishment of dismissal was illegal and unconstitutional mainly on the ground that the enquiry had been held in violation of the principles of natural justice and he was denied reasonable opportunity of defence, inasmuch as a copy of paper No. 5, mentioned in the Memo of charges, had not been supplied to him.
The trial court decreed the suit.
The decree of the trial court was confirmed in appeal by the District Judge.
On a second appeal by the Union of India, the High Court set aside the decisions of the subordinate courts, holding that the appellant had been afforded reasonable opportunity of defence and there had been no violation of the principles of natural justice in the enquiry.
The appellant appealed to this Court against the order of the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the court, 1103 ^ HELD: It is not necessary that each and every document must be supplied to the delinquent government servant facing charges; instead, only material and relevant documents are necessary to be supplied to him.
If a document even though mentioned in the Memo of charges is not relevant to the charges or if it is not referred to or relied upon by the enquiry officer or the punishing authority in holding the charges proved against the government servant, no exception can be taken to the validity of the proceedings or the order passed on the ground of non supply of the copy of the order.
If a document is not used against the party charged, the ground of violation of principles of natural justice cannot be successfully raised.
Violation of the principles of natural justice arises only when a document, a copy of which may not have been supplied to the party charged, is used in recording findings of guilt against him.
[1105G H; 1106A B] Copy of paper No. 5, mentioned in the charge sheet, was not supplied to the appellant and he was not permitted to inspect the same.
But that document was not considered, or relied upon by the enquiry officer in recording the findings against the appellant.
Therefore, the paper No. 5 was not a material or relevant document, and denial of a copy of that document did not prejudice the appellant and there was no violation of the principles of natural justice involved in the case.
The enquiry was fair.
[1109D E] State of Madhya Pradesh vs Chintaman, AIR 1961 SC 1623; Trilokinath vs Union of India and Ors., ; State of Assam & Anr.
vs Mahendra Kumar Das & Ors., ; ; State of Punjab vs Bhagat Ram, ; ; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Mohd. Sharif, AIR 1982 SC 937 and Kashinath Dikshita vs Union of India and Ors., ; relied upon by the appellant.
