% The appellant was a registered owner of a motor vehicle run by him as a stage carriage under a permit issued under the .
He was liable to pay tax in respect of the vehicle under section 3 of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957, which provides that a tax at the rates specified in Part A of the Schedule to the Act shall be levied on all motor vehicles suitable for use on roads, and item 4 in Part A of the Schedule to the Act, as it stood in 1985, relates to the levy of tax on the motor vehicles used as stage carriages.
On some occasions, it was found that the appellants stage carriage was carrying passengers in excess of the number of passengers allowed to be carried under the permit issued to him under the .
The taxation authority under the Karnataka Act above said issued to him a demand for the payment of additional tax under section 8 of the said Act.
The appellant filed a writ petition, challenging the demand for the additional tax.
The High Court dismissed the petition, following its earlier decision in Noorullha Khan vs State of Karnataka (Writ Petition No. 8302 of 1980, etc.
decided on 26.6.85.) The appellant appealed to this Court by special leave against the order of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The taxation authority levied the additional tax under section 8 of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957, on the ground that the appellant had proposed to use the vehicle in such a manner as to cause the vehicle to become a vehicle in respect of which a higher rate of tax was payable, in accordance with the decision of the High Court in the Noorullha Khan 's case.
The payment of the additional tax arises as per section 8 on two occasions (i) when the Motor 11 Vehicle is altered in such a manner as to cause the vehicle to become a vehicle in respect of which a higher rate of tax is payable, or (ii) when any motor vehicle is proposed to be used in such a manner as to cause the vehicle to become a vehicle in respect of which a higher rate of tax is payable.
The vehicle in question has not been altered, and it has been used only as a stage carriage, even when two or five extra persons have been carried.
There is no other provision in Part A of the Schedule to the Act which requires a higher rate of tax to be paid in respect of a vehicle which is being used as a stage carriage on the basis of a larger number of passengers that are carried in it.
It would have been possible to levy a higher tax on the appellant only if the words 'which the vehicle is permitted to carry ' in item 4(2) of Part A to the Schedule to the Act had been omitted.
These words cannot be ignored in the construction of the said item since it relates to the levy of tax.
Also, the provision in section 8 is specific.
[17G H; 18A C, F G] The High Court in Noorullha Khan 's case overlooked the presence of the words 'which the vehicle is permitted to carry ', found also in clause (b) of item 7 of the Karnataka Act.
A law which imposes a tax should be construed strictly.
A registered owner of a motor vehicle, which is permitted to be used as a stage carriage cannot be asked to pay additional tax under section 8 of the Act merely because he has carried on some occasions more passengers than the maximum number of passengers that he is permitted to carry under the permit.
The tax which he is liable to pay is limited by the maximum number of passengers he is entitled to carry under the permit.
The Court does not agree with the decisions of the High Court in the Noorullha Khan 's case, which is overruled.
The judgment of the High Court impugned set aside and the respondents directed not to levy the additional tax on the appellant under section 8 of the Karnataka Taxation Act for carrying more passengers than what he was permitted to carry on some occassions during the period in question.
Need impressed upon the authorities to enforce the provision in section 60 of the , strictly.[20A, D F] Payne vs Allock, , referred to.
