The appellant was a District and Session judge in the State of Bikaner and after its merger in the new State of Rajasthan, on August 7, 1949, continued to serve in the new State.
The covenant of intergration provided, inter alia, that the conditions of such service were to be no less advantageous than those under which he was working on November 1, 1948.
By a Gazette Notification the appellant was appointed as an ad hoc Civil and Additional Sessions judge.
After the reorganisation of the Services he was substantively appointed as a Civil judge and placed in grade C (Civil judges and Munsiffs) and placed at No. 18 in the list of juniors, but his old pay and emoluments remained as guaranteed.
Before such appointment he was, however, described in certain orders of transfer and increments of pay as District and Sessions judge.
The appellant moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution and contended that he had been reduced in rank without being afforded an opportunity to show cause under article 311 of the Constitution.
The High Court held that the appointment must be treated as an ad hoc appointment till it was regularised under the Constitution.
This was done by the Government after the decision of the High Court and the appellant was again appointed as a Civil Judge 1014 Held, that it is well settled that when a State is by merger integrated to form a new State, all contracts of service between the prior Government and its servants automatically came to an end and those who elect to serve in the new State, or are taken in by it, serve on such terms and conditions as the new State may choose to impose.
The State of Madras vs K. M. Rajagopalan, [1955] 2 S.C.R. 541, relied on.
Virendra Singh & Others vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , referred to.
As the appellant 's postings in the new State previous to his substantive appointment were all transitional and temporary in character and the guarantee given by the covenant was fulfilled, no question of reduction in rank arose so as to attract Art 311 Of the Constitution.
No inference of any determination by the new Government to appoint the appellant in his old post could follow from the descriptions made in the orders of transfer and increments of pay as appointments are not made in that casual way.
