% Section 127 of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 provides that if any land reserved under the Act was not acquired by agreement within ten years from the date on which a final regional plan or final development plan came into force or if proceedings for the acquisition of such land under that Act or under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 were not commenced within such period, the owner or any person interested in the land may serve notice on the appropriate authority to that effect and if within six months from the date of the service of such notice, the land was not acquired or no steps as aforesaid were commenced for its acquisition, the reservation should be deemed to have lapsed.
The Planning Authority, the Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, published a draft development plan reserving the land in dispute for a recreation ground.
The said plan was finalised and sanctioned by the State Government on January 6, 1967.
It came into effect from February 7, 1967 and thereunder the land was again reserved for recreation ground.
No action having been taken for acquisition of the land, the trustees of the land served a notice dated July 1, 1977 on the Commissioner for Municipal Corporation either to acquire the land or release it from acquisition.
The same was received by the latter on July 4, 1977.
On July 28, 1977 the Corporation 's Executive Engineer asked for information regarding the ownership of the land and the particulars of the tenants thereof from trustees respondents Nos. 4 7, and stated that the relevant date under section 127 cf the Act would be the date 22 upon which this information was received.
The trustees by their lawyer 's letter dated August 3, 1977 conveyed that the period of six months stipulated by section 127 has to be computed from the date of the receipt of the purchase notice by the Corporation, i.e. July 4, 1977 and stated that the Corporation had access to all the relevant records.
The requisite information was also provided therein.
The Executive Engineer wrote stating that the period of six months allowed by section 127 of the Act would commence on August 4, 1977, the date when the requisite information was furnished.
Thereafter the Executive Engineer by his letter dated November 2, 1977 inquired of the trustees whether they were prepared to sell the property in question to which the trustees quoted an overall rate of Rs.650 per square metre through their lawyer 's reply dated November 18, 1977.
They expressly stated that the offer was made without admitting the power and authority of the appellant to acquire the land or to initiate the proceedings for acquisition.
Instead of accepting the same, the Executive Engineer by his letter dated January 11, 1978 asked the respondents to disclose the basis for the rate of Rs.650 per sq.
metre.
The Corporation had, in the meanwhile passed a resolution on January 10, 1978 for the acquisition of the land and made an application to the State Government dated January 31, 1978 for taking necessary steps.
The State Government issued the requisite notification dated April 7, 1978 under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act 1894 for acquisition of land.
On July 17, 1978, respondent No. 1, the tenants ' association, filed a petition in the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for quashing the impugned notification.
The High Court held that the most crucial step was the application to be made by the Corporation to the State Government under section 126(1) of the Act for acquisition of the land within the period of six months commencing from July 4, 1977, the date of service of the purchase notice, and that upon the expiry of the said period on January 3, 1978, the reservation of the land had lapsed and it was released from such reservation.
It took the view that all that was required was that the owner or the person interested in the land must inform the Authority that the land reserved for any plan under the Act had not been acquired by agreement within ten years from the date on which plan came into force and the proceedings for acquisition of such land under the Land Acquisition Act had not been commenced within that period.
Consequently it struck down the impugned notification as invalid, null and void.
In the appeal to this Court by special leave it was contended that there was waiver or abandonment of right by respondents Nos. 4 7, 23 the trustees, to question the validity of the acquisition proceedings, and that there was inordinate delay or laches on the part of respondent No. 1 which disentitled it to grant of relief under article 226 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Section 127 of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 is a fetter upon the power of eminent domain.
By enacting it the legislature has struck a balance between the competing claims of the interests of the general public as regards the rights of an individual.
[30B C] 2.
The condition pre requisite for the running of time under 127 of the Act is the service of a valid purchase notice.
In the instant case, the purchase notice dated July 1, 1977 was a valid notice.
The appellant having failed to take any steps for acquisition of the land within a period of six months therefrom the reservation of the land in the development plan for a public purpose lapsed and consequently the impugned notification dated April 7, 1978 issued by the State Government under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act must be struck down as a nullity.
[29A B; 31D F] 3.1 The question whether the reservation has lapsed due to the failure of the planning authority to take any steps within a period of six months of the date of service of the notice of purchase as stipulated by section 127 is a mixed question of fact and law.
A rule of universal application cannot, therefore, be laid down.
[28G H] In the instant case the High Court found that the planning authority had failed to acquire the land reserved for the plan under the Act by agreement within ten years from the date on which the plan came into force and proceedings for acquisition of the land under the Land Acquisition Act had not been commenced within the period of six months from the receipt of notice from respondents Nos. 4 to 7, the trustees.
The Municipal Corporation had been assessing the trust properties to property tax and issuing periodic bills and receipts therefor and obviously could not question the title or ownership of the trust.
Accordingly, it struck down the impugned notification under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act and declared that the reservation of the land under the development plan had lapsed.
[28E, 29F, 28B] 3.2 There was no question of the period of six months being 24 reckoned from the date of receipt from respondents of the information requisitioned.
Section 127 of the Act does not contemplate an investigation into the title by the officers of the Planning Authority, nor can the officers prevent the running of time if there is a valid notice.
The Executive Engineer of the appellant Corporation was not justified in addressing the letter dated July 28, 1977 calling upon respondents 13 Nos.
4 7, the trustees, to furnish information regarding their title and ownership, and also to furnish particulars of the tenants, the nature of user of the tenements and the total area occupied by them.
The Corporation had the requisite information in their records.
The Planning Authority was the Municipal Corporation.
The said letter was, therefore, just an attempt to prevent the running of time and was of little or no consequence.[29A, B E] 4.
In order to constitute waiver, there must be voluntary and intentional relinquishment of a right.
The essence of a waiver is an estoppel and where there is no estoppel, there is no waiver.
Estoppel and waiver are questions of conduct and must necessarily be determined on the facts of each case.
[34B] In the instant case, respondents Nos.
4 7 had without admitting that the appellant had the authority or power to initiate the proceedings for acquisition, signified their willingness to sell the property subject to certain terms.
But the appellant did not accept the offer.
On the contrary, the appellant took further steps for the acquisition of the land by moving the State Government under section 126(1) of the Act to initiate acquisition proceedings by the issuance of a notification under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the conduct of respondents Nos. 4 7 was such as warrants an inference of relinquishment of a known existing legal right.
[34B D] 5.
The tenants were not parties to the earlier proceedings.
They were, therefore, not disentitled from maintaining the writ petition.
The objection that there was undue delay in moving the High Court cannot prevail.
[34E F]
