% The father of the appellant Thakore Shri Vinayasinhji, the Ruler of the former Mohanpur State, gifted certain properties to his youngest son, the respondent No. 1, by a deed of gift dated May 14, 1951, and also bequeathed certain properties to the respondent No. 1 and his mother by his will dated May 22, 1951.
The father died in 1955, whereupon the appellant became the Ruler.
He instituted a suit, challenging the validity of the said deed of gift and the will on the ground that as the rule of primogeniture applied to the Raj Estate, he being the eldest son succeeded to the 'Gadi ' and that his father, the former Ruler, had no power of alienation either by gift or by will and accordingly, the disposition made by him by the above said deed of gift and the will in favour of his younger brother, the respondent No. 1 was illegal and invalid.
The Civil Judge decreed the suit in part, declaring that the deed of gift and the will were illegal, and directing the respondent No. 1 to hand over to the appellant the possession of the properties mentioned in the deed of gift.
The Civil Judge passed a decree for mesne profits, but refused the prayer of the appellant for an injunction on the ground that he had failed to prove his possession of the properties mentioned in the plaint.
Being aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the Civil Judge, the respondents preferred an appeal to the High Court.
The High Court held that the former Ruler had the power of alienation and, accordingly, the deed of gift and the will impugned were legal and valid.
The judgment and decree of the Civil Judge were set aside.
Thereupon, this appeal was filed before this Court by special leave against the decision of the High Court.
During the pendency of the appeal, the appellant Thakore Harnathsinhji Vinayasinhji died, leaving behind the present appellants, who were already on record as his heirs and legal representatives.
1111 Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: It was not disputed that the Raj Estate of which the deceased appellant was the Ruler is impartible and that the rule of primogeniture one of the essential characteristics of an impartible estate is also applicable.
The question involved for the consideration of the Court was whether the holder of an impartible estate to which the rule of primogeniture applies as an essential characteristic of such an estate, could alienate the properties comprised in the estate by a deed of gift or will.
[1115D E] The law has been clearly and succinctly stated in the illuminating judgment of Sir Dinshah Mulla in Shiba Prasad Singh vs Rani Prayag Kumari Debi AIR 1932 P(; 216.
There is no restraint on the power of alienation of the holder of the impartible estate, as any restraint on the power would be incompatible with the custom of impartibility.
The impartible estate, though ancestral, is clothed with the incidence of self acquired and separate property except as regards the right of survivorship which is not inconsistent with the custom of impartibility.
The right of survivorship has been held to be a birthright and is not a mere spes successionis similar to that of a reversioner succeeding on the death of a Hindu widow to her husband 's estate.
[1116G H; 1117A] In Rani Sartaj Kuari vs Deoraj Kuari, 15 IA 51, the right of alienation of the holder has been recognised and in Shiba Prasad 's case (Supra) such right of the holder is reiterated.
Impartibility is essentially a creature of custom which supersedes the general law.
It is true that the impartible estate retains the character of joint family property only to the extent that there is a right of survivorship by birth to the junior members of the family, but, as the Privy Council has observed in Shiba Prasad 's case (supra) that in all other respects it is clothed with the incidents of self acquired and separate property, it follows that the holder of the impartible estate has the unlimited right of alienation not only by transfer inter vivos but also by will.
When the holder has the power to dispose of the estate during his life time, it would be quite illogical to hold that he would not have the power of disposition by a will.
The power of alientation has been recognised without any reservation in as much as such power is not incompatible with the impartibility of the estate.
The rights available to the member of the Hindu joint family under the Mitakshara law have been curtailed to a great extent, as most of the said rights would be inconsistent with the nature and character of the estate.
[1117E G; 1118D E] 1112 The case of Sri Raja Rao vs Venkata Kumari, 26 IA 83 is an authority for the proposition that a holder of an impartible estate cannot only dispose of the estate by transfers inter vivos but also by a will and that when such a disposition is made by a will, it defeats the right of survivorship.
It may be that the holder of an impartible estate can defeat the right of survivorship by leaving a will and such right cannot be said to have been founded on any logical basis, but it has to be borne in mind that the whole concept of impartibility is a creature of custom including the right of alienation of the holder of such estate.
In matters of custom, it is hardly possible to justify every incident on some logical basis.
[1120B C] There can be no doubt that an impartible estate is not a separate or self acquired property of the holder thereof, but it has been observed by Sri Dinshal Mulla in Shiba Prasad 's case (supra) that it is clothed with the incidents of self acquired and separate property.
One of such incidents is that the owner is entitled to dispose of the same in whatever manner he likes either by a transfer during his life time or by a will.
[1120D E] The right of a coparcener to take by survivorship can be defeated under certain circumstances as enumerated in Mulla 's Hindu Law.
When under certain circumstances the right of a coparcener to take by survivorship can be defeated, no exception can be taken if the right of survivorship of junior members of an impartible estate to succeed to it is defeated by the holder thereof by disposition by a will.
[1121E F] In view of the decisions of the Privy Council and this Court, it must be held that the holder of an impartible estate has the power of alienation not only by transfer inter vivos, but also by a will even though the disposition by will may altogether defeat the right of survivorship of the junior members of the family .
[1122B] The appellants contended alternatively that by virtue of a family custom, the holder of the impartible estate, as in this case, had no Ci power of alienation either by a transfer inter vivos or by a will, and in support of this contention, drew the attention of the Court to some correspondence between the original appellant since deceased and the political agent of the Mohanpur State.
The appellants placed much reliance upon the above documentary evidence in proof of their contention that there was a family custom prohibiting alienation by the Ruler of the State.
[1122C D] 1113 The correspondence related only to the question of granting jiwai (maintenance) to the younger son of the former Ruler.
It appeared from the correspondence that the entire attempt of the appellant was against the quantum of maintenance proposed to be granted by the Ruler to his younger son.
It was not the appellant 's contention that in view of a family custom, the Ruler had no right of alienation, but his case was that in view of the annual revenue of the State the quantum of the jiwai would be out of proportion.
It was only on this ground that he protested against the proposed jiwai.
The correspondence referred to did not prove any custom of inalienability of the impartible estate.
[1123B D] The appellants contended that as there was no instance of alienation till before the impugned deed of gift and will, it should be presumed that there was a family custom of inalienability of the estate.
More or less a similar contention made before the Privy Council in Protap Chander Deo vs Jagdish Chandra Deo, 54 IA 289 was overruled by the Privy Council.
There must be some positive evidence of such a custom.
The correspondence relied upon as the evidence of the alleged family custom of inalienability was far from being such evidence, the only question that formed the subject matter of all this correspondence related to the propriety of the question of jiwai.
The appellants had failed to prove that there was any family custom of inalienability of the estate.
[1123D G] The judgment and decree of the High Court were affirmed.
[1123G] Rani Sartaj Kuari vs Deoraj Kuari, 15 IA 51; Shiba Prasad Singh vs Rani Prayag Kumari Debi, AIR 1932 PC 216; Collector of Gorakhpur vs Ram Sunder Mal, AIR 1934 PC 157; Chinnathayi vs Kulasekara Pandiya Naicker, [19$2] SCR 1952 241; Shri Kaja Rao vs Venkata Kumari, 26 IA X3; Seth Lakshmi Chand vs Mt. Anandi and others, AIR 1926 PC 54; Lakshman Dada Naik vs Ramachandra Dada Naik, 7 IA 181; M.N. Arya Murthi vs M.N. Subbaraya Setty.
AIR 1972 SC 1279; Baijnath Prasad Singh vs Tej Bali Singh, AIR 1921 PC 62; Protap Chandra Dao vs Jagdish Chandra Deo, 54 IA 289; Mirza Raja Shri Pashavathi Viziaram Gajapathi Raj Manne Sultan Bahadur vs Shri Pushavathi Visweswar Gajapathi Raj, ; and Bhaiya Ramanuj Pratap Deo vs Lalu Maheshanuj Pratap Deo, ; , referred to.
