% The respondent, Aditya V. Birla, described to be a technician with experience in the business of manufacturing and selling Stapple Fibres, and the Thai Rayon Company, Thailand, engaged in the business of manufacturing and selling Stapple Fibres, entered into an agreement wherein the respondent was stated to be approached by the Thai Company to make his services available to the Company as his 'employer ', in Bangkok, on certain terms and conditions, for which the Company would pay him remuneration receivable at Bangkok.
The agreement was for a period of three years and was subject to the approval of the Governments of India and Thailand, etc.
The respondent applied to the Government of India for its approval of his employment with the Thai Company under the agreement; for the purpose of securing the benefits conferred by section 80 RRA of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The Government declined to accord its approval to the respondent 's employment with the Thai Company on the terms and conditions contained in the agreement, for the purpose of section 80 RRA, on the ground that the section, according to its view, contemplates rendering service outside India in the status of an 'employee ', whereas the status of the respondent under the foreign employer was that of a 'consultant ' and not an 'employee ', and that, therefore, the remuneration contemplated under section 80 RRA would be applicable to the case of the respondent and the benefit of the section could not be given to him.
The respondent moved the High Court for relief against the decision of the Government.
A learned Single Judge of the High Court quashed the order of the Government and directed it to reconsider the case of the respondent.
The Letters Patent Appeal against the order of the Single Judge was dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
The appellant then moved this Court against the order of the High Court by Special Leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, 116 ^ HELD: An analysis of section 80 RRA reveals that, in the case of the respondent, in order to be entitled to the deductions at the rate enumerated in the section, the sum must be (i) remuneration, (ii) received by him in the foreign currency, (iii) from any employer (being a foreign employer or an Indian Concern) for any service rendered by him outside India.
Further the terms and conditions of his service outside India must be approved by the Government of India.
Furthermore, in his case the deduction of the section would not be allowed In respect of the remuneration if the service related to any period after the expiry of 36 months.
He was not employed beyond the period of 36 months.
Indisputably, the sum concerned in the case, fee, was remuneration, being the amount paid in lieu of 'services ' rendered.
The sum in question was received in foreign currency for services rendered outside India.
[120D F] In the context of the Income Tax Act, the expression 'employee ' will include a consultant or a technician employed by a foreign company.
The amplitude of the expressions 'employee ' and 'employer ' I) covers the case of the consultant or the technician.
There is nothing in the scheme of the section to warrant any exception, as contended for by the revenue.
[122E; 121B] The High Court was right in dismissing the appeal.[123E] Aiyar `The Lexicon, 1941) Ed.
at page 387, .Shri Chintaman Rao and Anr.
vs The State of Madhya Pradesh.
[19581 S.C.R. 1340 at 1346; Ellis vs Ellis and Co., [19051 1 K.B. 324; Stroud 's Judicial Dictionary, 4th Edition, Vol. 2 at page 893 and Morren vs Swinton and Pendlebury B.C.,[1965] 1 W.L.R, 576, referred to.
