% The respondent mortgaged his shop and delivered possession thereof to the mortgagees with the right to collect rent from the tenant in payment of the interest on the mortgage amount.
The mortgagees let out the premises to the appellant (tenant), during the subsistence of the mortgage.
The respondent filled a suit against the mortgagees for redemption of the mortgage and recovery of vacant possession of the mortgaged shop.
The appellant tenant was also impleaded as a party defendant in the suit.
The suit was decreed and the mortgage was redeemed, with an order to the mortgagees to give possession of the shop to the respondent.
The appellant tenant filed an application under Section 47, read with Section 151 of the C.P.C. stating that the decree of redemption could not be executed and possession given by the mortgagees to the respondent/decree holder, as the tenancy of the appellant subsisted and the same had not been terminated under the provisions of the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950.
This plea of the appellant was rejected by the executing Court which held that the decree was executable and the appellant had no interest and he could not resist the execution of the decree.
Against this Judgment and order of the court, the appellant filed an appeal which was allowed.
Thereupon, the respondent preferred a second appeal which was allowed by the High Court.
The appellant appealed to this Court by special leave against the order of the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court on a conspectus of the various decisions of the Court on the subject, 100 ^ HELD: The lease given by the mortgagee during the subsistence of the mortgage came to an end on the redemption of the mortgage.
The tenant of the mortgagee in possession is not entitled to the protection of the Rent Act against the mortgagor after redemption of the mortgage, as held by the Rajasthan High Court in 1984 R.L.R. 709, following the decisions of this Court.
The letting out of the premises to the appellant tenant was not a prudent act done in the ordinary course of management, as held by all the Courts below.
The respondent/mortgagor landlord is entitled to get recovery of possession.
[106A D] M/s. Sachalmal Parasram vs Mst.
Ratanbai and Ors., AIR 1972 (SC) 637; The All India Film Corp. Ltd. & Ors.
vs Sri Raja Gyan Nath & Ors. ; Mahabir Cope & Ors.
vs Harbans Narain Singh & Ors., ; Hanhar Prasad Singh & Anr.
vs Must.
Of Munshi Nath Prasad & Ors., [1956] SCR t; Asa Ram & Anr.
vs Mst.
Ram Kali Anr.
AIR 1958 (SC) 183 and Om Prakash Garg vs Ganga Sahai & Ors.
JT , referred to.
