% The petitioners, who were engaged on terms of casual labour for periods varying between 10 and 16 years in the Construction Department of the Signal Unit in the Northern Railway, filed writ petitions in this Court alleging that though they had put in continuous service for quite a long period, the Railway Administration the respondent, had not treated them as temporary servants and had applied discriminatory rates of wages, and prayed for a direction to treat them at par with maintenance workers, and to declare that they were entitled to equal pay for equal work and absorption in the regular cadre in The permanent category as per the circulars issued by the respondents.
The respondents in their counter affidavits contested the claim of the petitioners contending that out of the forty four petitioners, sixteen bad been empanelled, five of whom had been given temporary appointments, eleven had refused to join and seventeen had been given temporary status, and that by the Railway Board 's directions on January 1, 1984, project casual labourers were now entitled to all privileges that were applicable to open line temporary railway servants, that temporary status will first be given in the cadre of Khallasis and then promotion to skilled category, after conducting trade test, and that the employees in the open line acquired temporary status on completion of 120 days of service whereas such status was acquired by the casual labour in project work on completion of 360 days as formulated under orders of this Court.
Disposing of the writ petitions, ^ HELD: Casual labour seems to be the requirement of the Railway 139 administration and cannot be avoided.
The Railway Establishment A Manual has made provisions for their protection, but implementation is not effected.
Several instructions were issued by the Railway Board and the Northern Railway Headquarters to remove the difficulties faced by the casual labour but there is slackness in enforcing them.
This Court hopes and trusts that such an unfortunate situation will not arise again and in the event of any such allegation coming to the Court, the Administration will have to be blamed.
[144F G] No doubt, the petitioners have put in more than 360 days of service.
But keeping the prevailing practice, distinction between the casual labour employed in the open line, and in the project line cannot be obliterated.
[141D F] The Railway Administration should take prompt steps to screen such of the petitioners who have not yet been tested for the purpose of regularising their services.
[144C] The respondents are directed to consider the claims of the petitioners promptly and make appropriate orders for their regularisation.
[144D E] The petitioners are entitled to the same pay as is admissible to others, either in the project or in the open line.
Retiral benefit of pension is not admissible.[144D,B]
