% Sub section (3) of section 11 of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965 permits eviction of a tenant where the landlord bona fide needs the building for his own occupation.
The second proviso thereto excepts the tenant depending for his livelihood mainly on business carried on in such building.
Sub section
(1) of section 17 interdicts conversion of a residential building into a non residential one or vice versa and division of such building into separate portions except with the permission of the Accommodation Controller.
The proviso thereto makes the consent of the landlord necessary where such conversion involves structural alteration of the building.
The premises in question was being used by the tenant for nonresidential purpose.
The respondent landlord required it bona fide for his self occupation.
The Rent Controller granted permission under section 11(3) for eviction of the tenant.
The Appellate Authority and the District Judge in revision did not interfere with the concurrent findings of facts on the bonafide need of the landlord.
In second revision the contention that since the requirements of the second proviso to section 11(3) had not been fulfilled, the landlord was not entitled to eviction was rejected by the High Court on the ground that this was a question of fact and ail the courts had found in favour of the landlord.
In the appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellant that since the building in question was used for non residential purpose by the tenant and the landlord required the same for a residential purpose, such a need could not justify tenant 's eviction by virtue of section 17 of the Act which prohibited such conversion.
82 Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: l.
The landlord is entitled to eviction.
It is found as a fact that he bona fide needed the premises in question for his own use and occupation.
Therefore, section 11(3) has been complied with.
[84D E] The prescriptions of section 17 are not attracted to the instant case.
The conversion as contemplated by section 17(1) for which permission was required is conversion by the tenant and cannot be a conversion by the landlord.
The use of expression "such conversion" in the proviso to section 17(t) indicates that in case of conversion by the tenant permission is required on the consent of the landlord.
Further more, the term "convert" therein does not denote a mere change in the mode of occupation but covers only alterations of the physical features.
Putting to a different purpose the user of the building is not a conversion of the building as such.
The building was used for non residential purposes and the purpose for which it was sought was for residential purpose.
It has been found that the building has rooms which can be used as bed rooms, sitting rooms etc.
and it has a kitchen and dining hall.
No alteration or conversion is required if the building is to be used for residential purpose.
There was, therefore, no conversion of the building as such involved in the instant case, but a change of user of the building.
[86A; 85C F, 86B] Muhammed vs Abdul Rahiman, and Das Naik vs Narayanan, , approved.
[Since the appellants tenants have been in possession of the premises for sometime, it was directed that the decree for eviction shall not be executed till 30.9.1988 provided they pay arrears of rent, if any, within one month, and undertake to hand over vacant and peaceful possession, to pay future compensation month by month before 10th of every month and not to induct any other person.[86D G]
