% In the year 1974, the then landlords of the property in dispute, Bhonri Lal and others, filed a suit for eviction against the tenants appellants on the ground of bona fide need, material alterations in the premises and default in payment of the rent.
During the pendency of the suit, the present respondents purchased the property in 1979 and v continued with the suit for eviction.
The trial Court passed a decree for eviction on the ground of material alterations construction of a wooden balcony (Dochhatti) made in the premises by the appellants under section 13(1)(c) of the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950.
The decree of the trial Court was affirmed in Second Appeal by the High Court.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellants appealed to this Court by special leave.
Allowing the Appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The first notice in the case given to the tenants/appellants on behalf of the then landlord Bhonri Lal was through an Advocate and there was no mention of the objection about any construction or material alteration at all.
Another notice dated 13.8.1974, given just a little before the filing of the suit for eviction, also did not contain any mention of any material alteration or construction of the balcony (Dochatti).
There was a reference to some damage to the floor of the property in dispute in that notice, but the same was given up and not pressed.
It was, therefore, plain that if the balcony/Dochatti, which was a wooden structure, was a construction without the permission and consent of the landlord, he would have made it a ground for termination of the lease or a ground of eviction mentioned in any one of the two notices above said, if not both.
It was a significant factor that in the two notices, that construction was not mentioned as a ground.
In his cross examination, Bhonri Lal admit 125 ted that no notice about the balcony had been given, and explained away the reasons therefor.
[131A D] The present respondents purchased the property in dispute during the pendency of the suit.
The statement of Bhonri Lal in cross examination, showed that he had given up his objection to the balcony, and it was also clear from his evidence that the cost of a window, constructed in the year 1964 to give light and air to the balcony, had been borne by the landlord himself.
In the context of that evidence, it was significant that even in the plaint it had not been clearly stated that the balcony had been constructed in the year 1972 as was now alleged.
It was also significant that what was now alleged that the balcony was supported on beams fixed in the walls and pillars fixed in the floor was also not alleged in the plaint at all.
It was also not alleged in the plaint as to how the structure in question which was a wooden structure, easily removable according to the appellants, could be said to be a material alteration or how the same had impaired or damaged or lowered the value of the property involved.
It is true that section 13(1)(c) of the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950, as it stands, does not require that in addition to the material alteration being there, it should be to lower or reduce the value of the property, but it was significant that all the three Courts below had not considered the omission of that allegation in the notices and the statement of Bhonri Lal and other discrepancies in the pleadings, and had come to the conclusion which could not be reached.
The only possible conclusion from these facts could be that either the balcony had been constructed with the implied consent of the landlord or that after seeing it the landlord had decided to waive his objection to it on an assurance given by the tenant, and, therefore, had not made it a ground for termination of the lease in his notices given before the suit; the landlord had waived his right to file a suit on that ground.
All the three Courts had failed to look into these conclusions appearing in evidence and appreciate the matter in this light.
If a party gives up the advantage he could take of a position of law, it is not open to him to change and say that he can avail of that position.
[131F H; 132A D; H] In the context of the conclusion that the Court had reached in the facts and circumstances that it could not be held that the tenants had constructed the wooden balcony or Dochhatti without the consent express or implied of the landlord, it was not necessary for the Court to dilate on the question of waiver any further.
[133C] 126 If the Courts below have, while coming to a conclusion of fact, omitted to consider material pieces of evidence and have drawn inferences without looking into that evidence which proves circumstances on the basis of which a contrary inference could be drawn, then, such findings are not binding on this Court and in this view of the matter, the conclusions reached by the Courts below could not be accepted.
[133E] In the light of the test laid down by this Court in Om Prakash vs Amar Singh and another, A.I.R. 1987 S.C. 617, it was clear that the construction of the balcony (Dochhatti), which was a wooden structure, did not amount to a material alteration which could give a cause of action to the respondents landord for filing a suit for eviction.
The judgments and decrees passed by the Courts below set aside and suit filed by the respondents dismissed.
[137C E ] Om Prakash vs Amar Singh and another, A.I.R. 1987 S.C. 617; Dawsons Bank Ltd. vs Nippon Menkwa Kabushihi Kaish (Japan Cotton Trading Co. Ltd.) A.I.R. 1935 Privy Council 78 and Babu Manmohan Das Shah and Ors., vs Bishun Das, ; , relied upon.
Venkatlal G. Pittle & Anr.
vs M/s. Bright Bros. Pvt. Ltd., (3) S.C. 139, referred to.
