% The Chandigarh administration wanted the printing presses, scattered all over Chandigarh in the residential premises or small shops, to be located in an industrial area.
For that purpose, the administration earmarked forty three sites in the industrial area Phase lI, and invited applications for allotment of the sites.
Several persons submitted the applications with deposits of earnest money of Rs.1,000 in each.
That was ten per cent of the premium payable for each site.
The appellants in the C.A. No. 97 of 1981, who were among the said applicants, were called upon to deposit 25 per cent of the premium calculated at the rate of Rs.15 per square yard.
The appellants complied with that demand.
The authorities decided to draw lots as the applicants were more than the number of the sites available.
In October 1977, lots were drawn and the appellants won.
But the authorities did not issue the letters of allotments.
The authorities had a second thought about the scheme of the allotment of the sites.
They wanted to accommodate as many applicants as possible, which, however, could not be done in the industrial area phase II.
The authorities also came to hold the view that for setting up the printing industry, larger sites as earmarked earlier would not be necessary and smaller sites would meet the requirements.
Consequently, the sites proposed in the industrial phase II were given up and a lay out of smaller sites in the industrial area phase I was prepared, wherein about 131 sites were reserved for allotment to the printing press owners.
The appellants as also the other applicants were intimated by letters that the said sites would be allotted at the rate of Rs.35 per square yard, and that the allotment would be made by draw of lots on October 3, 1979.
The appellants did not participate in the proceedings.
They moved the High Court by a writ petition, challenging the 158 revised policy of the allotment of the smaller sites on the ground inter alia that they had a right to take possession of bigger plots in respect which lots were earlier drawn in their favour.
The High Court did not give substantial relief to the appellants, holding that there was nothing illegal in the said revised policy since the appellants did not acquire right to get bigger sites in the phase II, it directed that the appellants would be liable to pay at the rate of Rs.15 and not Rs.35 per square yard.
The appellants appealed to this Court by special leave against the decision of the High Court (C.A 97 of 1981).
The respondents the Chandigarh Administration also moved this Court by special leave (C.A. No. 98 of 1981) against the direction of the High Court as to the reduced premium to be recovered from the appellants.
Dismissing both the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: There was no substance in the appeal by the respondents.
If the applicants had been allotted sites as per the original plan and as per the first draw in 1977, they would have been liable to pay at the rate of Rs.15 per square yard.
In fact, the other enterpreneurs who were allotted sites in the industrial area phase II paid premium only at the rate of Rs.15 per square yard.
Why then should there be a higher rate payable by the appellants? They had not asked for the sites in the industrial area phase I. Secondly, the applicants were not responsible for the delay in the allotment of sites.
Thirdly, there was no evidence that the Chandigarh Administration had to incur more expenditure in forming the new sites in the phase I. The High Court was right in directing the authorities to recover only at the rate of Rs.15 per square yard.
[161H; 162A C] In the case of the appeal by the appellants/owners of the printing presses, admittedly, at the relevant stage, there was no intimation of the allotment of the sites to the appellants.
There was no official communication to them, as required under sub rule (3) of Rule 8 of the Chandigarh Lease Hold Sites and Building Rules, 1973.
Such an intimation alone could confer the right on the appellants to obtain possession of the sites.
In the absence of any such communication, the appellants could not be held to have the right to get the sites.
[163F G] Emphasis was laid on the word "shall" used in sub rule (3) of Rule 8, which provides that when 10 per cent of the premium has been tendered, the Estate officer shall, subject to such directions as may be issued by the Chief Administrator in that behalf, allot a site of the size 159 applied for.
There is not much force in this contention.
Generally, the use of the word "shall" prima facie indicates that the particular provision is imperative, but that is not so always.
The meaning to be given to a word depends upon the context in which it is used.
The right of every applicant under sub rule (3) of Rule 8 is only a right to have his application considered.
The acceptance of the application does not create a right for allotment of a site.
The word "shall" used in the sub rule must be considered as not mandatory.
imperative meaning would defeat the purpose of the rule.
[163H; 164A B, F] It is not known under what provision the authorities asked the appellants to pay 25 per cent of the premium payable in respect of the sites even before allotment.
There was no specific assurance or representation made by the authorities, promising to allot the sites applied for.
Even if there was any such assurance, the Court did not think that it would give rise to the doctrine of promissory estoppel in the case.
The authorities cannot give assurance contrary to the statutory rules.
They are bound by the rule of procedure and cannot make any representation or promise to allot particular sites to the applicants.
Even if they make such a promise or assurance, the doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be invoked to compel them to carry out the promise or assurance which is contrary to law.
[166B D] If there were enough plots to accommodate all the applicants in the industrial area Phase II, it would not be proper for the authorities to revise the policy and allot smaller sites in phase I.
But no material was placed before the Court to come to the conclusion that there were enough industrial plots to accommodate, possibly, all the applicants.
The authorities formed another lay out in phase I for want of plots in phase II.
The action of the authorities was bona fide and there was no reason to doubt it.
[166F G] The revised policy of the Chandigarh Administration did not suffer from any act of arbitrariness either in classifying the appellants as a separate group or in considering them for allotment of smaller sites in phase I. All the persons, who had applied for industrial sites for establishing printing presses were grouped together.
They were considered together.
They could not be accommodated in phase II for want of enough sites.
So, another lay out was formed in phase I. The grievance of the appellants about the revised policy of the Chandigarh Administration to allot smaller sites to them, being discriminatory, was not justified.
[168H; t69A C] 160 Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 223 of 1974, disposed of by this Court on October 8, 1987 and Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar and Ors,. ; , referred to.
