% The respondent was a Sarpanch of a Gram Panchayat.
Consequent upon a report made by the Sub Divisional officer, against the respondent stating the facts and circumstances which satisfied the conditions mentioned in section 115 of the orissa Gram Panchayat Act, 1964 for his suspension and removal, the second appellant, by his order dated 22.4.85, suspended the respondent.
A notice, as required by sub section (2) of section 151, was served on the Sarpanch who filed his detailed reply and was also personally heard.
As the explanation was not considered satisfactory, an order dated 24.10.86 removing him from the office of the Sarpanch was passed, in which it was mentioned that the appellant 's further continuance in office would be detrimental to the interest of the Gram Panchayat as also of the inhabitants of the Grama.
A second notification dated 24.10.86 under sub section (4) was also passed.
The Sarpanch challenged the above notifications before the High Court.
The High Court quashed the notifications on the sole and simple ground that the order did not satisfy one of the mandatory requirements, i.e. the appellant 's further continuance in the office would be detrimental to the interest of the Gram Panchayat or inhabitants of the Grama.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The language of sub section (2) does not require a repetition of the necessary satisfaction in the same language as referable to sub section (1).
Besides, the section cannot be interpreted to mandatorily lay down a rule for the authority concerned to express his conclusion in relation to the fulfilment of the conditions mentioned therein in a particular form using a particular set of words.
[181B] 178 What is contemplated by the section is the formation of an opinion in this regard after giving a reasonable opportunity to the Sarpanch in question to meet the allegations suggested and to announce the conclusion in unambiguous and express terms.
All that has been done in the instant case.
1 [181B C] The second appellant, while passing the order of suspension under sub section (l) of section 115, expressly stated that further continuance of the appellant in the office would be detrimental to the interest of the Gram Panchayat and the inhabitants of the Grama.
The State Government was of the opinion that the circumstances specified in sub section (1) existed.
In the order of removal, the State Government after mentioning the allegations, stated that the explanation of the Sarpanch was not acceptable and he was, therefore, being removed from the office.
The allegations made against him thus were accepted as correct.
The High Court was, therefore, not justified in quashing the impugned orders.[180 H; 181A,C]
