% The respondent was appointed a transport and handling Contractor by the appellant subject to the terms and conditions mentioned in three successive written agreements entered into by both the parties.
After disputes arose between the parties, an arbitrator was appointed as per the arbitration clause to adjudicate upon the disputes.
The arbitrator made and published an award which was a speaking one.
He did not allow the appellant 's claim for demurrage and wharfage charges paid to the Railways amounting to Rs.15,63,863.02 by reason of the alleged wrongful conduct of the respondent but awarded only 25% of the claim.
The arbitrator also did not allow the appellant 's claim for shortage in transit but reduced the claim by 40% and allowed only 60% of it amounting to Rs.52,971.99.
The arbitrator awarded to the respondent Rs.12,64,175.97 and pendente lite interest at 6% per annum.
The appellant filed objections in the High Court under sections 30 and 33 of the ( 'The Act ') for setting aside the award.
The High Court (Single Judge) set aside the award.
The respondent filed an appeal to the Division Bench of the High Court which allowed the same, setting aside the judgment of the learned single judge and upholding the award.
Being aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellant appealed to This Court for relief by special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: While issuing notice on the application under Article 136 of the Constitution, it was indicated that only three questions would be adjudicated upon in this appeal, viz, Rs.13,94,982.46 being the amount allowed on account of demurrage and wharfage charges mentioned in the award, secondly, the sum of Rs.2,35,769.46 and lastly, the question of interest.
[332G] 330 So far as the second question was concerned, counsel for the appellant did not make any submission before the Court.
The Court also could not find any substance in this aspect.
Therefore, it was not necessary to deal with this aspect of the matter.
[332H; 333A] So far as the amount of Rs.13,94,982.46 on account of demurrage and wharfage was concerned, which was allowed, it appeared that the total demurrage and wharfage charges paid by the Corporation to the Railways in respect of the wagons cleared by the claimant firm, respondent herein, after obtaining such waiver as the Railways were persuaded to make were Rs.15,63,863.21.
There was no dispute about the actual payment of the charges.
The appellant 's case was that it was entitled to recover the entire amount it had to pay on account of the demurrage and wharfage charges from the respondent under clause 9(a) of the agreement.
[333B C] Under clause 9(a) according to the appellant, the Agent was liable to make good any compensation/demurrage/wharfage as per Railway rates in force during the period of contract and other charges or expenses that might be incurred by the Corporation on account of delay in loading/unloading of trucks/carts and unloading/loading of wagons unless the delay was for reasons beyond the Agent 's control.
It appeared that the appellant had periodically served notices upon the respondent of firm calling upon it to pay demurrage and wharfage charges with liberty prefer objections.
Such objections as the respondent firm preferred were disposed of by the District Manager.
This procedure continued till the end of November, 1975.
Then the respondent firm went to the Civil Court and obtained discontinuance of all proceedings for the recovery of demurrage and wharfage charges.
The arbitrator noted that as a result of the hearings by the Corporation upto November, 1975, relief to the tune of Rs.1,21,884.55 was granted to the respondent firm and the recovery of Rs.45,996.20 was made from the respondent firm 's bills.
The Corporation, therefore, claimed before the arbitrator recovery of the remaining or the claim of Rs.13,94,982.46.
Counsel for the appellant drew this Court 's attention to clauses 9(a) and (b) of the agreement and submitted that the adjudication made by the Manager was final and there was no dispute thereafter.
According to him, no further deduction was possible from what had been granted by the Manager for determination on account of demurrage and wharfage charges, nor was it arbitrable because it was final.
[334B E] It appears on the facts as recorded by the arbitrator in his award that there was adjudication really by the Manager of the claims upto 331 November, 1975.
Thereafter, there could be no adjudication as a result of injunction obtained from the Court.
Therefore, it appeared that there was in fact no adjudication of all the disputes.
The remaining points were arbitrable because of the amplitude of the arbitration clause.
It was not brought to the notice of the Court that there was an adjudication by the Manager of the claim for the period beyond November, 1975, as mentioned hereinbefore.
Therefore, the arbitrator was not in error in proceeding in the manner he did.
There was no other aspect of law on this aspect of the matter to which the attention of the Court was drawn.
The submission on this aspect was, therefore, negatived and the challenge to the award on this aspect must fail.
[337C D; 338B] So far as the grant of interest pendente lite in the award was concerned, reliance was placed on various decisions of this Court.
In deference to the latest pronouncement of this Court, which is a pronouncement of three learned Judges, in Executive Engineer Irrigation Galimala & Ors.
vs Abaadute Jena, (J.T. , the Court held that the grant of pendente lite interest in this case was was not justified.
Though the award in this case was a speaking award, it was not made clear on what basis the interest was awarded.
The arbitrator was in error in granting the interest in the manner he did .
It was true that in specific terms there was no denial on this right to grant interest, but there was denial as to get it in accordance with law.[338C D; 340E F] In awarding the interest the arbitrator committed an error of law.
With this modification, the judgment and order of the High Court were affirmed.
[340F G] Wadsworth vs Smith, L.R. Vol.
VI Q.B. 332; State of Orissa and others, vs Construction India, J.T. [1987] 4 S.C. 588; Executive Engineer Irrigation Galimala & Ors.
vs Abaaduta Jena, J.T. , Firm Madan lal Roshanlal Mahajan vs Hukumchand Mills Ltd., Indore, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 105; State of Madhya Pradesh vs M/s. Saith & Skelton (P) Ltd., ; ; M/s. Ashok Construction Company vs Union of India, and M/s. Alopi Parshad referred to.
