% Rule 6 of the Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class I and Class II) Rules, 1963 interdicts appointment to the service except duly qualified persons.
The requisite qualification laid down by Appendix 'A ' to the Rules for Class I post of Director of Ayurved includes (1) a five years ' degree course in Ayurvedic system of medicine, and (2) Doctor of Science in Ayurvedic Medicine.
For the posts of Professor, Assistant Director and deputy Director of Ayurved the requisite qualification is a five years regular course in Ayurvedic system of medicine.
The appellant had read as a regular student for three years in the first instance, and for the remaining two years he was directly under a qualified, Professor.
He had then obtained a degree from a recognised University.
Later he acquired the Doctor of Science Degree in Ayurved.
He was appointed as a Professor of Ayurvedic Medicine under the Punjab Government and later as Deputy Director.
He was further promoted as Director.
His appointment as Director was challenged for lack of requisite qualification in a writ of quo warranto by respondents, 2, 3 and 4.
In the return made to rule he averred that the petitioners respondents, his one time students, had filed the application on account of ill motive.
He was reverted to the post of Deputy Director on October 21, 1981 during 364 the pendency of the writ petition which he challenged in a connected writ petition.
he superannuated from the post of Deputy Director on October 31, 1987.
The High Court held that the appellant was not qualified to hold the post of Director since he had not studied in a regular course for five years to obtain the degree, though it found that he possessed the second qualification, namely, Doctor of Science Degree, and a degree in Ayurvedic system of medicine duly recognised by the Government of Punjab.
Consequently, in the connected writ petition the High Court took the view that he was not entitled to challenge reversion to the post of Deputy Director.
Allowing the appeals with costs, ^ HELD: 1.1.
The writ petitioners have failed to establish that the appellant did not possess the requisite qualification.
In fact he had read as a regular student for three years in the first instance and for the remaining two years he was directly under a qualified Professor.
After reading for five years he had obtained the degree which has been from a recognised University.
[368E] 1.2 The appellant had been serving as Professor for several years.
As far as the qualification goes there is no difference in the case of a Professor and that of a Director.
In giving appointment to the appellant as Professor, the Government must have been satisfied that he had the requisite qualification.
[368B] 1.3 There was no challenge to the appointment of the appellant to the post of Deputy Director.
The first item of the qualification is the same for the Director as also the Assistant Director and the Deputy Director.
The appellant held a post between the two.
The High Court should have looked into this aspect to find out what exactly was the requirement.
[368D; A] 1.4 The High Court should have given due consideration to the background and the history of the matter.
Ayurveda is the traditional method of medical attention.
In the post medieval India the system had suffered a set back but in the post independence period it has been accepted as a regular course of study and recognised as a system of therapy.
[369B; 368H] 1.5 The appellant has alleged that the writ petition was the out 365 come of malice and ill will.
The High Court did not appropriately advert to this aspect.
The petitioners respondents were the once upon a time students of the appellant.
Ordinarily one would except obligations, piety and reverence in their conduct towards the appellant, especially in the traditional system of Ayurved culture.
Surprisingly that seems to have been totally wanting.
[369C] 2.
Since the reversion of the appellant was grounded upon non possession of the requisite qualification the order of the High Court in the connected writ petition cannot be sustained.
[369F G] 3.
The appellant shall be treated to have been regularly appointed as Director of Ayurved and to have been retired in that post, the order of reversion notwithstanding.
He shall be entitled to all the benefits prescribed for the post of Director from the date he came to the post till he retired.
[369G H] Statesman (Private) Ltd. vs H.R. Deb & Ors., ; , referred to.
