% Controversies relating to the seniority of the officers in the Indian Forest Service (I.F.S., for short) in this batch of cases from the States of Maharashtra, orissa and Uttar Pradesh, arose as asequal to three decisions of this Court in regard to the constitution of the Indian Forest Service, in Kraipak vs Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 150; Parvez Qadir vs Union of India, and Union of India vs Chothia, ; The Court had to consider in these cases the questions arising out of the selections made by the Special Selection Boards (S.S. Bs.) in place of the selections set aside by the Kraipak case above mentioned, and was concerned with the initial recruitment under section 4(1) of the I.F.S. (Recruitment) Rules, 1966.
The first selections by way of initial recruitments to the State cadres were made sometime in 1966 and 1967.
The Kraipak decision came in 1969.
In the meanwhile, in many of the States, the first selection had been made followed up by subsequent recruitments largely made on the basis of competitive examination under rule 4(2)(a) of the Recruitment Rules and a few also, by promotion under rule 4(2)(b).
As a result of the second (and third) selections made by the S.S.B., a number of officers in the respective State Forest Service (S.F.S.) had been given appointment in the IFS with effect from October 1, 1966, under rule 4(3A) and were placed in a position of higher seniority vis a vis the recruits direct recruits under rule 4(2).
The direct recruits were dissatisfied with this.
In the case of Uttar Pradesh, nine petitioners moved the High Court for relief, out of whom, eight direct recruits of 1968 and 1969 confirmed between 1969 and 1972 came up in appeal to this Court.
In this State, the initial recruitment was made in 1966 67 of 85 officers, 58 to the posts in the senior time scale and 27 to the posts in the junior time scale.
Subsequently, six persons were promoted under rule 4(2)(b) and 286 nine persons were recruited under rule 4(2)(a) of the Recruitment Rules.
the initial recruitment having been declared bad, a fresh S.S.B. was appointed and, on its recommendations, 104 persons were appointed to the service, 60 to senior scale posts and 44 to junior scale posts.
Again, in 1976, six more persons were added and thus 110 persons were taken in by way of initial recruitment as against 85 persons taken in the first selection.
The direct recruits were aggrieved by these selections.
Their case was rejected by the High Court.
In the case of Maharashtra, the first selection was made on 2.2.1967 of 57 officers, 36 for the senior time scale and 21 for the junior time scale.
This was set aside.
On July 13, 1971, at the second selection, 116 officers were found eligible but only 66 were considered suitable for appointment.
39 out of 51 eligible officers were found suitable for the senior scale, of whom, 35 were appointed immediately and four, later.
For junior scale 27 were found suitable, out of whom 23 were appointed initially and four, later.
All these 66 appointments were made w.e.f. t. tO. 1966.
Some persons, who had joined the State Forest Service in 1962 and had put in 4 years ' service as on 1.10.1966, and were thus eligible for consideration for junior scale posts, filed a writ petition in the High Court.
Their grievance was that the government had not considered all the officers who were eligible for the junior posts, as should have been done as laid down in the Chothia case aforementioned.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions.
Some of the respondents, comprising persons, who had been directly recruited under rule 4(2) between 1968 and 1970, appealed to this Court against the decision of the High Court.
In the case of Orissa, eight persons moved this Court by Writ Petitions.
They had joined the orissa State Forest Service as on 1.4.1962.
After two years ' training, they had been appointed Assistant Conservators of Forests on 1.4.1964.
By 1.4.1966, they had four years ' continuous service in the State Cadre.
They had become eligible for selection to junior scale posts in the l.
F.S. Two selections were made by way of initial recruitment, once in January, 1967, when 41 officers were selected, and, then, in 1972, 42 out of 82 eligible officers were selected.
The petitioners were taken into the I.F.S. under rule 4(2)(b) between 1975 and 1977.
The petitioners ' contention was that their names were not considered at all either at the first selection or at the second selection, and the selections were made by considering eligible officers in the order of seniority only to recruit 41 or 42 persons.
The government did not consider all the 82 eligible officers and select 34 out of them arranged in the order of preference, and this vitiated the selection, as 287 held in the Chothia case afore mentioned.
Dismissing the appeals from U.P. and Maharashtra subject to observations and allowing the Orissa writ petitions, and directing the Special Selection Board to redo the selections in the light of the principles set out, the Court, ^ HELD: The initial recruitment regulations clearly envisage that the Special Selection Board should consider the cases of all the officers in the State Forest Service who fulfil the conditions of eligibility and judge their suitability for appointment to posts in the service and prepare a list of such officers in the order of preference.
This selection was done by a Board, the constitution of which was found to be vitiated.
The logical consequence of this would be that the process of selection had to be redone by a validly appointed S.S.B., before which the range of selection was the same as was, or should have been, considered by the initial S.S.B. i.e. Out of those officers in the S.F.S. who were eligible as on 1.10.66.
However, there had been some changes subsequent to 1.10.66 in the C.R.S.
Of some of the officers pertaining to the period upto 1.
10.66, consequent on the representations for expunction or modification of the adverse remarks, and nobody could validly object to these persons also being considered since the case of an officers who has the adverse remark against him struck off or modified, is on the footing as if such adverse remark had not been there at all, or had been in the modified form from the beginning.
The decision in the Kraipak case necessitated a complete review of the first selection.
The subsequent selection Boards could not be compelled to restrict their adjudication regarding suitability to the same number of persons as the first Board had selected, so long as the same list of eligible officers and their records as on 1.10.1966 were considered.
[309D H; 310C D] The first proviso to rule 4(2) of the cadre Rules, only outlines the general principle that whoever has the power to do a particular thing, has also the power to exercise it from time to time, if needed.
The Central Government has the power to alter the strength and composition of the cadres at any time.
However, if the terms of the relevant rules are scruitinized, it will be seen that the strength and composition of the cadres have to be determined by regulations which have to be made by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government.
If the initial composition can be only drawn up in consultation with the State Government and by Regulations, it will not be permissible for the Central Government to modify or alter the same save in the same manner.
It is not possible to accept the contention of 288 the initial recruits that the mere appointment of an excess number of officers should be treated as an automatic expansion of the cadre strength and composition in exercise of the power available under rule 4(1).
[312D E; 313A B] These cases are concerned with a set of Regulations whose whole purpose is to fix the cadre strength.
It is also a provision in regard to an All lndia Service in regard to the constitution of which both the Central Government and the State Governments have a say.
The cadre strength could not be varied without amending the Regulations and schedule or without.
lt consulting the State Government concerned.
[313H;314A] The Cadre Regulations, read with the Cadre Rules, leave no doubt that the strength and composition referred to or prescribed therein, are of the entire cadre of the service in the State concerned and are not restricted to the recruitments made after the initial recruitment.
The total authorised strength referred to is the total number of officers, who, at any point of time, can man the posts in the cadre.
It could not have been the intention that the cadre should consist of an indefinite number of persons recruited by the S.S.B. from the S.F.S. supplemented by the number of officers referred to as the total authorised strength.
There is no difficulty in holding that the total strength of the cadre is to be counted by including the initial recruits and that all the eligible officers adjudged suitable cannot be recruited to the service in excess of the total authorised strength.
[314E F; 316B] The critical and difficult question in these appeals is not that appointments by way of initial recruitment were made in excess of the total authorised strength but that the government has failed to keep in mind the restrictions placed on the number of senior and junior posts in each cadre while making appointments.
The grievance of the appellants is that more recruitments have been made against the junior posts than is permissible under the respective schedule.
[316C E] The initial recruits are right in contending that the Cadre Regulations do not lay down any water tight classification of junior and senior posts in the manner contended for by the direct recruits.
It is true that the Cadre Regulations make a reference to seniors and junior posts, but this is not intended to be an essential element in the composition of the cadre.
The Cadre Rules do not indicate, in respect of some posts, whether they are to be considered as junior or senior, and they contain no definition of the words 'senior ' and 'junior ' posts.
It cannot be postulated that the entrants to the service will first enter on a junior 289 scale post and work their way upward.
All the rules show that an officer, being in the junior or senior time scale or on a junior post or senior post, depends upon various eventualities, and it is not possible to pin down any posts as senior or junior or any officer as on one of the two time scales.
The Court agreed with the initial recruits that the reference to junior and senior posts in the cadre should not be considered to be so rigid or integral a part of the cadre composition as to affect the validity of the appointments made m excess of a particular number.
[318B C; 319B C] One thing plain on the terms of the Regulations is that once a person is found to be eligible and is adjudged suitable for recruitment under the Initial Recruitment Regulations, he has to be taken into service as a part of the initial recruitment either immediately on 1.10.1966 or as and when the vacancies arise in the cadre.
It is necessary to remember that if the vacancies are in senior posts, they can be filled only by S.F.S. Officers with eight years ' continuous service, and exhypothesi such officers will not be available for at least four more years, and if the vacancies are of junior posts, they can be filled in only after a competitive examinations is held, which will take time.
The Court cannot accept the contention that officers of the S.F.S., who have been adjudged suitable by the S.S.B. should not be taken into the service merely because their number exceeds the number of posts available.
True, they cannot be appointed immediately but the consequence cannot be that they should be ignored and persons recruited under rule 4(2) given preference over them.
It is only rational to interpret the rules as laying down that all those officers of the S.F.S. with eight or four years ' experience, who are adjudged suitable for the service should be recruited to the service bef ore any recruitment can at all start under rule 4(2).
Whether all such persons are entitled to the back dating of their appointment to 1.10.1966 or not, they are certainly entitled to contend that their appointment should be given precedence over the appointments of the recruits under rule 4(2) of the Recruitment Rules.
In this view of the matter, the plea of the petitioners that they will get precedence over the surplus officers among the eligible cannot at all be accepted.
It is only right that persons should be adjudged on the basis of the correct C.R.S. Any.
Expunction or modification in the C.R.S.
Of a period naturally relates back to that period and no legitimate objection can be taken if the correct C.R.S are taken into account.
There was nothing wrong in the selections made by the Selection Board.
[319D E; 320D E; 321C E] Rule 4(3A) only places the fresh recruits in the same position as if they had been recruited in the first instance, i.e. on 1.10.1966 as indeed 290 they should have been, and thus involves no retrospective effect beyond the date of commencement of the Act.
It is also not 'correct to suggest that it prejudicially affects the direct recruits in any way.
The appellants acquire under the Rules no right to be in service until after the initial recruitment is over.
Under the Rules, they can rank only after the candidates who get in by way of initial recruitment.
The appellants cannot be aggrieved that those in service in the S.F.S. are found suitable for recruitment to the service and taken into service w.e.f. 1. 10.1966.
Those persons, even if not entitled to appointment as on 1. 10.1966, are entitled to be appointed as and when vacancies arise and must always be given a position of precedence over the recruits under Rule 4(2).
The direct recruits can hardly claim that they are prejudicially affected by the re making of the initial recruitment.
[323D G] So far as Orissa is concerned, all the 82 eligible officers had to be considered for initial recruitment, but the S.S.B. merely selected 42 officers and made an omnibus observation that the others were found unsuitable.
This, as explained Chothia 's case is not a proper compliance with the Rules, and so the selection has to be set aside with a direction that it should be re done properly.[324A B] There has been delay on the part of the petitioners in coming to this Court, but in view of the complicated nature of the issues involved, the petitioners should not be put out of the court on the ground of laches.
All the 82 eligible officers as on 1.10.66 should be considered and not merely some of them.
Their suitability should be adjudged.
If they are not found suitable, reasons should be given which the U.P.S.C. should be able to consider.
If they are found suitable, a list of such officers should be drawn up with ranking given to them in the order of preference for the consideration of the U.P.S.C.
Since this has not been done, the recruitments have to be set aside and the matter remanded with the direction that it should be finalised as per the Recruitment Rules and in the light of the judgment.
[324E G] If the Court had agreed with the direct recruits that there had been some invalidity or infirmity attached to the subsequent selections by way of initial recruitment, the Court would not have rejected the appeals on the ground that the Regulations cannot give rise to a cause of action.
There is no error in the procedure followed by the Government.
[327E] It is not the intention of the Court, nor can it be the result of dis 291 cussion, that the appointments of any officers recruited under rule 4(1) or 4(2) should be considered invalid.
All the officers selected will have to be adjusted, if necessary, by amending the Cadre Regulations.
The only result of the Court 's findings would be the re adjustment of the seniority with necessary and consequential effect on promotions in the service.
[327G] No merit in the appeals from U.P. and Maharashtra, Orissa writ petitions allowed, S.S.B. directed to re do the selections in the light of the principles set out in the judgment.[328A B] Kraipak vs Union of India, AIR 1970, SC 150; Parvez Qadir vs Union of India, ; ; Union of India vs Chothia; , ; Jagat Narain vs Union, CMWP 58 of 1968; Lila Gupta vs Lakshmi Narain, ; at 932; Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd. vs State of Haryana, ; at 1076, 1084, 1085; G.S. Lamba vs Union of India, at 1032; Kapur vs Union of India, ; Union of India vs Harnek Singh, L.P.A. 406/83, decided by the Punjab & Haryana High Court on 20.9.1983; Inderjit Singh vs Union of India, ; Amrik Singh and Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, and R.R. Verma and Ors.
vs The Union of India & Ors., , referred to.
