% The appellant, an employee of the Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies (I.C.P.S., for short), was dismissed from service by order dated November 17, 1982, as a result of disciplinary action.
He challenged the dismissal order by a writ petition before the High Court.
The question whether the I.C.P.S. was a 'State ' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution arose for consideration as a major issue in the matter before the High Court.
A Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the petition, holding that the employer was neither an agency nor an instrumentality of the government and did not constitute 'State ' as above said, and, therefore, was not subject to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
The appeal against that judgment of the Single Judge was dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellant moved this Court by special leave.
Disposing of the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: In the course of hearing, Dr. Anand Prakash, counsel for the I.C.P.S., respondent No. 2, stated that whether the Institute be 'State ' or not within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, the employer was prepared to give a fresh opportunity to the appellant to meet the charges against him.
With that concession, the order of dismissal, etc.
passed against the appellant should have been set aside and the matter should have gone before the enquiry officer, but Dr. Anand Prakash as also counsel for the Union of India invited the Court to decide the issue as to whether the I.C.P.S. constituted 'State ' within the constitutional meaning of the term.
[263H; 264A C] The main question for consideration then was whether I.C.P.S. was a 'State '.
I.C.P.S. could become 'State ' only if it was found to be an authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.
[264D,G] 261 I.C.P.S. is a registered society.
The emergence of a new generation within less than two decades of independence gave rise to a feeling that the people 's representatives in the Legislatures required the acquisition of the appropriate democratic bias and spirit.
I.C.P.S. was born as a voluntary organisation to fulfil this requirement.
The Speaker of the Lok Sabha was its first President.
Three Ministers, a former Chief Justice of India and a former Attorney General joined as its Vice Presidents.
Some of the public officers were associated in its Administrative set up.
Services of some employees of Parliament were lent to it.
While Article 12 refers to Parliament as such, a few members of Parliament cannot be considered as Parliament so as to constitute that body as referred to in Article 12.
The Speaker and the Ministers who joined as Vice Presidents of the Society were there in their personal capacities and not as Ministers, etc.
There were many people in the category of Vice President, Executive Chairman, Treasurer and members, who were not a part of the Government, and some of them did not belong to Parliament.
[281A F] The objects of the Society were not governmental business.
Many of the objects of the Society were not confined to the two Houses of Parliament and were intended to have an impact on Society at large.
[281G H] The Memorandum of the Society permitted acceptance of gifts, donations and subscriptions.
No material was placed before the Court for the stand that the Society was not entitled to receive contributions from any indigenous source without government sanction.
Since government money has been coming, the usual conditions attached to government grants have been applied and enforced.
If the Society 's affairs were really intended to be carried on as a part of the Lok Sabha or Parliament as such, the manner of functioning would have been different.
The accounts of the Society are subject to audit as the affairs of the Societies receiving government grants are.
Government imposes conditions and restrictions when grants are made, and the Society is also subject to the same, and the mere fact that such restrictions are made is not a determinative aspect.[281H; 282 A D] There are registered societies which have been treated as 'State ', but in the case of each of them, either governmental business had been undertaken by the Society or what was expected to be the public obligation of the 'State ' had been undertaken to be performed as a part of the Society 's function.
[282H; 283A] 262 Having given anxious consideration to the facts of the case, the Court is not in a position to hold that I.C.P.S. is either an agency or an instrumentality of the State so as to come within the purview of other authorities"in Article 12 of the Constitution.
I.C.P.S. is a case of its type typical in many ways and normal tests may, perhaps, not properly apply to test its character.
Even if some institution becomes 'State ' within the meaning of Article 12, its employees do not become holders of Civil posts so as to become entitled to the cover of Article 311 of the Constitution.
They would, however, be entitled to the benefits of Part III of the Constitution.
It is unnecessary to examine the appellant 's case, keeping Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution in view, as, on the concession of counsel for I.C.P.S., the proceedings would have to re open.
[283C E] In the result, the appellant would be entitled to the following reliefs.
The order of dismissal set aside and the proceedings restored to the stage of enquiry.
[283F] The appellant shall be deemed to have been restored to service and he would become entitled to normal relief available in such a situation.
He should be deemed to be in service and his suspension would not continue.
His suspension, which had merged into dismissal is vacated.
It shall, however, be open to the employer to make any direction as is deemed appropriate in that behalf in future.
[283F G] The appellant becomes entitled to salary for the past period subject to his satisfying the authorities that he had not earned any income during that period.
[283H] The appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity by the enquiring officer to meet the charges and the enquiry shall be completed within four months.
[283H; 284A] The enquiry officer shall allow inspection to the appellant of all records relevant to the enquiry.
[284B] Rajasthan State Electricity Board, Jaipur vs Mohan Lal and Ors.
, ; ; Smt.
Ujjam Bai vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1963] l SCR 778; Sabhajit Tewary vs Union of India Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi & Anr.
, ; ; Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs The 263 International Airport Authority of India & Ors., ; ; Managing Director, Uttar Pradesh Warehousing Corporation & Anr.
vs Vinay Narayan Vajpayee, ; ; Ajay Hasia, etc.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors. etc.
; , ; Som Prakash Rekhi v Union of India and Anr., ; ; B.S.Minhas vs Indian Statistical Institute & Ors., ; and P. K Ramachandra Iyer and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
