% Words and Phrases 'Timer ' 'Fire ' wood ' Meaning of.
The Forest Department of Madhya Pradesh sold to the appellants, who are dealers in timber, stacks of "eucalyptus wood" after separating the "Ballies" and "poles".
Sales tax at the rate of 16% ad valorem leviable on the sale of 'timber ' under Entry 32A of part II of Schedule Il of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958, was sought to be recovered from the appellants on the grounds that what was sold was 'timber '.
The levy was challenged by the appellants in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.
The High Court rejected the appellants ' contention that what was sold, being left overs after the extraction of "poles" and "Ballies", was merely 'fire wood ' within the meaning of and attracting entry No. 12 of Part V of Schedule II of the Act and thus liable to sales tax only at the rate of 3%.
The High Court upheld the levy on the view that the goods were 'Timber ' and attracted entry 32A of Part II.
The High Court took the view that where the wood was not, in the normally accepted commercial practice, fire wood, and more especially, where the wood was sold and purchased subject to specifications which conduce the wood to particular purposes other than fuel, the goods sold cannot be regarded as firewood.
The appellants ' contentions reiterated before this Court were (t) that what was sold were the left overs and remnants, (2) that the forest department had itself described the goods in the tender notice as 'fire wood heaps ', (3) that the wood stacks could, by no stretch of imagination, be held to answer the well known concept of 'Timber ', and (4) that the wood sold was 'fire wood ' or at all events, plain 'wood ' not amounting to 'Timber ' or 'firewood ' in which case it fell within the residuary entry.
502 The respondents, on the other hand, urged that the 'wood ' sold did not admit of being described as 'fire wood ' because nobody used eucalyptus wood as fire wood due to its very high cost.
Allowing the appeal in part and remitting the matter to the High Court it was, ^ HELD: (I) The finding of the High Court that the goods was 'Timber ' appears to have been reached as necessary consequence and logical corollory of the goods not being 'fire wood '.
If the wood is pot "fire wood" it need not necessarily and for that reason alone be 'Timber '.
All wood is not timber as, indeed, all wood is not 'fire wood ' either though perhaps it may not be incorrect to say that both 'firewood ' and 'Timber ' are 'wood ' in its generic sense.[508C] (2) All parts of portions of even a timber tree need not necessarily be 'Timber '.
Some parts are timber, some parts merely 'fire wood ', and yet others merely 'wood '.
[509F] (3) In a taxing statute words which are not technical expressions or words of art, but are words of everyday use, must be understood and given a meaning, not in their technical or scientific sense, but in a sense as understood in common parlance i.e. "that sense which people conversant with the subject matter with which the statute is dealing, would attribute to it.
" Such words must be understood in their popular sense.
[505B C] (4) The use to which the 'goods ' are capable of being put is not determinative of the nature of the goods; nor even the nomenclature of the goods as given by till theoretic is determinative.
The fact that the purchasers were dealers in timber is also not conclusive.
[508G] (5) The expression 'Timber ' has an accepted and well recognised legal connotation and is nomen juris.
It has also a popular meaning as a word of everyday use.
In its popular sense, 'timber ' is understood to be 'imarathi Lakdi '.
In a popular sense 'Timber ' has certain association of ideas: as to its size, stability, utility, durability, the unit of measure of quantity and of valuation etc.
[505D; 507A] (6) Having regard.
to the size, nature and description of the wood in the present case, the 'wood heaps ' were not susceptible to be or did not admit of being called 'Timber ' with all the concomitants and associations of that idea.
[509F] 503 (7) No tests of general validity applicable to or governing all A cases can at all be laid down.
Perhaps different considerations might apply if, say, the pieces of eucalyptus wood are of a longer length or of a higher girth.
Differences of degree can bring about differences of kind.
[509E G] Shantabai vs State of Bombay, ; ; referred to.
