% The respondent, a partnership firm, carried on business termed as a "Scheme for Investment".
The Registrar of Firms, Societies and Chits, the appellant, holding the view that the investment scheme of the respondent company fell within the prohibited category of prize chits as defined in section 2(e) of the Prize Chits and Money Circulation Scheme (Banking) Act, 1978, seized all the documents of the company and directed the concerned banks not to have accounts in relation thereto.
The respondent challenged the action of the appellant by a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition, quashing the orders of the appellant.
The appellant appealed to this Court by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The prize chit, by a simple definition, includes a scheme by which a person in whatever name collects moneys from individuals for the purpose of giving prizes and refunding the balance with or without premium after the expiry of a specified period.
The reach and range of the definition of 'Prize Chit ' is sweeping.
The participation of any person in such chit or scheme has been prohibited, the object being that people should not be attracted to invest their moneys in the hope of getting prizes or gifts.
[468A B, Cl There is no doubt that the scheme of the company is primarily for the benefit of the promoter or the company at the cost of the subscribers.
Section 2(e) of the Act was intended to cover all such arrangements or schemes.
It is emphasized that the Act was intended to ban all kinds of prize chits where people part with their money and risk the chance of 457 getting prizes and gifts, and to protect the people from exploitation.
A Any scheme or arrangement in which a person agrees to lose or is make to part with a portion of his payment against the chance of getting any prize or gift, should be considered as prize chit: falling within the inclusive definition under Section 2(e).
The scheme of the company is nothing but prize Chit as defined under Section 2(e) of the Act.
The conclusion of the High Court is patently erroneous and is unsustainable both on facts and law.
The action of the Registrar, appellant, upheld.
[473E H;; 473A B] OBSERVATION: The Registrar of the firms will, while taking action against the persons or firms under the Act, take care to see that the members of the scheme are not denied, their contributions or prises which they are legitimately entitled to, if the prize chit is allowed to be run for the full term.
[473B C] Srinivasa Enterprises and others vs Union of India etc.; , at 804 and Reserve Bank of India vs Peerless General Insurance and investment Co. Ltd., A.I.R. referred to.
