% The Assam Taxation (on Goods Carried by Road or Inland Water ways) Act,1954 was struck down as ultra vires the Constitution in Atiabari Tea Co. Lld.
vs State of Assam, ; A new Act was thereafter passed which received the President 's assent on April 6, 1961.
The High Court declared the said Act to be ultra vires on August 1, 1963.
The State and other respondents preferred appeals before Supreme Court against the decision.
In the meantime, in Khyerbari Tea Co. Ltd. & Anr.
vs State of Assam, ; the Court held the Act to be intra vires on December 13, 1963.
Following the decision in Khyerbari case the appeals filed by the State and others were allowed by this Court on April 1, 1968.
After this decision the respondents required the appellants by notices under section 7(2) of the Act issued on July 8, 1968 to submit return for the period ending June 30, 1961, September 30, 1961, December 31, 1961 and March 31, 1962.
Due to the penal consequences mentioned in the said notices the appellants filed returns on July 11, 1968.
The assessment orders were passed under section 9(3) of the Act.
The tax was duly paid.
In November 1973 the appellants filed writ petitions before the High Court seeking direction for refund of the tax paid under mistake relying on the High Court 's Judgment in Loong Soong Tea Estate (Civil Rule No. 1005 of 1969) dated July lO, 1973 declaring the assessment as without jurisdiction.
475 The High Court set aside the orders and notices of demand but refused claim of refund on the ground of delay and laches.
It took the view that it was possible for the appellants to know about the legality of the tax sought to be imposed as early as 1963, when the Act in question was declared ultra vires.
The taxes having been paid in 1968 the claim in November 1973 was belated.
It, however, held that the claim for refund was a consequential relief.
In the appeals to this Court it was contended for the appellants that they had paid the tax under a mistake of law and were entitled to seek refund thereof, and a writ petition seeking refund of tax realised without the authority of law cannot be rejected on the ground of limitation or delay unless such delay can be said to amount to laches or has caused some irreparable prejudice to the opposite party.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: By the Court: (Per Sabyasachi Mukharji & Ranganathan, JJ.) The money was refundable to the appellants.
The writ petitions were within time.
[4X4H] Per Mukharji, J. 1.
No State has the right to receive or to retain taxes or monies realised from citizens without the authority of law.
There is in such cases concomitant duty to refund the realisation as a corollary of the constitutional inhibition that should be respected unless it causes injustice or loss in any specific case or violates any specific provision of law.
[480H; 485E F] In the instant case, tax was collected without the authority of law.
The notices were without jurisdiction.
So was the assessment made under section 9(3) of the Act.
The respondents, therefore, had no authority to retain the money so collected, and as such the money was liable to refund.
[480D] 2.1 In an application under Article 226 of the Constitution the Court has power to direct the refund unless there has been avoidable laches on the part of the petitioner which indicate either the abandonment of his claims or which is of such nature for which there is no probable explanation or which will cause an injury either to respondent or any third party.
[484C D] 476 2.2 Courts have, however, made a distinction between those cases where a claimant approaches a High Court seeking relief of obtaining refund only and those where refund is sought as a consequential relief after striking down of the order of assessment etc.
A petition of the former nature is not ordinarily maintainable for the simple reason that a claim for such a refund can always be made in a suit wherein it is open to the State to raise all possible defences to the claim, defences which cannot in most cases be appropriately raised and considered in the exercise of writ jurisdiction.
[480F H; 48;B] In the instant case, s.23 of the Assam Act provided for refund to a producer or a dealer any sum paid or realised in excess of the sum due from him under that Act.
The section thus applies only in a case where money is paid under the Act.
If there is no provision for realisation of the money under the Act, the act of payment was ultra vires, the money had not been paid under the Act.
In that view of the matter the case did not come within section 23 of the Act.
The High Court having found that the claim for refund was a consequential relief, it could have directed the State to refund the amount in question.
[483 G H;484A B] 2.3 Exercise of every discretion must be fair and equitable.
The period of limitation prescribed for recovery of money paid by mistake under the was three years from the date when the mistake was known.
In the instant case, knowledge is attributable from the date of judgment in Loong Soong 's case on 10th July, 1973.
There being a statement that the appellants came to know of that fact in October 1973 and there being no denial by the averment made on this ground, the High Court was in error in presuming that there was a triable issue on this ground and refusing to grant refund.
Within a month in November 1973 the present petitions were filed.
There was no unexplained delay.
The appellants had proceeded diligently.
There is nothing to indicate that had they been more diligent, the appellants could have discovered the constitutional inhibition earlier.
The position is not clear even if there is a triable issue.
The position becomes clearer only after the decision in Loong Soong 's case.
It could not, therefore, be said that the appellants had abandoned their claims.
[487B D] Suganmal vs State of Madhya Pradesh and others.
, AIR 1965 SC 1740; Tilokchand Motichand & Ors.
vs H.B. Munshi & Anr., ; Kantilal Babulal vs H.C. Patel 21 S.T.C. 174; Chandra Bhushan & Anr.
vs Deputy Director of Consolidation (Regional), U.P. & Ors., ; ; R.L. Kapur vs State of Madras, ; ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhailal Bhai & Ors.
J [1964] 6 477 SCR. 261; Ramchandra Shankar Deodhar & ors.
vs The State of Maharashtra & Ors., ; ; A.V. Venkateswaran, Collector of Customs, Bombay vs Ramchand Sobhraj Wadhwani and another; , ; Shiv Shankar Dal Mills etc.
vs State of Haryana & Ors. etc.
; , and State of Madhya Pradesh and others etc.
vs Nandlal Jaiswal and others etc.
; , referred to.
It is only on the delivery of the judgment in Loong Soong 's case in 1973, the appellants realised the right to claim the relief of refund as a consequential relief, setting aside the assessment and the assessment was set aside by the very order itself.
That right has been granted by the High Court.
The High Court has not refused the setting aside on the ground of delay.
It would be inconsistent for the High Court to refuse to grant consequential relief after setting aside the assessment.
If the realisation was without the authority of law and that was declined by the High Court by the judgment in the instant case, which claimed also the consequential relief, that relief must automatically follow.
Refunding the amount as a consequence of declaring the assessment to be bad and recovery to be illegal will be in consonance with justice, equity and good conscience.
[489F H] 4.
The challenge to the assessment on the ground that the assessment was bad could not be made in an appeal under the Act because the right to appeal being a creature of the Act, if the Act is ultra vires that right would not ensure to the benefit of the appellant.
Section 16 of the Act under which an appeal lay within thirty days from the date of service of an assessment order therefore had no application.
Similarly, rule 55 of the Rules framed under the Act barring claims of refund unless made within one year from the date of the original order of assessment being unconstitutional had no application.
[485H; 486A B; 487H] 1.
The assessments on the appellants were illegal.
The taxes demanded on the basis thereof had been collected without the authority of law.
The High Court, therefore, while allowing the appellant 's prayer for quashing the assessment should also have allowed the refund of the illegally collected taxes.
[490D] Superintendent of Taxes vs Onkarmal Nathmal Trust, [1975] Supp.
SCR 365, applied.
478 The petitions filed in November, 1973 were within the period of limitation prescribed in Article 113 of the read with section 23 of the Assam Act.
The appellants ' averment that they realised their mistake only when they came to know about the decision of Loong Soong Tea Estate case in July, 1973 stands uncontroverted.
There is nothing on record to show that the appellants had realised their mistake earlier[491D f] State of M. P. vs Bhailal Bhai [1964]6 SCR 261 referred to.
It was considered unnecessary therefore to consider the larger question whether the bar of limitation would be fatal to a writ petition for refund.
