The respondent filed a suit against the appellant under 0.
xxxvII of the Code of Civil Procedure on the basis of a cheque for Rs. 60,000 drawn by the appellant in favour of the respondent which, on presentation to the Bank, had been dishonoured.
The appellant applied under r. 3 Of 0.
XXXVII for leave to appear and defend the suit on the ground that the cheque had been given only as a collateral security for the price of goods supplied, that the goods had been paid for by cash payments and by other cheques and that therefore the cheque in question had served its I54 1212 end and was without consideration.
The Court held that the defence raised a triable issue but that the defence was vague and was not bona fide as the appellant had produced no evidence to prove his assertions and consequently granted leave to defend the suit on the condition of the appellant giving security for the suit amount and the costs of the suit : Held, that the imposition of the condition was illegal and the appellant was entitled to defend the suit without giving the security.
The object of the special procedure under 0.
XXXVII of the Code is to see that a defendant does not unnecessarily prolong the litigation by raising untenable and frivolous defences.
The test is to see whether the defence raises a real issue and not a sham one, in the sense that, if the facts alleged by the defendant are established, there would be a good, or even a plausible, defence on those facts.
If the Court is satisfied about that, leave must be given and given unconditionally.
Held, further, that the Court was wrong in imposing the condition about giving security on the ground that for want of production of documentary evidence the defence was vague and not bona fide as the stage of proof can only arise after leave to appeal and defend has been granted.
Though the Court is given a discretion about imposing conditions it must be exercised judicially and in consonance with principles of natural justice.
If the discretion is exercised arbitrarily, or is based on a misunderstanding of the principles that govern 'its exercise, then interference is called for if there has been a resultant failure of justice.
