% detention order was passed and served on the detenu on Augus t 3, 1987, while he was in jail for five non bailable offences alleged to have been committed by him on May 19,1987.
The detention order alleged that as the detenu who was in jail was trying to come out on bail, and there was enough possibility of his being bailed out, it was necessary to detain him in order to prevent him from doing acts against maintenance of public order.
The detention was approved by the Government under section 12 (1) of the , after the receipt of the Advisory Board 's opinion.
The validity of the detention was challenged in the writ petition before this Court.
On the question: whether the detention could be justiaed solely on the ground that the detenu was trying to come out on bail and there was enough possibility of his being bailed out and he would then act pre judicially to the interest of the public order.
This Court quashed the detention order on December 18, 1987.
Giving the reasons for its decision, ^ HELD: Section 3 of the does not preclude the authority from making an order of detention against a person while he is in custody or in jail, but the relevant facts in connection with the making of the order would make all the difference in every case.
The validity of the order of detention has to be judged in every individual case on its own facts.
[597C D] 594 Every citizen in this country has the right to have recourse to law.
He has the right to move the court for bail when he is arrested under the ordinary law of the land.
If the State thinks that he does not deserve bail, the State could oppose the grant of bail.
He cannot, however, be interdicted from moving the court for bail by clamping an order of detention.
The possibility of the court granting bail may not be suffi cient.
Nor a bald statement that the person would repeat his criminal activities would be enough.
There must also be credible information or cogent reasons apparent on the record that the detenu, if enlarged on bail, would act prejudicially to the interest of public order.
[598B C] In the instant case, there was no material made apparent on record that the detenu, if released on bail, was likely to commit ac tivities prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
The detention order cannot be justified merely on the ground that the detenu was trying to come out on bail and there was enough possibility of his being bailed out.
[598F G] Poonam Lata vs M. L. Wadhawan, ; relied on.
Alijan Mian and another vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad, ; Ramesh Yadav vs DistrictMagistrate, Etah and ors., [1985] 4 SCC at p. 234 and Binod Singh vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad, ; at 421, explained
