% These matters involved the interpretation of section 2(1)(d) of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent & Eviction) Act, 1972 (Act No. 13 of 1972).
The landlords of a building known as Prem Talkies had let out the building to Sunil Sharma and another, and the lease to the Sharmas was a lease of the building simpliciter.
The building was subject to the provisions of the Act above said.
The landlords obtained delivery of vacant possession of the building on 30.09.1984 through a suit for eviction instituted by the landlords.
The revision petition filed by the Sharmas in the High Court against the order of eviction was dismissed on 1st August, 1985.
After the Revision Petition of the Sharmas was dismissed, landlords proceeded with the renovation of the building, installation of plant, machinery, new furniture and electrical fittings, as they wished to let out the building alongwith the plant, machinery, furniture and apparatus installed for running a cinema theatre.
On February 5, 1986, an agreement of lease was executed between the landlords and the Mehrotras respondents before this Court under which the Mehrotras agreed to take the building fully equipped with projector, machines, fixtures and furniture for a period of five years with an option to renew.
A lease deed pursuant to the agreement of the lease between the landlord and the Mehrotras was entered into on 30.12.86 and actual possession of the building, it was claimed, was given to the Mehrotras on the 8th January, 1987.
In the meantime, the appellant, Satya Narain Pandey, appeared to have made an application under section 16 of the Act for allotment of the building in question to him.
He claimed to have filed that application on 25.9.86 and that, on the basis of that application, the Additional District Magistrate had called for a report from the Rent Control & Eviction Inspector, who had submitted a report dated 28.10.86, stating that 679 the building was vacant as on that date.
On the other hand, the landlords claimed that the vacancy of the building had been declared on 6.3.87, that a notification calling for applications for allotment had been issued on 9.3.87 and the application by Pandey for allotment had been made only on 9.3.87.
They also applied to the Additional District Magistrate on 23.3.87, requesting that a high placed official should be sent to inspect the premises and submit a report, as the report of the Eviction Inspector had been obtained behind their back.
The application was granted and the Sub Divisional Magistrate submitted a report on 28.4.87, which said that as on that date the building was a full fledged building with all the equipments and was not vacant as it appeared to have been let out to the Mehrotras under the agreements of 5.2.86 and 30.12.86.
In the meantime, the Mehrotras, in pursuance of the lease deed entered into by them with the landlords, had applied on 8.1.87 for the grant of a licence for running a cinema in the building in question.
The application was granted by the Additional District Magistrate.
Pandey, who had applied for the allotment of the building to him, felt aggrieved by the grant of the cinematographic licence to the Mehrotras.
He filed a writ petition in the High Court, challenging the grant of the licence.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
Pandey, the appellant, then filed in this Court Civil Appeal No. 1502 of 1987 by Special Leave against the decision of the High Court.
The Writ Petition of the landlords filed in the High Court against the order dated 6.3.87 of the Additional District Magistrate, declaring a vacancy of the building in question and the notice dated 9.3.87 inviting applications for allotment of accommodation in respect thereof, and a similar writ petition filed by the Mehrotras in the High Court, were disposed of by the High Court by a consolidated order dated 20.11.87, by which the High Court had accepted the contentions of the petitioners and allowed the writ petitions setting aside the order dated 6.3.87 and the notice dated 9.3.87 and directing the Rent Control & Eviction Inspector to proceed with the allotment of the cinema building under the Act.
One of the respondents in those two writ petitions was Pandey, the appellant, who then also filed two petitions for special leave in this Court against the said decision of the High Court in the two writ petitions above said.
Dismissing the appeals out of the two petitions for special leave (wherein leave to appeal was granted) and, consequently, the Civil Appeal No. 1502/87, the Court 680 ^ HELD: The short question that arose for decision in these matters was whether the cinema building in question was exempt from the purview of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulations of Letting, Rent & Eviction) Act, 1972, by reason of the exemption contained in section 2(1)(d) thereof.
As regards the controversy regarding the grant of the cinema licence to the Mehrotras, the High Court was clearly right in holding that Pandey had no locus standing in the matter.
However, the issue of a valid licence to Mehrotras would ultimately depend upon the outcome of their right to occupy the premises in question.
If had Pandey succeeded in his contention that the building continued to be subject to the provisions of the Act, then, the allotment of the building on its vacation by the Sharmas would have to be made in accordance with law and the Mehrotras would not be able to occupy the building in pursuance of the lease deed and run the cinema, as they would not be entitled to a licence, as, a condition precedent for which was the availability to the exhibitor of a building in which he had a right to exhibit cinema shows.
This was clear from the provision in section 13 of the Act.
If, on the other hand, Pandey 's contention was not acceptable, then, the Mehrotras would be entitled to run the theatre.
The Court, therefore, granted leave to Pandey in the two petitions for special leave and took up those appeals for consideration in the first place.
[686E H; 687A B] On a careful consideration of the scheme and language of the Act, the Court was of the opinion that the judgment of the High Court should be affirmed and the appeals, dismissed.
[690D] Section 2(1) of the Act exempts from the operation of the Act various types of buildings set out in clauses (a) to (f) of the sub section.
The initial attempt of the appellant was to suggest that the above exemptions were available only where the premises in question was of a nature specified in one or the other of those clauses as on the date of the commencement of the Act, namely, 15th July, 1972.
The Court could not accept this contention.
A perusal of the various clauses makes it clear that the building should fulfil the character indicated therein on the date on which the provisions of the Act are sought to be made applicable thereto.
It was clear, in the opinion of the Court, that even a building which might have belonged to private individuals since 1972 would automatically fall within the exemption clause (a) as soon as it was purchased by the Government or a local authority or a public sector corporation.
It would not be correct to read the section as conferring an exemption only on the buildings which belonged to the Government, etc., on 15th July, 1972 and not on those acquired by them thereafter.
The position must be construed likewise in respect of the other clauses too.
[690E H] 681 It was strongly urged by the appellant that the nature of the building had to be determined as on the 30th September, 1984, on which date the building was vacated by the Sharmas, and on that date, the building was subject to the provisions of the Act.
A vacancy having arisen in such a building, it was the duty of the landlord to have intimated the same to the District Magistrate and then followed the procedure under the Act.
Any letting out of the property by them to the Mehrotras was unlawful in view of section 13 of the Act, and on the strength of an unlawful letting, the landlords could not contend that the building was outside the purview of the Act.
There was a plausibility about this contention but the Court could not accept it as this construction of the provisions would render the exemption section totally unworkable.
[690H; 691 A C l Section 2(1) of the Act takes out of the provisions of the Act certain classes of buildings.
Some of these exemptions are based on the nature of the ownership of the property and some of them, on the nature of the use to which the property is either put or intended to be put.
In the view of the Court, even in respect of a building covered by the Act, the Act would cease to be applicable if, on a vacancy occurring therein, the landlord intended to put it to the use specified in clauses (c) to (f) of the section and in cases covered by clauses (c) and (d) of the section, also intended to let it out for such use along with the plant and apparatus therefor.
The Court favoured this interpretation of an automatic exclusion of certain classes of buildings from the purview of the Act.
[691 D; 692G H l How would the question of the applicability of the Act be determined? It could certainly not be ipsi dixit of the landlord.
If a landlord let out his property or otherwise dealt with it on his own, and was found at fault, he would not only be punishable but would also be unable to resist an allotment of the property by the District Magistrate in due course.
Since the District Magistrate was empowered to deal with buildings to which the Act applied it was for the District Magistrate to satisfy himself, after hearing the landlord, that it was in fact a building to which the Act was applicable.
It was open to the landlord to intimate the vacancy but make a claim before the District Magistrate that the Act had ceased to be applicable to his building.
Where the landlord failed to do so, the Magistrate might consider the issue if vacancy in respect of the building was brought to his notice.
The District Magistrate could inspect the building and then decide whether the Act continued to apply or not.
It was for the District Magistrate to satisfy himself that the landlord intended to let out the premises and he intended to let it out not as a mere building but with plant and apparatus.
The District Magis 682 trate had to satisfy himself on the materials made available to him.
But it would not be incumbent or proper for him to give notice to the proposed allottees of the property and hear them.
An application for allotment merely conferred on the applicant a right to be considered for allotment of a building to which the Act was applicable, and he had no right qua any property until the District Magistrate came to the conclu sion that the building was one which he could allot.
[694C H] The Court did not accept the contention of the appellant for remanding the case to the District Magistrate for a determination after hearing the appellant also on the question whether the landlords in this case were entitled to an exemption.
This determination had to be arrived at by the District Magistrate after hearing the landlord and on the basis of such inspection or enquiries as he might consider necessary.
At this stage, he should not permit the intervention of any other party; a contrary interpretation would make the provisions almost impossible of being worked.
There might be several applicants for allotment, some general, and some with regard to specific property.
If they were con sidered as having a right to be heard on the availability of a property for allotment, every one must be allowed to intervene.
The landlord might have to face innumerable challenges by the various applicants at different points of time, resulting in the proceedings being delayed.
All this was not envisaged under the Act.
Once the District Magistrate decided that a building was not one to which the Act applied, there was an end of the matter.
If the District Magistrate decided that the building fell within the provisions of the Act, an aggrieved landlord 's remedy was only by way of a writ petition, where such conclusion was on the face of it erroneous or perverse or based on no material.
[695B E] In this case, the District Magistrate, after registering the vacancy on 6.3.1987, came to the conclusion on the basis of the appellant 's averments that the Act continued to be applicable to the premises.
The landlords challenged this conclusion successfully by a writ petition.
Subsequent to 6.3.1987, the District Magistrate himself had the property inspected, and, apparently, he did not apply his mind to the terms of the report of the inspection.
In normal course, perhaps, the Court would have sent the matter back to enable him to do this, but in the present case, the Court thought no useful purpose would be served by remanding the matter to the District Magistrate for a fresh consideration.
The report of the Sub Divisional Magistrate, the terms of the lease agreement, the registered lease deed and the application for, and the grant of, a cinematograph licence in the name of the Mehrotras, clearly showed that the landlord intended to let out the property as a fully 683 equipped cinema theatre.
In the fact of this, the District Msgistrate had clearly no jurisdiction to proceed with the allotment of the premises in question.
695F H; 696A B]
