% The State of Andhra Pradesh in exercise of powers conferred under sub section (1) of section 9 of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, made an order on January 27, 1987, reducing the rate of tax on sale of Cement made to the manufacturing units of Cement products in the State.
On the same date, the State of Andhra pradesh made another order in exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (5) of section 8 of the , reducing the tax leviable under the said Act in respect of sales of Cement in the course of the inter State trade or commerce.
The State of Karnataka in exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (5) of section 8 of the , issued a notification on 28.10.1987, reducing the rate of tax payable under the said Act on the sale of Cement in the course of the inter State trade or commerce.
The petitioners cement manufacturing concerns, their shareholders and their authorised stockists filed this writ petition, challenging the vires of section 8(5) of the (Central Act 74 of 1956) and the notifications referred to above as ultra vires the provisions contained in Part XIII of the Constitution providing that trade, commerce and inter course throughout the territory of India shall be free.
According to the petitioners the three orders referred to above created trade barriers and directly impinged upon the freedom of trade, commerce and inter course provided for in Article 301 of the constitution.
Since the vires of section 8(5) of the Central Act 74 of 1956 had been assailed, notice had been issued to the Union of India, Attorney General, and all the States but at the hearing of the writ petition, the 575 petitioners gave up the challenge against section 8(5) of the Central Act.
In view of that, the writ petition was confined to the challenge against the two notification of the State of Andhra Pradesh and the lone notification of the State of Karnataka.
The return to the rule nisi was made on behalf of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
The State of Karnataka chose not to make any return to the rule nisi, but its counsel joined at the hearing and contended that the order made by the Karnataka State did not affect the provisions in Part XllI of the Constitution.
The Attorney General confined his submission to the scope of Part III of the Constitution and the effect of the notifications on the scheme contained in that part.
Allowing the writ petition, the Court, ^ HELD: The title for Part XIII.
which contains the relevant Articles 30 l, 302, 303 and 304 is "Trade Commerce and inter course within the Territory of India.
" The true purpose of the provisions contained in Part Xlll of the Constitution, as elucidated in the different decisions of the Constitution Benches of this Court, is that the restriction provided for in Article 301 can within the ambit be limited by law made by the Parliament and the State legislature.
No power is vested in the executive authority to act in any manner affecting or hindering the very essence and thesis contained in the scheme of Part XIII of the Constitution.
lt is equally clear that the declaration contained in Part XIIl of the Constitution is against the creation of economic barriers and or pockets which stand against the free now of trade, commerce and inter course.
[580F; 587H; 588A B] Taxation is a deterrent against free flow.
As a result of favourable or unfavourable treatment by way of taxation, the course of flow of trade gets regulated either adversely or favourably.
If the scheme which Part XIII guarantees has to be preserved in national interest, it is necessary that the provisions in the Article must be strictly complied with.
One has to recall the far sighted observations of Gajendragadkar.
J. in Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs The State of Assam & Ors., [1961] 1.S.C.R. 609 and the observations then made obviously apply to cases of the type now before the Court.[588C D] Under the first notification made under section 9(1) of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, the rate of tax was reduced to 4 percent in respect of the sales made by the indigenous cement manufacturers to manufacturers of Cement products.
The Tamil Nadu producers had sales officers in Andhra Pradesh and in regard to their sale to such manufacturers of cement products, the benefit of the reduced rate of 576 taxation was not applicable.
Two reasons were advanced by way of justification.
One was that it was beneficial to the State revenue and secondly, that it protected the local manufacturers too.
It could not be demonstrated to the Court how the reduction in the rate of sales tax was beneificial to the State revenue.
The other justification was what the provisions of Part XIII of the Constitution did not permit.
The reasonable restriction contemplated in Part XIII have to be backed by law and not by executive action, provided the same are within the limitations prescribed under the Scheme of Part XIII.[588D H] The second notification related to the inter State transactions.
Variation of the rate of inter State sales tax does affect free trade and commerce and creates a local preference which is contrary to the scheme of Part XIII of the Constitution.
The notification extended the benefit even to the unregistered dealers.
Both the notifications of the Andhra Pradesh Government were bad and hit by the provisions of Part Xlll of the Constitution.
They could not be sustained in law.[592D] In the case of the notification of the Karnataka State, as already said, no return had been made and no attempt had been made to place the facts and circumstances to justify the action.
The notification suffered from the same vice as the second notification of the State of Andhra Pradesh suffered, and no distinction could be drawn.
The notification of the Karnataka Government was also bad in law.
[597E F] The writ petition succeeded and the two impugned notifications of the Andhra Pradesh Government and the impugned notification of the Karnataka Government were quashed.
[592G] Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs The State of Assam & Ors., ; The Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Limited vs The State of Rajasthan & Ors., [1963] S.C.R. 491; State of Madras vs N.K. Nataraja Mudaliar., [1968] 3 S.C.R. 829; Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg.
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd. vs The Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax & Ors., [1974] 2 S.C.R. 879 and State of Tamil Nadu, etc.
vs Sitalakshmi Mills, etc.; , , referred to.
