% These appeals and Petitions for Special Leave raised a common question of law regarding the scope and effect of Explanation 11 A to clause (25) of section 2 of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1964, as amended by Act 17 of 1972.
What fell for consideration was whether by reason of Explanation Il A to section 2(25) of the Act, a person in occupation of a homestead or a hut belonging to another during the period stipulated in the Explanation would become a Kudikidappukaran and be entitled to Kudikidappu rights under the Act.
Allowing Civil Appeal No. 3045 of 1980, allowing C.A. No. 2505 of 1977 partly and dismissing the Petitions for Special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: The contentions of the parties in these cases had to be examined in the conspectus of the several amendments made by the legislature to section 2(25) of the Act and the decisions rendered by the Kerala High Court.[669C] Explanation Il A has been made a non obstante provision in order to give over riding effect to the Explanation over any judgment.
decree or order of any court, passed against a person who was on 16.8.68 in occupation of a homestead or hut thereon and who continued to be in such occupation till the 1st day of January, 1970.
The Legislature has by introducing Explanation II A done away with any reference to occupation being referable to any permission granted by the owner of the land or the hut as the case may be.
Not only had the Legislature eschewed any reference to permissive occupation but had also given a mandate that every one in actual occupation of any land and the dwelling house thereon between 16.8.68 and 1.1.70, irrespective of who built the dwelling place, should be granted recognition as a Kudikidappukaran.
By reason of this explicit provision, there was no scope whatever restricting the class of person entitled to the benefit of Explanation Il A to only those who were able to prove obtainment of initial permission to 662 occupy a homestead or a hut thereon.
Explanation II A equates an occupant of a homestead or a hut thereon during the relevant period with a Kudikidappukaran as defined under the main clause.
Such being the case, anyone satisfying the requirements of Explanation II A would automatically be entitled to have the status of a Kudikidappukaran and to all the benefits flowing therefrom.
In other words, a person falling under Explanation II A has to be statutorily deemed as one permitted to occupy a homestead or the hut thereon as envisaged in sub clauses (a) and (b) of clause (25) of section 2.
The only limitation placed by explanation Il A is that a person falling within the terms of the definition should satisfy the conditions laid down by the proviso to the Explanation, viz. that if he or his predecessor had not constructed the dwelling house, the house should not costwise exceed Rs.750 or rentwise exceed a monthly rent of Rs.5 and the occupant should not be in possession of land exceeding three cents in extent in any city or major municipality or five cents in any other municipality or ten cents in any panchayat area or township either as owner or as a tenant on which he could erect a building.
Viewed in the proper perspective, Explanation II A constitutes a second limb of clause (25) of section 2 to give full effect to its intendment, viz., entitling a person to Kudikidappu rights under section 2(25) if he proves initial permission to occupy the land and the dwelling house without the need of proving continuous possession during a prescribed period of time or in the alternative to claim Kudikidappu rights under Explanation lI A by proving continuous occupation during the period of time prescribed by the Explanation without the necessity of proving obtainment of initial permission to occupy the land and the dwelling house thereon.
Explanation II A has got operative force of its own, which may be seen from the fact that clause (25) of section 2 as well as sub clause (b) of the proviso to Explanation II A lay down identical conditions which are to be satisfied by an applicant under the main clause or the Explanation for claiming rights as a Kudikidappukaran.
If the Explanation was sub servient to section 2(25), there was no need for the Legislature to have provided sub clause (b) of the proviso to Explanation II A.
There was no repugnancy between the two provisions because section 2(25) pertains to occupants of homesteads of one category while Explanation II A pertains to homestead occupants of a different category.
[670A H; 671A G] The Kerala Land Reforms Act was a beneficial enactment intended to secure occupancy rights to farmers and agricultural labourers who did not have homestead lands and dwelling places of their own for their occupation.
In the case of beneficial enactments, the courts should follow a policy of benevolent and liberal construction.
Even if 663 there was any little room for doubt whether Explanation II A could go to the extent of conferring Kudikidappu rights on persons who were not able to prove their lawful entry upon the land and the occupation of the dwelling house, it had to be held that the Explanation had been specifically provided for giving greater thrust to the intendment of the legislature, and, therefore, the Explanation warranted a liberal and purposive interpretation so as to fulfil the object of the legislation and comply with the legislative intent.
[1672G H; 673G H; 674A] The attention of the Court was drawn to a judgment of this Court in Palayi Kizhakkekara Methai 's son K. M. Mathew and anr.
vs Pothiyill Mommutty 's son Hamsa Haji & Ors., C.A. No. 165 of 1974, etc.
J.T. , but the Court found no conflict between the view taken by the Court in these appeals and the view taken by this court in C.A. No. 165 of 1974, etc.
[675C; 676E] In C.A. No. 3045 of 1980, the appellant was in possession of a hut from 1982 onwards; nevertheless his claim for Kudikidappu rights under Explanation II A was rejected as he was not able to prove grant of permission to him by the respondent for occupying the hut.
Since it has been held by the Court that a claimant for Kudikidappu rights under Explanation II A, who did not suffer any disqualification under the proviso, needed only to prove the factum of possession between the prescribed dates for being placed on par with a Kudikidappukaran as defined in section 2(25) of the Act, the appeal had to succeed, with order of the Land Tribunal, restored.
[676F H] In the C.A. No. 2505 of 1977, the appellant claimed Kudikidappu rights in respect of two sheds set out in A & B Schedules.
The appellant was not entitled to any relief in respect of the A schedule property because it had been concurrently found by all the courts that he had taken the shed on lease in the year 1954 under rent chit and that the shed continued to be in existence and it had not been rebuilt by the appellant.
In respect of the schedule shed, the appellant had been denied relief solely on the ground that he had failed to prove grant of permission by the respondent and his predecessor in title to occupy the homestead and put up the shed.
In view of the factum of occupation of the schedule property during the period envisaged by Explanation II A, the appellant was entitled to a decree in respect of the schedule property.
Appeal was partly allowed in respect of the schedule property and the case, remitted to the Land Tribunal for determining the price of the schedule property and for directions, etc.[677A D] 664 The Petitions for Special Leave failed, because it had been concurrently found that the sheds occupied by the respondent in each case were included in the property leased to the petitioner though possession was allowed to be retained by the respondents and as such, the respondents were entitled to claim Kudikidappu rights under Explanation II A.
As the respondents had been inducted into possession of the huts by the owner of the land and as the lease granted to the petitioner comprised the sheds occupied by the respondents also, the petitioner could not contend that the respondents were not entitled to seek the sale of ten cents of land adjoining each hut under section 80 of the Act.
[677E F] Velayudhan vs Aishabi, A.I.R. 1981 Kerala 185; Gopalan vs Chellamma, ; Mariam and others vs Ouseph Xavier, ; Achutan vs Narayani Amma, [1980] K.L.T. 160, A.I.R. 1980 NOC 90; Moideen Kuktty vs Gopalan, ; East End Dwelling Co. Ltd. vs Finsbary Borough Council, M. K. Venkatachalam vs Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing Co. Ltd., ; ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi vs Teja Singh, A.I.R. 1959 S.C. 355; Industrial Supplies Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India, [1980] IV S.C.C. 341; Jeewanlal & Ors.
vs Appellate Authority, 119841 4 S.C.C. 356; Bharat Singh vs Management of New Delhi Tuberculosis Centre, New Delhi, & Ors., ; ; Sonawari & Ors.
vs Shri Ram & Anr., [1968] 1 SCR 617; Azad Singh & Ors.
vs Barkat Ullah Khan & ors.
; , ; Shri Prithvi (Cotton Mills Ltd. & Anr. vs Broach Borough Municipality & Ors., [19701] 1 SCR 388; Hari Singh & Ors.
vs The Military Estate Officer & Anr., ; ; D. Cawassi & Co. Mysore vs State of Mysore & Anr., ; and Palavi Kizhakkekara Mathaiy 's son K. M. Mathew & Anr.
vs Pothiyill Mommitty 's son Hamsa Haji & Ors., J.T. , referred to.
