% The facts and issues involved in all these appeals were similar.
Criminal Appeals Nos.
644 45.87 and Criminal Appeals Nos.
642 45 /87 were against the judgment and order of the High Court of Bombay, dismissing the Criminal Appeal filed by masters of two trawlers against their conviction and sentence and allowing the appeal filed by Commander S.D. Baijal against the acquittal of accused Nos. 3 and 4, i.e. the Charterer Company and its Managing Director and also releasing the trawlers.
The High Court convicted the accused Nos. 3 and 4 for contravention of sub section 6 of section 5 of the Maritime Zones of India Act, 1981 (M.Z.I. Act) read with section 7 thereof and rule 16 of the Maritime Zones of India Rules 1981, (M.Z.I. Rules).
The High Court also ordered confiscation of the two trawlers, vesting the same in favour of the Central Government under section 13 of the M.Z.I. Act.
The two trawlers involved foreign vessels were chartered by the respondents Nos. 4 & 5 herein for fishing in Maritime Zone of India after obtaining permit under section 5 of the M.Z.I. Act.
The trawlers along with three other pairs of trawlers were apprehended and seized by the Coast Guard ship commanded by Commander S.D. Baijal for fishing operations in the exclusive economic zone of India, in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit and the letter of intent granted to that company by the Government of India under section 5(4) of the M.Z.I. Act and in violation of the M.Z.I. Rules.
They were prosecuted by the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate on the complaint filed by Commander S.D. Baijal as authorised officer under section 19 of the M.Z.I. Act.
The masters of the trawlers, respondents Nos. 2 and 3, were convicted and sentenced to pay fines and the other accused respondents Nos. 4 and 5 were acquitted and the trawlers and the fishes thereon were ordered to be released on payment of the detention 642 charges.
Of the other three pairs of foreign trawlers chartered by Indian Company for fishing in the Maritime Zone of India under the permit granted under the M.Z.I. Act, which were seized and prosecuted, two pairs of trawlers with fishes thereon were ordered to be confiscated while one pair of these trawlers were directed to be released.
The masters of each pair of trawlers were similarly convicted and sentenced to pay fine for violation of the provisions of the said Act and the Rules thereunder.
The Masters of the pair of trawlers filed a criminal appeal against their conviction and sentence while the complaining Commander S.D. Baijal filed a criminal appeal against the acquittal of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 i.e. the Managing Director of the company and the company and also against the release of the trawlers in spite of conviction of the masters under section 12(b) of the M.Z.I. Act.
The High Court disposed of these appeals by a common judgment, allowing the appeal of the masters in part and modifying their sentence and convicting.
in the appeal filed by S.D. Baijal, the Managing Director and the Company, accused respondents Nos. 3 and 4 and sentencing them to pay fines, and ordering the trawlers to be confiscated with fishes thereon or the proceeds thereof in case of sale of the same.
The High Court also held the masters of the trawlers guilty under Rule 8(1)(g) and convicted them under section 12(a) instead of section 12(b) of the M.Z.I. Act, but maintained the sentence of penalty.
Criminal Appeals Nos.
645 47;87 and Criminal Appeals Nos.
65051 of 1987 arose out of a common judgment of the High Court in two criminal appeals, modifying in part the judgment and order of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, whereby the Magistrate had convicted the masters of the trawlers, i.e. accused Nos. 1 and 2 for contravening Rule 8(1)(g) read with Rule 16 and section 20(b) of the M.Z.I. Act and sentenced them to pay fines, in default of payment of fine, to suffer rigorous imprisonment.
The Magistrate also had made an order, confiscating the two trawlers alongwith the fishing gear, equipments, stores, cargo and fish and vesting the same together with the proceeds of the sale of the fish, if any, with the Central Government.
The Magistrate had acquitted the accused Nos. 3 and 4 i.e. the Charterer Company and its Managing Director.
The criminal appeal filed by Cdr.
S.D. Baijal against the order acquitting the accused Nos. 3 and 4 above said was allowed by the High Court and they were convicted and sentenced to pay fines etc.
The order of confiscation of the two trawlers was maintained.
The criminal appeal filed by the masters of the trawlers was dismissed with the modification that the conviction 643 made under section 12(b) was altered to one under section 12(a) of the M.Z.I. Act and the sentence of vigorous imprisonment was modified.
Criminal Appeals Nos.
648 49.87 and Criminal Appeals Nos.
65253187 arose out of a common judgment of the High Court, dismissing the appeals of the masters of the vessels and allowing the appeals filed on behalf of the prosecution.
All these appeals were filed against the judgment and order of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate in the Criminal case wherein the Magistrate had convicted and sentenced the masters of the trawlers with the imposition of fines on accused Nos. 1 and 2 for contravening Rules 8(1)(g) and 16 of the M.Z.I. Rules and also of the offence under section 5 of the Act and imposing penalty section 12(b) of the M.Z.I. Act.
The Magistrate had acquitted the accused Nos. 3 and 4 i.e. the Charterer Company and its Managing Director and directed the release of the trawlers in favour of the masters of the trawlers.
The criminal appeal filed by the masters of the vessels was dismissed by the High Court and the conviction and sentence u/s 12(b) of the M.Z.I. Act was altered to one under section 12(a) of the Act.
The criminal appeal filed on behalf of the prosecution was allowed and the accused Nos. 3 and 4 i.e. the Charterer Company and its Managing Director, were convicted and sentenced to pay fine.
The vessel and the fishing equipment were confiscated and directed to vest in favour of the Central Government.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 654 55/87 and Criminal Appeal No. 656 of 1987 arose out of a common judgment and order of the High Court in the Criminal Appeals filed by the Charterers and the masters of the trawlers, respectively.
These appeals were filed against the judgment and order of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate in a criminal case against the masters of vessel.
The Magistrate had convicted and sentenced the accused Nos. 1 and 2, i.e. the masters of the vessel to pay fines; in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment, and had confiscated the trawlers together with fishing gear, equipment, stores, cargo and fish therein.
The criminal appeal of the masters of the trawlers had been dismissed with a modification of the conviction and sentence passed under section 12(c) of the M.Z.I. Act was altered to one u/s 12(a) of the Act and the criminal appeal of the Charterers was dismissed with a modification of the imprisonment awarded in default of payment of fine imposed on the appellant to simple imprisonment instead of rigorous imprisonment.
The order of confiscation of trawlers passed by the Magistrate was confirmed.
Dismissing all the appeals, the Court, 644 ^ HELD: The appellants contended that at the time of the apprehension of the trawlers no fish had been found on board and there was no evidence that fish on board was seized or that what had happened to fish or who had put the fish in the hold of the trawlers, and that, therefore, no presumption under section 22 of the Act could be drawn that the trawlers were engaged in fishing within the exclusive economic zone of India in contravention of the provision of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
This contention could not be considered in appeal by special leave as there had been concurrent findings by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and the High Court that there was fish on board.
[649F H; 650A] The main argument on behalf of the appellants was focussed on the vital question as to whether the words used in section 13 of the M.Z.I. Act "shall also be liable to confiscation" mandated that the foreign vessel used in the commission of the offence would be con fiscated as soon as the masters were convicted under section 10 or 11 or 12 of the Act, or it was the discretion of the Court to order either release of the vessel or confiscation of the vessel with the fish and the other equipment, cargo and fishing gear, considering the graveness of the offence.
On an examination of the objects and Reasons and the various provisions of the Maritime Zones of India (Regulation of Fishing by Foreign Vessels) Act, 1981, it was crystal clear that the M.Z.I. Act had been enacted with the object of preventing illegal poaching of fishes by foreign vessels, including foreign vessels chartered by Indian citizens in the exclusive economic zone of India at a depth less than 40 fathoms, by providing deterrent punishment for contravention of the provisions of the Act to protect Indian fishermen.
The objects and reasons were to be taken into consideration in interpreting the provisions of the statute.
In interpreting a statute, the Court has to ascertain the will and policy of F. the legislature as discernible from the object and scheme of the enactment and the language used therein.
Viewed in this context, it was apparent that the said Act had been made with the sole purpose of preventing poaching of fishes by foreign vessels chartered by Indian citizens within the exclusive economic zone of India as specified in Rule 8(1)(g) of Maritime Zone of India Rules as amended in 1982 as well as in breach of the provisions of the said Act and the terms and conditions of the permit issued under section 5 of the said Act.
[650E G; 651D; 654F] Section 13 of the Act expressly says that besides the conviction and sentence of the masters of the vessels, and charterers, the vessel is liable to be confiscated with fishes therein.
The appellants ' contention was that the words "shall also be liable to confiscation" used in section 13 of 645 the Act did not mean that it was mandatory to confiscate the vessel as the masters of the vessel had been convicted and sentenced to pay penalty under section 12 of the Act, and as various punishments had been provided for different types of offences, it was left to the discretion of the court to order confiscation of the vessel or to release the vessel.
[655A C] Section 13 in clear and unimbiguous terms says that on the conviction of the master and the charterer of an offence under section 10 or 11 or 12, the vessel used in connection with the offence together with the fish on board such ship or the sale proceeds of such fish, and stores, cargo shall also be liable to confiscation.
Viewed in the context, the words "shall also be liable to be confiscation" do not leave any discretion to the Magistrate or the court to make no order of confiscation of the vessel as soon as the masters of the vessel were convicted u/s 10 or 11 or 12 of the Act.
The Legislative intent in making this provision was to provide deterrent punishment to prohibit fishing in the exclusive economic zone of India by foreign vessels in infringement of the Act and the rules framed thereunder and the conditions of the permit or licence.
Viewed in this context, section 13 mandates that on conviction of the master and the charterer of an offence under section 12, not only penalty of fine would be imposed, the vessel used in or in connection with the commission of such offence has to be confiscated.
It is not open to the court to consider the graveness of the offence and other extenuating circumstances and to make no order for confiscation of the offending vessel concerned.
Confiscation of the vessel is the immediate statutory consequence of the finding that an offence either under section 10 or 11 or 12 has been proved and the master of the vessel has been convicted.
Section 13 is thus mandatory and it is not open to the court to refrain from making an order, confiscating the offending vessel as soon as the masters of the vessel are convicted of an offence under section 12 and awarded penalty.
[660BF] The judgments and orders of the High Court were affirmed.
The vessels had been detained in Bombay Port after apprehending them on July 26, 1984 and a huge amount had to be paid as port charges.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the Port Authorities at Bombay might consider if an application was made by the parties for exemption or partial exemption of the same favourably in view of the order of confiscation of the trawlers.
[660G H] State of Madhya Pradesh vs Asad Bharat Finance Co. Anr., [1966] Supp.
SCR 473; Indo China Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. vs Jasjit Singh, Addl.
Collector of Customs & Ors., ; ; 646 Superintendent and Legal Remembrancer of Legal Affairs to the Govt.
Of West Bengal vs Abani Maity, ; ; K.P. Verghese vs The Income tax officer, Ernakulam and another, [19821 I SCR 629 and F.N. Roy vs Collector of Customs, Calcutta; , , referred to.
