The appellant carries on the business of metal process ing i.e. beat treatment of metals.
In 1963 it established a factory with about 32 workmen called "No. I Unit".
In the year 1975 another factory called "No. II unit" was estab lished for carrying on the same kind of business employing about 75 workmen about 200 yards away from the No. 1 Unit.
Both the Units had independent location, separate factory licences and separate municipal licences.
The two Units had separate stores and maintained separate accounts and balance sheets.
The workmen of both the units were also employed independently and there was a separate muster roll in re spect of each of the two units.
There was no rule or condi tion regarding the inter transferability of the workmen.
However, there was by mistake the name of one workman by name Kishore Ram of Unit 1 entered in the muster roll of the II Unit in October 1980 and it had been scored out later.
On finding that the workmen of No. 1 Unit were wilfully slacking their work and that there was growing indiscipline among them, the appellant decided in the year 1981 82 to reduce the three shifts working previously to two shifts.
The indiscipline and the lack of production continued and on it becoming impossible for the appellant to carry on 415 with even the two shifts as reduced, the appellant came to the unhappy conclusion that it had no alternative left but to close down the No. 1 Unit altogether with effect from 15.2.82 and closure compensation was offered to the entire staff of 32 workmen.
The workmen of the I Unit raised through their Union, namely, Association of Engineering Workers, Bombay an indus trial dispute reference (IT) No. 218 of 1982.
In the state ment of claim filed by the workmen it was urged; (i) that the two units which were being run by the appellant had functional integrality and were for all purposes parts of one establishment and that the workmen were mutually trans ferable from one unit to the other; (ii) that the reasons given by the management for closing down Unit No. 1 is false, the action of the management was arbitrary and was colourable exercise of the management 's power of closure; (iii) the impugned action was by way of victimisation for the trade union activities of the said workmen in Unit No 1 and the principle of "last come, first go" while terminating the services of the workmen having not been followed as required by section 25 G of the Act, the termination was illegal.
The Tribunal rejected the case of the workmen that the closure was in retaliation to the trade union activities of workmen and found that there was no victimisation of the workmen and the workmen concerned were not entitled to be reinstated as the closure of the 1 Unit had become legally effective from 15.12.1982 and passed its award to that effect on September 6, 1983.
Aggrieved by the Award passed by the Tribunal, the workmen filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before the High Court of Bombay challenging the legality of the Award.
The learned Single Judge, before whom the writ petition came up for consideration, reversed the Award of the Tribunal and re manded the proceedings back to the Tribunal for afresh disposal.
By the time, the decision was rendered, there were only 14 workmen, who were interested in the dispute, and therefore, the learned Single Judge directed the Tribunal to consider whether the termination of services of any of the 14 workmen, whose claim for reinstatement still subsisted, was done in violation of the principles laid down under section 25 G of the Act.
Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the appellant preferred an appeal before the Division Bench of the High Court.
That appeal having been dismissed the appellant has come by way of special leave to the Supreme Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The existence of the unity of ownership, supervi sion 416 and control in respect of the two units, the fact that the conditions of the service of the workmen of the two Units were substantially indentical, the fact that both the units are situate at a distance of 200 meters and that the busi ness of heat treatment processing in the two Units are the same are not by themselves sufficient in the eye of law for holding that there was functional integrality between the two Units.
This is a clear case of closure of an independent unit and not of a part of an establishment.
[422D E] Workmen of the Straw Board Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs M/s Straw Board Manufacturing Company Ltd., followed.
S.G. Chemicals and Dyes Trading Employees ' Union vs S.G. Chemicals and Dyes Trading Ltd. & Anr., ; distinguished.
The question of application of section 25 G of the Act arises only when the services of the workmen are re trenched within the meaning of section 25F and not when sections 25FF, and 25FFF are applicable.
If the case is one of genuine closure then the question of applying section 25 G of the Act which is applicable to a case of retrench ment would not arise.
It is not the case of the workmen in the present case that the II Unit could not continue to function after the closure of the I Unit.
In fact the II Unit is continuing to function as usual even now notwith standing the stoppage of the activities at the I Unit.
[423C E] Santosh Gupta vs State Bank of Patiala, ; , relied on.
It is not necessary that in the order to effect closure of business the management should close down all the branches of its business.
A genuine closure of a Unit even though it did not amount to closure of the business could not be interfered with by an industrial Tribunal.
The clo sure was stoppage of part of the activity or business of the management and such stoppage is an act of management which is entirely in the discretion of the management.
No Indus trial Tribunal could interfere with the discretion exercised in such a matter.
[423F H; 424A B] Management of Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The Workmen & Ors., ; ; Workmen of the Indian Leaf Tobacco Development Co. Ltd. Guntur vs Management of the Indian Leaf Tobacco Development Co. Ltd., Guntur ; fol lowed.
417 4.
The two factors; namely: (i) the provident fund accounts of the employees and the Employees ' State Insurance accounts of the two units had common numbers with the au thorities concerned and (ii) settlements containing similar terms had been entered into in 1974 between the management and the workmen of the two units are not sufficient for holding that the two units were one and the same notwith standing the fact that the nature of the business carried on in them was the same.
[424B D] 5.
On a consideration of the entire material it is clear that (i) the Tribunal had not committed any error in record ing the findings which called for interference at the hands of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution; (ii) this case is one of bona fide closure of an independent unit of business and not a case of termination of services of workmen requiring consideration on remand, by the Tribu nal in the light of s.25 G of the Act; (iii) it was a case where the judgment of the High Court if maintained would result in a wholly unjust situation in which a corresponding number of workmen in the II Unit would be prejudicially affected even though they had nothing to do with the 1st Unit.
[424E H] Indian Cable Co. Ltd. vs Its Workmen, , followed.
