% The lands of the appellant were situated on the banks of the river Tapti known for its frequent floods.
They were sought to be acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
The preliminary notification declaring the intention to acquire the said land was issued under section 4 of the act and published in the Government Gazette on April 30, 1970.
It was notified that the proposed acquisition was for the public purpose for extension of the village site for the purpose of housing 12 families who had been rendered homeless because of floods in the Tapti river.
An individual notice under section 4 of the Act was served on the Appellant on May 2, 1970.
He filed his objections against the proposed acquisition on May 12, 1970 and filed additional objections on June 20, 1970 and July 6, 1970 respectively.
After the consideration and rejection of the said objections, the notification of the lands under section 6 was issued on December 8, 1970.
Notices under section 9 were issued on January 8, 1971.
The appellant challenged the aforesaid acquisition in a writ petition in the High Court on various grounds, the main ground being that the provisions of sections 4 and 6 of the Act were ultra vires the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the petition, but granted a certificate of fitness under Article 133(t)(c) of the Constitution. 777 In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant it was conceded: (1) that the vires of sections 4 and 6 could no longer be called in question, but it was submitted that (t) under the provisions of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879 it must be established that the lands in the existing village site are insufficient for the extension of the village site before any acquisition can be resorted to, (2) the land acquisition authorities had failed to consider what were the other lands available which could have been more conveniently acquired, and (3) since several years have passed from the date of the Notification under section 4, the victims of the floods must have been housed and rehabilitated elsewhere and hence the public purpose for which the lands were sought to be acquired does not survive.
Dismissing the Appeal the Court, ^ HELD: t.
The challenge to the vires of sections 4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 no longer survive in view of the validity of the sections having been upheld by this Court in Manubhai Jehtalal Patel and Anr.
vs State of Gujarat and others, ]983 4 SCC 553.
[778F] 2.
Section 126 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code merely deals with the limits of the site of any village, town or city and prescribes the procedure for fixing the limits of such sites.
There is nothing in the Bombay Land Revenue Code or the Land Acquisition Act which would suggest that before acquisition can be resorted to for enlarging a village site, the Collector or a Survey officer or Revenue Authority must decide upon such enlargement.
[781E F] Chandrabhagabai Udhaorao and others vs Commissioner, Nagpur Division, Nagpur Ors., [1962] Nagpur Law Journal, Vol.
XLV at p. 466 and Sitaram Maroti vs State of Maharashtra, [1963] 65 Bombay Law Reporter, 241 distinguished.
The assessment of suitability of the land proposed to be acquired for the concerned public purpose is primarily for the Land Acquisition officer to consider, and no good reason has been shown on behalf of the appellant which could warrant interference with his decision.
Moreover, the appellant had not even given proper particulars of the other lands which, according to him, were available and were more suitable for acquisition and hence he can make no grievance on the score of proper consideration not having been given to the question of acquiring such lands.
[782BC D] 778 4.
The delay in the acquisition has taken place on account of the legal proceedings adopted by the Appellant himself and by reason of the interim orders obtained by him.
He cannot take advantage of this delay and claim that the public purpose no longer survives.
Moreover, the public purpose stated in the Notification is the extension of a village site or goathan of the village Bhairav and there is nothing to show that the public purpose has exhausted itself.
In fact, on account of increasing population, it would be more necessary today that the village site should be extended even then it was at the time when the notification was issued.[782E F]
