The appellants were suspected of exporting potatoes at concessional rates on false declarations and Madan Lal, a Railway Officer, was deputed to assist the Police in the investigation.
In course of that investigation the appellants offered a bribe to Madan Lal for hushing up the case but he refused to accept it.
As they persisted in their offer a trap was laid in Madan Lal 's house and it succeeded.
Two Police Officers and a Magistrate heard the conversation from the adjoining room and saw the payment of the bribe through a hole.
The appellants were charged under section 120 B of the Indian Penal Code for criminal conspiracy to cause the offence of criminal misconduct punishable under section 5(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act of 1947 to be committed by Madan Lal as also under that section read with section 116 of the Indian Penal Code.
They were convicted by the Special Judge on both the counts and their convictions were upheld by the High Court.
The contentions on their behalf were that section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act had no application to the facts of the case, that Madan Lal was not a public servant within the meaning of the Act and, lastly, that the laying of the trap was an invitation to commit the crime and afforded a good reason for reduction of the sentences.
Held, that the contentions were untenable and must be rejected.
That the word "obtains" occurring in clause (d) to sub section (1) of section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act does not exclude the idea of acceptance of a bribe on offer, and a public servant, whether he simply accepts a bribe, or solicits or extorts it, thereby obtains a pecuniary advantage by abusing his position as a public servant and commits an offence under that section, any consideration as to motive or reward for showing favour or disfavour being altogether irrelevant.
That as a result of the amendment of section 137 of the Indian Railways Act by the Amendment Act of 1955 all railway servants have become public servants not only for the limited purposes of Ch.
IX 183 of the Indian Penal Code but generally under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
That it cannot be laid down as an absolute rule that the laying of traps, especially in cases of this nature, should be deprecated as constituting an invitation to commit an offence and an offence thus detected does not lose its gravity thereby so as to call for a lenient sentence.
Where, however, proper limits are exceeded and the money to be given as bribe is supplied by the Police, it must be severely condemned.
Brennan vs Peek ([1947] 2 All E.R. 572), considered.
Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh and another vs The State of Vindhya Pradesh ([1954] S.C.R. 1098) and Bamjanam Singh vs The State of Bihar, (Cr.
Appeal No. 81 of 1953), referred to.
