% The question for consideration in this case was whether it was appropriate for the High Court to interfere with an election process at an intermediate stage after its commencement and before the declaration of the result of the election held for filling up a vacancy in the office of the Chairman of a Panchayat Union under the Tamil Nadu Panchayats, Act, 1958 (The Act), on the ground that there was an error in the matter of allotment of symbols to the contesting candidates.
The appellant.
the respondent No. 1, the respondent No.6 and two others were nominated as candidates at the election held to the office of the Chairman.
Panchayat Union, Madathukkulam.
On scrutiny of the nomination papers, the nomination papers of the appellant, respondents Nos. 1 and 6, and the two others were found to be laid by the Returning officer.
Under rule 17(1 ) of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Conduct of Election of Chairman of Panchayat Union Councils & Presidents and members of Panchayats) Rules 1978.(The Rules), the Returning officer was directed by the State Government to assign to the candidates of the National and State parties the symbols reserved by the Chief Election Commissioner.
The symbol reserved for the Indian National Congress (I) was 'hand '.
Under the procedure prescribed by the Government, intimation was received by the Returning officer showing the appellant as the candidate of the Indian National Congress (I) under the signatures of the President of the Tamil Nadu Congress (I) Committee on the 3rd February, 1986.
A similar letter was handed over by respondent No. 6 on that date showing that he was also the official candidate of the Indian National Congress (I) Committee.
That letter also appeared to have been signed by the President of the Tamil Nadu Congress (I) Committee.
Faced with two persons claiming to be the official candidates of the same party, the Returning officer declined to 760 assign the symbol 'hand ' to either of the two.
These two candidates, i.e., the appellant and respondent No. 6, then gave in writing their choice of symbols belonging to the unreserved category.
The Returning officer allotted the symbol of 'glass tumbler ' to the appellant and the symbol 'fish ' to respondent No. 6.
The Returning officer then published the list of the candidates nominated with the symbols allotted to each of the three candidates whose nomination papers had been found to be valid.
Immediately, on publication of the said list, the President of the Tamil Nadu Congress (I) Committee, who was alleged to have signed the letters in favour of both the appellant and respondent No. 6 as the official candidates, wrote to the respondent No. 3, the Election Authority as well as the Secretary to the Government, Rural Development Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, on 4.2.86 stating that he had not given his approval to respondent No. 6 being the official Congress (I) candidate, and the authorised candidate of the Congress (I) Party was the appellant.
On receipt of the letter, the respondent No. 3 sent a message to the Collector of Coimbatore to treat the appellant as the official candidate of the Indian National Congress (I) Party and to assign the symbol 'hand ' to him.
The Collector communicated this message to the Returning officer on 6.2.86.
The Returning officer issued, in accordance with that direction, an Errata Notification in Form IV assigning the symbol 'hand ' reserved for the Indian National Congress (I) to the appellant on that date itself and sent copies of the said Notification to all the contesting candidates.
This action of the Returning officer was challenged by respondent No. I a validly nominated candidate with 'bow and arrow ' as his symbol, by a writ petition in the High Court, contending that the issuing of the Errata Notification was an abuse of power on extraneous and irrelevant considerations and there was undue interference with the actual conduct of the election, and praying that the Errata Notification dated 6.2.86 should be quashed and the election, directed to be proceeded with in accordance with the Notification issued on 3.2.86 under which the 'glass tumbler ' symbol had been allotted to the appellant.
The High Court (Single Judge) dismissed the writ petition holding that the petitioner respondent No. I could not be considered as an aggrieved party and that the dispute could be, if at all, between the appellant and respondent No. 6.
The respondent No. I filed an appeal before the High Court.
A Division Bench allowed the appeal, quashed the Errata Notification issued by the Returning officer and directed him to hold the election on the basis of the symbols originally allotted, treating 'glass tumbler ' as the symbol of the appellant, etc.
Aggrieved by the order of the Division Bench, the appellant filed this appeal by special leave.
761 Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The appellant contended that the Division Bench was in error in setting aside the Errata Notification issued by the Returning officer in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before the declaration of the result of the election in view of an alternative remedy under the Rules framed under section 178(2)(iii) of the Act, entitled "Decision of Election Disputes Relating to Panchayat Union Councils".
[766A B] Rule 5 of the Rules provided that subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the Election Authority the Returning officer should be responsible for the proper conduct of the election under the Rules.
The instructions issued by the Election Authority to the Returning officer regarding the allotment of the symbols could not, therefore, be construed as interference with the election process by an authority unconnected with the process of election.
Even if there was any mistake committed by either the Election Authority or the Returning officer in the allotment of symbol to the appellant the said mistake could not amount to a non compliance with the provisions of the Act or the Rules made thereunder.
It was clear from clause (c) of rule II of the Rules made for the purpose of providing a machinery for the decision of the election disputes relating to panchayat union councils that every action amounting to such non compliance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder would not automatically vitiate an election.
It was only when the election court on a consideration of the entire material placed before it at the trial of an election petition came to the conclusion that the result of the election had been materially affected by such non compliance with any of the provisions of the Act or the Rules made thereunder the election of the returned candidate could be declared void.
Rule I of the said Rules provided that an election held under the Act whether of a member or Chairman or Vice Chairman of a Panchayat Union Council could be called in question only by an election petition and not otherwise, but the rule could not have the effect of overriding the powers of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India [767H:768A F] In N.P. Ponnuswami vs Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency and Ors., 11952] S.C.R. 213 (decided by the Full Court) this court first laid down as a matter of general principle that interference with an election process between the commencement of such process and the stage of declaration of the result by a court would not ordinarily be proper, and next laid down that Article 329 (b) of the Constitution 762 had the effect of taking away the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution also in respect of the dispute arising out of election during the said period.
The view of this Court in the above case laid down a salutary principle.
[770A B] Taking into consideration all the aspects of the present case.
including the fact that the person who filed the writ petition before the High Court was not one of the candidates nominated by the Indian National Congress (I) and the fact the President of the Tamil Nadu Congress (I) Committee had written that he had authorised the appellant to contest as the candidate on behalf of his party and had not given his approval to respondent No. 6 contesting as a candidate on behalf of his party, the exercise of the jurisdiction by the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution in this case could not be supported.
The parties who were aggrieved by the result of the election could question the validity of the election by an election petition which was an effective alternative remedy.
[775D F] The Division Bench of the High Court committed a serious error in issuing a writ under Article 226 of the Constitution quashing the Errata Notification allotting the symbol 'hand ' to the appellant.
Judgment of the Division Bench was set aside writ petition filed in the High Court was dismissed and the Returning officer was directed to proceed with the election in accordance with law from the stage at which it was interrupted by the order of the High Court.
[775G H] N. P. Ponnuswami vs Returning officer, Namakkal Constituency and Ors.
, ; Nanhoo Mal & Ors.
vs Hira Mal & Ors., [1976]1 S.C.R. 809; Malam Singh vs The Collector, Sehore, M.P. & Ors., A.I.R, 1971 M .P. 195, referred to.
