% The respondents, members of the United Basel Mission Church (U.B.M.C.) of South Kanara and Coorg, instituted a suit in the Court of Munsif, Mangalore, praying for a declaration that the resolution dated May 9, 1961, passed in the extraordinary meeting of the District Church Council of UBMC of South Kanara and Coorg, proposing the merger of UBMC of South Kanara and Coorg with the Church of South India (C.S.I.).
was void, illegal and ultra vires the constitution of the UBMC and also the provisions of the Religious Societies Act, 1880, and not binding on the respondents/plaintiffs or other members of the UBMC of South Kanara and Coorg.
The suit was contested by the appellants defendants.
The trial Court dismissed the suit, holding that (i) the suit was maintainable but the respondents were not entitled to file the suit in a representative character, representing the UBMC of South Kanara & Coorg, (ii) there was no fundamental difference between the UBMC and CSI, and (iii) the impugned resolution was legal and valid.
The respondents filed appeal against the judgment of the trial court.
which was dismissed by the Additional Civil Judge, who, however, held that the respondents were entitled to file the suit in a representative character.
The respondents preferred a second appeal to the High Court against the judgment and decree of the Additional Civil Judge.
The High Court (Single Judge) took a contrary view and allowed the appeal, holding that there were fundamental differences in doctrine.
faith, tradition, heritage and practices between UBMC and CSI.
and the resolution impugned was illegal and void.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellants moved this Court for relief by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court 738 ^ HELD: It was well established that the dispute as to the right of worship was one of a civil nature within the meaning of section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure and a suit was maintainable for the vindication or determination of such a right.
It must be made clear that maintainability of the suit would not permit a Court to consider the soundness or propriety of any religious doctrine, faith or rituals.
The scope of enquiry in such a suit was limited to those aspects only that had a direct bearing on the question of right of worship, and with a view to considering such a question, the Court might examine the doctrines.
faith.
rituals and practices for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same interfered with the right of worship of the aggrieved parties.
In view of section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the enquiry should be confined to the disputes of a civil nature.
Any dispute, which was not of a civil nature should be excluded from consideration.
[745B,D F] Both the churches were Protestant Churches.
The fundamental doctrines, faith and belief appeared to be the same.
Both UBMC and CSI believed in Jesus Christ, the Incarnate Son of God the Redeamer of the World.
Both also believed that man was saved from sin through grace in Jesus Christ.
Both believed in the Holy Spirit and in the Supreme Power of Holy Spirit and that there should be free access of man to God.
[745G H;746A] U.B.M.C. was a Presbyterian Church and the respondents did not believe in the concept of Episcopacy or apostolic succession, associated with historic Episcopacy.
UBMC was opposed to Episcopacy, but Episcopacy, adopted by the CSI was not that historic Episcopacy, but historic Episcopacy in a constitutional form.
The CSI believed that in all ordinations and consecrations the true ordainer and consecrater was God.
From all this, the irresistible conclusion was that there was neither apostolic succession nor historical Episcopacy in CSI as contended on behalf of the respondents.
[746B C,E F] The respondents placed much reliance on the universal priesthood.
That was said to be prevalent in UBMC.
The submission in this regard, however, did not find support from the constitution of UBMC.
The universal priesthood, which was said to be prevalent in UBMC, did not permit lay preachers and Evangelists to administer the sacraments.
[747C,G] In the CSI, Presbyters had the authority to administer the sacraments and in the UBMC, the Pastors, who were ordained ministers, were authorised to administer the sacraments.
There was, therefore, no 739 distinction between a pastor in the UBMC and a Presbyter in the CSI.
As the functions and duties of Presbyters and Pastors were the same and as both of them were ordained ministers, no exception could be taken by the respondents if the sacraments were administered by Pastors instead of the Presbyters.
No objection could also be taken to the Bishops administering the sacraments, for they did not emerge from the apostolic succession which was the main characteristic of historical episcopacy.
If the respondents or any members of the UBMC had any Objection to the administering of sacraments by the Bishops, the sacraments could be administered by the Presbyters.
The Malabar and Bombay Karnataka Units of UBMC had already joined the CSI.
The CSI had accepted already the form of worship followed in the UBMC before the Union of the two units with the CSI, and such acceptance was indicated in Rule 12 of Chapter II of the Constitution of the CSI, and in view of this it was difficult to accept the contention of the respondents that in case of merger or implementation of the impugned resolution, the right of worship of the impugned resolution, the right of worship of the members of the UBMC would be affected.
[748A F] After a person was appointed a Bishop or a Presbyter in the CSI or a Pastor in UBMC, he had to be ordained in almost the same manner.
The Court did not think it was within the purview of the enquiry in this litigation whether such ordination in the CSI had a spiritual significance of a transfer of grace or whether it was only a symbol of conferment of authority, so far as UBMC was concerned.
The mode or manner of ordination or the underlying object of such ordination had, in the Court 's opinion, nothing to do with the right of worship of the respondents.
[749B C] Both UBMC and CSI believed in Apostles Creed and Nicene Creed.
If shorter Catechism, as stated by D.W. t consisted of the Creeds in the form of questions and answers, the Court did not think that merely because there was no mention about Shorter Catechism in the Constitution of the CSI, it could be said that there was a difference in the faith and doctrine of the two Churches, as held by the High rt [749F G] There was no cause for apprehension of the respondents that in case of merger, the Apocrypha would be imposed upon them which was repugnant to their religious faith, in the liturgy of the CSI, the prayer from Apocrypha had been made optional which showed that there was no scope for the imposition of Apocrypha on the respondents in the case of Union of UBMC and CSI.
[751A B] 740 As regards the properties of the UBMC, even though there was merger, the properties or the income thereof would be utilised only for the benefit of the members of the UBMC of the South Kanara and Coorg.
It was difficult to accept the contention of the respondents that in the case of merger, there would be diversion of the properties in the hands of the UBMC Trust Association to the CSI in breach of trust.
[752B C] There was little or no difference between the doctrines, faith and religious views of UBMC and the CSI.
The objection of the respondents to historical Episcopacy had no solid foundation inasmuch as historical Episcopacy was not in existence in the true sense of the term in the CSI, and it was none in a constitutional form.
In other words, the Bishops were elected and Apostolic succession which was associated with historical Episcopacy, was totally absent.
The observations made in General Assembly of Free Church of Scotland vs Lord overtoun, , could not in any event be applicable to the facts of this case, which are different from the said Free Church Case.
[753F H] As regards the question whether the District Church Council had the authority to pass the impugned resolution, it was true that the District Church Council had only the power of amendment of the Constitution and no power had been conferred on it to pass a resolution relating to the union of the UBMC of South Kanara and Coorg with the CSI, but the Synod was the highest authority and the Synod of UBMC had the power to sanction merger of any unit of UBMC in the CSI, and the Synod passed a resolution, permitting the District Church Council of South Kanara and Coorg to join the Church of South India CSI.
As the Synod was a representative body of the units, it stood dissolved after passing the said resolution, but until such a resolution was passed, it existed as the highest authoritative and administrative body of the UBMC.
[757A B, E F] The challenge to the validity of the resolution impugned on the ground of violation of the provisions of section 6 of the Religious Societies Act, 1880, was misconceived and without any substance.
The section dealt with the dissolution of societies and adjustment of their affairs.
There was no question of dissolution of UBMC of South Kanara and Coorg and disposal of settlement of its property, claims and liabilities, etc., and as such the provision of section 6 was not at all applicable to this case.
[758C D] The Court disagreed with the High Court that the impugned 741 resolution violated the provision of section 6 of the Religious Societies Act, and in view of the fact that the Synod had unanimously accorded permission for the merger, the High Court was not justified in striking down the said resolution.
On the ground that it was beyond the authority of the District Church Council to pass such a resolution.
The impugned resolution was legal and valid.
[758E F] Ugamsingh and Mishrimal vs Kesrimal, [197l] 2 S.C.R. 836; Thiru venkata Ramanuja Pedda Jiyyangarlu Valu vs Prathivathi Bhayan Karam Venkatacharlu, ; General Assembly of Free Church of Scotland vs Lord overtoun, and N.P. Barwell vs John Jackson, A.I.R. 1943 All. 146.
