% The appellant was arrested and detained on 21st March, 1987 pursuant to an order of detention made under section 3(1) of the .
He was served with the grounds of detention by the Detaining Authority.
In the grounds it was stated that the appellant had been indulging in illegal sale and purchase of foreign currency, and also in the sale and purchase of gold of foreign origin on a large scale, and that in three premises connected with the appellant search was carried out on 10th December, 1986 under section 33 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973.
On 6th April, 1987 the appellant made two representations; one to the Detaining Authority the second respondent, and another to the Central Government the first respondent.
In these representations the appellant stated that he had no concern whatsoever as regards the premises where search was carried out, and US $ and primary gold were recovered as the said premises did not belong to him but belonged to his sister in law, and that if the relevant documents on the basis of which the detaining authority came to its subjective satisfaction are not given it would not be possible to make any effective representation.
On 2nd April, 1987 the appellant also made a representation before the Advisory Board.
The appellant was produced before the Advisory Board on 29th April, 1987 and the Board heard the appellant in respect of his representation.
Me received a communication dated 7th May, 1987 from 801 respondent No. l stating that his detention had been confirmed with effect from 21st March, 1987 for a period of one year.
The appellant challenged the order of detention in a writ petition and also prayed for quashing of the said order.
It was contended on his behalf: (1) that the grounds of detention were supplied on 21st March, 1987 whereas the vital documents were supplied as late as on 24th April, 1987 and that this was a clear infringement of the provisions of section 3(3) of the COFEPOSA Act.
(2) That the appellant could not make an effective representation against the order of detention in accordance with the mandatory provisions of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
The order of detention was also challenged on the ground: that the order of confirmation of detention did not give any indication as to why the Government had specified or determined the maximum period of detention of one year, that there had been an inordinate delay in considering the representation dated 6th April, 1987, that it was disposed of by the Central Government on 29th April, 1987, and that this delay of 23 days had not been satisfactorily explained.
This unusual delay in the disposal of the representation also rendered the order of detention bad.
The writ was contested by the first and second respondents by submitting in their counter affidavits that at the time of the search of the premises several personal documents of the detenu like driving licence, his and his wife 's bank passbooks, HUF passbooks, account books were seized from the searched premises, and that in pursuance of his representation dated 6th April, 1987 the detenu was supplied with more documents numbering 150 pages on 24th April, 1987 although the same had not been relied upon in forming the subjective satisfaction of the Detaining Authority.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition in view of the affidavit filed by the Detaining Authority Respondent No. 2 that all the documents seized though placed before the detaining authority he did not rely on them in forming his subjective satisfaction in making the order of detention, and as such the non supply of certain documents seized from the premises after search to the detenu along with the grounds of detention cannot be said to amount to an infringement of the provisions of article 22(5) of the Constitution rendering the order of detention illegal and bad.
Allowing the Appeal, the Court, 802 ^ HELD: l.
It is crystal clear that certain documents though placed before the Detaining Authority for consideration were not sup plied to the appellant within 15 days from the date of the order of detention as provided under section 3(3) of the COFEPOSA Act.
It is also evident that on the request of the appellant by his representation made on 6th April, 1987 the documents were supplied to him on 24th April, 1987.
The representation of the appellant was disposed of by the Advisory Board on 29th April, 1987.
In these circumstances, it cannot be denied that the failure on the part of the Detaining Authority to supply the aforesaid material documents prevented the appellant from making an effective representation against the grounds of his detention, and as such the mandatory provision of article 22(5) had not been complied with.
The order of detention is, therefore, illegal and bad and the same is liable to be quashed.
[807C E] 2.
It is necessary for the valid continuance of the detention that subject to article 22(6) copies of the documents, statements and other materials relied upon in the grounds of detention should be furnished to the detenu alongwith the grounds of detention or in any event not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing not later than fifteen days from the date of detention.
There are no exceptions or qualifications provided to this rule and if this requirement of article 22(5) read with section 3(3) COFEPOSA Act is not satisfied the continued detention order of detenu would be illegal and void.
Appellant directed to be released forthwith.
[807G H; 808A B, C] Smt.
Icchu Devi Choraria vs Union of India and Ors., ; and Kamla Kanahiyalal Khushalani vs State of Maharashtra and Another, ; referred to.
