% Appellants Nos. 1 and 2 along with two other accused were convicted for the murder of the first Appellant 's paternal uncle, his wife and daughter.
First the brother, and then his daughter and wife were done to death with gandassa and kapa blows just outside their house.
The motive alleged was that the first appellant 's father and his deceased brother had inherited some land from their father and there were disputes about it, and by eliminating the family, one of the successors entitled to half share in the property had been removed.
It was also alleged that the deceased man had no male issue and had only one daughter for whom negotiations for marriage were in the offing and appellant No. 1 and his father apprehended the entry of a stranger in the family as the son in law to succeed to the property falling to the share of the deceased man.
The Trial Court convicted the appellants and sentenced them to death, while the other two accused were sentenced to life imprisonment.
Against the conviction and sentence, an appeal was filed.
There was also a reference to the High Court, as death sentence was involved in respect of the two appellants.
The High Court dismissed the appeal and confirmed the death sentence.
The appeal before this Court is filed by the two appellants who have been sentenced to death.
The motive alleged has been disputed on behalf of the appellants, as a will had been executed by the deceased man in favour of the son of his wife 's brother, and that if at all there was a motive he should have also been eliminated.
844 It was also contended that in the locality independent witnesses could be available and they have not been examined.
Another submission was that one of the witnesses had complained against the Police Officer and so the Police Officers were prejudiced against him.
The time at which the FIR had been registered has also been questioned.
In the absence of motive on the part of the second appellant, it was contended, that the death sentence awarded to him is not justified.
Allowing the appeal partly, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The will was filed after the murders, in some civil proceedings when the legatee claimed to be brought on record in place of the deceased man.
This apparently could not indicate that this will was in the knowledge of the appellants on the date of incident.
Therefore the motive cannot be doubted.
[848G H] 2.
One of the witnesses is the maternal uncle of the deceased girl and there were some negotiations for her marriage and for that purpose he along with his son had come to the house of the deceased.
It is apparent that a maternal uncle is generally consulted when negotiations for marriage of a girl are in progress and apart from it both the courts below had accepted the testimony of this witness which is fully corroborated by the First Information Report lodged immediately after the incident.
It appears from the evidence that the nearby area was not so inhabitated and by that time in the evening no one else was available.
Those who were present have been examined and in this view of the matter the contention that independent witnesses were not examined is of no consequence.
The names of the eye witnesses have been mentioned in the First Information Report, which was lodged immediately after the incident and the statements of eye witnesses have been fully corroborated by medical evidence.
No doubt could therefore be raised about the reliability of such evidence.
[849B C; 851C] 3.
No relevant evidence was brought on record and not a single question was put to any witness or to the person who made the First Information Report as to whether he had noted the correct time of the incident.
There is no material on record to show as to whether the persons who lodged the First Information Report, walked through 12 1/2 kilometres or took a lift in any vehicle.
In the absence of any material, the only thing that appears is that immediately after the incident the report was recorded and this report contains a clear description of the incident corroborating the testimony of the eye witnesses.
[849F; 850A B] 845 4.
Merely because the second appellant chose to make some application and also mentioned the names of some police officers in it, it could not be said that all police officers would be interested in falsely implicating him in a murder case.
In the complaint made by appellant No. 2, none of the police officers in charge of the investigation of the present case has been referred to therein.
It was, however, contended that the brotherhood of the uniform created a prejudice against the second appellant and that is why he has been falsely implicated.
This appears to be too tall a proposition.
There is no material to indicate that there was any prejudice in the mind of the investigating officer.
The report of the incident was lodged immediately and in the report the part played by the accused has been clearly stated.
[851A B; 850G H] 5.1 It appears that first appellant and his father were keen to grab the property and it is in pursuit of this motive that they committed the triple murder.
The attack was brutal.
The medical evidence indicates that the deceased man 's neck was chopped off and repeated blows by Gandasa were inflicted on the body of his daughter.
Therefore, it is clear that the first appellant first chopped off the neck of his uncle and even after doing this he inflicted number of blows on the young girl, who was his own uncle 's daughter, and the repeated blows go to show that he inflicted the injuries with determination that she may not escape.
In this view of the matter and the brutal manner in which these two were done to death, there is no reason to alter the sentence awarded to the first appellant.
[852C E] 5.2 So far as the second appellant is concerned he is a stranger and he is not in any way connected with the family and so there could be no motive attributed to him.
He appears to have been dragged into the killing.
Therefore, the sentence of death awarded to the second appellant is altered to a sentence of imprisonment for life.
[852E F]
