% The Nagar Mahapalika, Bareilly petitioner imposed octroi duty on goods brought within its limits for 'consumption, use or sale therein ' through a Notification dated April 30, 1986 in exercise of powers under section 172(2)(b) of the U.P. Nagar Mahapalika Adhiniyam, 1959.
In the Schedule forming part of this notification are mentioned the articles on which octroi duty is payable and the rates thereof.
The articles have been grouped together in different classes from Class I to Class X. Class III which bears the Heading "Articles of lighting, fuel, washing and lubricants contains the entry Item No. 7 as "7.
Methalated denatured and rectified spirit Rs.0.05 per litre.
" Class VI with the heading "Tobacco and other intoxicating goods" contains the entry at Item No. 6: as "6.
Foreign imported liquor and all kinds of wines made in India Re.1 per litre.
" Kasturi Lal Satantra Kumar and his partner respondents 3 and 4 by a bid in the auction held for retail vend of country liquor for the excise year 1987 88 ending on March 31, 1988 obtained the necessary licence under the U.P. Excise Act for a group of shops in the district of Bareilly.
One of the conditions of the auction which also formed part of the licence was that the licensee would obtain supply of country liquor for retail vend from the bonded warehouse in respect of Bareilly district.
The Nagar Mahapalika sought to realise octroi duty on the 866 country spirit supplied by the bonded warehouse at the rate of Re.1 per litre treating it to be 'liquor fit for human consumption ' under Entry 6 of Class VI of the Notification.
The respondents filed a writ petition for a direction to restrain the Nagar Mahapalika from collecting octroi at the rate of Re.1 per litre contending that country spirit is nothing but rectified spirit and that octroi duty could not be charged in excess of Rs.0.05 per litre under Item No. 7 of Class III of the Notification.
The High Court allowed the writ petition and restrained the Nagar Mahapalika from requiring payment of octroi duty at Re.1 per litre upon the country spirit brought within its limit under Item No. 6 of Class VI of the Schedule to the Notification.
Dismissing the SLP of the Nagar Mahapalika, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The taxable event for the imposition of octroi is the entry, and the nature and type of the goods at the point of entry on the relevant factors.
[870A] 2.
The normal meaning of the expressions "foreign imported liquor or all kinds of wine made in India" would not fit in the description of the rectified spirit.
Ordinary people would not consider rectified spirit to be 'foreign imported liquor or all kinds of wines made in India '.
That is not the natural meaning as understood by common people.
That is the yardstick by which this should be judged.
The dictionary meaning also corresponds to the same view.
[868E F] 3.
While giving a meaning to an Item contained in the Schedule of articles, the Court should normally give it a meaning intended by the framers of the Schedule by looking at the various articles mentioned in a particular group.
All the items in one group should be considered in a generic sense.
[868H; 869A] In the instant case, having regard to the nature of the duty and the type of the goods, rectified spirit is dutiable at the rate of Rs.0.05 per litre and not on the basis that it was 'foreign wine or liquor. ' [870B] State of U.P. and others vs Synthetics and Chemical Ltd. etc.
; , , referred to.
Heeralal and others vs State, A.I.R. , approved.
