% The property in dispute was sold by its original owner to the respondent.
Claiming that there was a local custom under which the tenant in occupation of a building had a right of pre emption, the tenant of a portion of the property filed a suit for pre emption and valued the portion at Rs.10,000.
The suit was opposed by the respondent contending that there was no such customary law and that in case the decree was passed, the plaintiff should be asked to pay Rs.20,000, as consideration.
During the pendency of the suit, the plaintiff tenant died and the appellants, his legal representatives filed an application under Order 22, Rule 3 of Civil Procedure Code, for being brought on record in place of the original plaintiff and for permission to prosecute the suit further.
The respondent, opposed the application contending that the right of pre emption, even if it existed, was only a personal right of the tenant and was not heritable, and consequent on his death the right to sue did not survive, and therefore the suit was liable to be dismissed.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the respondent filed a revision petition before the High Court, which allowed the same following a Full Bench decision of that Court in Chandrup Singh and Anr.
vs Data Ram and Anr., [1985] Punjab Law Reporter 771, that a statutory right of pre emption resting only on blood relationship created by section 15(1) of the Punjab Pre emption Act, 1913 was not a heritable one and did not devolve on the heirs on the death of the pre emptor before the grant of 896 the decree in the suit, and declared that the suit instituted by the tenant had abated on his death.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: While a right of pre emption does not give right to an interest in immovable property, the right of tenancy itself was heritable and, therefore, every right attached to the said right of tenancy or incidental to it should ordinarily be heritable.
There can be no distinction between the right of pre emption arising under the statutory law and the customary law.
[900F, H] In the instant case, the plaintiff had acquired the said right of pre emption under customary law by virtue of right of tenancy which he had in the portion of the property in his possession and had instituted a suit for enforcing that right.
The fact that the pre emptor had died at the trial stage cannot make any difference.
[900G] The right to sue therefore survived on the death of the plaintifftenant in favour of the appellants, who were his legal representatives, and they were entitled to be brought on record in substitution of the original plaintiff tenant under Order 22, Rule 3 of the Civil Procedure Code.
[902B C] The trial court was directed to bring the appellants on record as legal representatives of the deceased plaintiff and to dispose of the suit on merits.
[902C] Chandrup Singh and Another vs Data Ram and Another, [1982] Punjab Law Reporter 771, over ruled.
Hazari & Ors.
vs Neki & Ors.
, ; , followed.
Wajid Ali & Anr.
vs Shaban & Ors.
, I.L.R. 31 Allahabad 623, approved.
Muhammad Husain vs Niamet un nissa and Ors., I.L.R. 20 Allahabad 88, distinguished.
Faqir Ali Shah vs Ram Kishan & Ors., 133 P.R. 1907, referred to.
