% A Division Bench of a High Court made certain observations casting reflections on the conduct of certain officials and their competence to decide matters in the quasi judicial capacity.
In the appeal by special leave the Charity Commissioner sought redressal in respect of such observations.
A direction against Respondent No. 16 was also sought.
Disposing of the appeal this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court might well have avoided casting reflections on the Deputy Charity Commissioner who was merely discharging his judicial functions under the Act.
He should have been permitted to discharge his function in regard to the issues arising before him, in the light of his own independent perspective.
The observations made by the Single Judge on merits in regard to the interpretation of the clauses of the Will could not have influenced even the trial court.
Besides, an appeal was pending before the Division Bench.
Taking a view different from the one reflected in the judgment of the Single Judge could not be said to have been made in scant regard of the judgment; nor can it be construed as exhibiting disrespect for the High Court.
The Division Bench went too far in observing to the effect that what the officer had done in discharging his quasi judicial functions would constitute contempt of Court.
The official was entitled to take his own view subject to his decision being questioned in accordance with law.
He had not been amiss or at fault in taking the view which commended itself to him and which he was at full liberty to take under the law.
The observations made against the Deputy Charity Commissioner should be treated as non existent.
So also the observations made in regard to the mode of recruitment to the office in question.
[950G H; 951A E] 2.
The status quo in regard to the property in question shall be maintained.
Respondent No. 16 shall not get executed or obtain a sale 950 deed in respect of the property in his favour or in favour of his nominees or assignees till the question is finally disposed of.
The Assistant Charity Commissioner before whom the matter is pending will have full liberty to decide the matter in accordance with law in the light of his own perception of the matter without being influenced one way or the other by any observation made in the judgment of the learned Single Judge or in the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court.
[951H; 952A B] [The Court directed the Assistant Charity Commissioner to dispose of the matter with expedition preferably within the outside limit of six months.] [952C]
