% The appellant was appointed to the post of Craftsman (Jawan) on November 23, 1973.
He was later promoted to the post of Naik in view of his good services and subsequently confirmed in that post.
He served at various places in the country, including field areas.
He was, however, reverted from the post of Naik to the post of Craftsman (Jawan).
While he was in service he incurred the displeasure of the Commanding Officer of his regiment (Major) as he did not comply with his directions.
He was consequently harassed and maltreated in various ways.
Unable to bear the torture he surrendered to the mercy of the Commanding Officer of the Battalion (Colonel).
He, however, directed him to surrender to the Commanding Officer of his regiment and gave him a certificate of surrender.
The Commanding Officer took him into custody.
He was charge sheeted for the purpose and sentenced to 42 days imprisonment in military custody.
During the period of his remaining in military custody, his family suffered harassment.
The appellant on 12th September, 1984 left station with his wife and children without taking any leave.
He stated that he became unwell and was under the treatment of a doctor.
When he reported back to his unit with the fitness certificate the Commanding Officer of his regiment served him with a charge sheet on November 2, 1984 and directed that he be tried by a summary court martial.
On November 9, 1984, the order of dismissal of the appellant from service was made by the Commanding Officer in the Summary Court Martial.
The appellant challenged the aforesaid order in a writ petition to the High Court, and sought quashing of the same contending: that the Commanding Officer was not legally competent to preside a summary 954 court martial, that the punishment of dismissal from service was disproportionate to the charge, that he was denied a fair opportunity to defend himself, and was in fact not permitted to question the witnesses.
A Division Bench of the High Court however, dismissed the writ petition holding that no objection was taken before the Summary Court Martial that the appellant was not allowed to be represented by his counsel, that no objection was taken as to the competence of the Commanding Officer to act as a Judge in the Summary Court Martial, that the appellant had earlier been convicted four times and entries were made in red ink in his service record, and that as the appellant was absent from duty without leave and pleaded guilty before the court martial proceedings, there was as such no illegality in the order of dismissal made in the court martial proceedings.
Dismissing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Four kinds of courts martial are specified in Section 108 of the .
These are:(a) General Courts Martial; (b) District Courts Martial; (c) Summary General Courts Martial and (d) Summary Courts Martial.
[959G H; 960A] 2.
Section 116 of the Act says that a summary court martial may be held by the Commanding Officer of any corps or department or detachment of the regular Army, and he shall alone constitute the court, and that the proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be Officers or junior commissioned officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed.
It is only in the case if general court martial or district court martial that Rule 39(2) of the Army Rules 1954 is applicable and the Commanding Officer is not competent to convene general or district court martial.
[960B,D] 3.
In the instant case, the summary court martial was held by the Commanding Officer of the Corps, Major P.S. Mahant and there were two other officers Captain K.J. Singh and another officer to attend the proceedings.
In such circumstances, the summary court martial had been convened by the Commanding Officer according to the provisions of the .
[960C, E F] 4.
Section 39(a) of the Act specifies that to be absent without leave constitutes an offence, while Section 71(e) provides dismissal from service as one of the punishments for such an offence.
[960F] 955 5.
The appellant in the instant case, undoubtedly absented himself from duty without taking any leave from the lines as required under the , was charge sheeted for the said offence and tried by a summary court martial convened by the Commanding Officer.
After giving him due opportunity it was held that the appellant was previously punished also for the offence of absence from duty on four occasions and there was a red ink entry.
Considering all this, in the summary court martial proceedings he was convicted and sentenced to the punishment of dismissal from service.
The submission on behalf of the appellant that punishment is disproportionate to the charge is wholly unsustainable.
As such the said order of dismissal cannot be challenged as disproportionate to the charge or as one tainted with illegality.
It is also evident from the judgment of the High Court that the appellant admitted his guilt of absenting from duty without any leave.
[960G H; 961A B,F]
