% Respondent No. 1, Jugal Kishore, while driving a three wheeler scooter, met with an accident with bus No. DLP 3699, driven by Rai Singh, respondent No. 2, owned by M/s. Delhi Janata Co operative Transport Policy Limited, respondent No. 3, and insured with the appellant.
The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Delhi awarded compensation in the sum of Rs.10,000 to respondent No.1.
On appeal, the High Court enhanced the Compensation to Rs.1,00,000.
This Court, while granting special leave required the appellant to deposit the amount of compensation awarded by the High Court and permitted the respondent to withdraw the same, making it clear that it shall not be refunded by him in the event of reversal of the decision of the High Court.
The appellant contends that in view of the statutory provision contained in this behalf in clause (b) of sub section (2) of section 95 of the Act, as it stood on the date of accident, no award in excess of the statutory liability of Rs.20,000 could have been made against the appellant.
The respondent, on the other hand, contends (1) Notwithstanding the provision contained in this behalf in clause (b) aforesaid, it was open to the insurer to take a policy covering a higher risk than contemplated by clause (b) and consequently the said clause had to be read subject to the terms of the policy.
In this connection, the respondent relies on the words "Commercial Vehicle comprehensive" printed on the policy, 911 and on the circumstance that the premium paid was higher than the premium of an "Act only" policy, and urges that the liability of the appellant was unlimited.
(2) In view of sub section (6) of section 96 of the Act no Insurer to whom the notice referred to in sub section (2) thereof has been given, is entitled "to avoid his liability" to any person entitled to the benefit of any such judgment as is referred to in sub section (1) thereof otherwise than in the manner provided for in sub section (2).
On this basis it is urged that the appellant was not entitled to assert that its liability was confined to Rs.20,000 only inasmuch as this is not one of the defences specified in sub section (2) of section 96 of the Act.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: (1) It is not obligatory for the owner of a vehicle to get it comprehensively insured for which a higher premium than for an "act only" policy is payable.
Such comprehensive insurance entitles the owner to claim reimbursement of the entire amount of loss or damage suffered up to the estimated value of the vehicle insured.
Comprehensive insurance of the vehicle and payment of higher premium on this score, as was done in the instant case do not mean that the limit of the liability with regard to third party risk becomes unlimited or higher than the statutory liability fixed under sub section (2) of section 95 of the Act.
For this purpose a specific agreement has to be arrived at between the owner and the insurance company and additional premium paid.
[915C E] (2) A perusal of the policy indicates that the liability undertaken with regard to the death or bodily injury to any person caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle has been confined to "such amount as is necessary to meet the requirements of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1939", which was at the relevant time Rs.20,000 only.
An award against the appellant could not, therefore, have been made in excess of the said statutory liability.
[916F G] (3) It is apparent from the words "to avoid his liability" used in sub section (6) of section 96 that the restrictions placed with regard to defences available to the insurer specified in sub section (2) of section 96 are applicable to a case where the insurer wants to avoid his liability.
In the instant case the appellant is not seeking to avoid its liability but wants a determination of the extent of its liability in accordance with the statutory provisions contained in this behalf in clause (b) of sub section (2) of section 95 of the Act.
[917E F] 912 (4) This Court has consistently emphasized that it is the duty of the party which is in possession of a document which would be helpful in doing justice in the cause to produce the said document and such party should not be permitted to take shelter behind the abstract doctrine of burden of proof.
This duty is greater in the case of instrumentalities of the State, such as the appellant, who are under an obligation to act fairly.
The obligation on the part of the State or its instrumentalities to act fairly can never be over emphasized.
[918C D] (5) The attitude often adopted by the Insurance Companies, as was adopted in this case, is not to file a copy of the policy before the Tribunal and before the High Court in appeal.
The claimants for compensation are invariably not possessed of either the policy or a copy thereof.
In all cases where the Insurance Company concerned wishes to take a defence in a claim petition that its liability is not in excess of the statutory liability it should file a copy of the insurance policy alongwith its defence.
[917G H; 918B C] Pushpabai Purshottam Udeshi vs Ranjit Ginning and Pressing Co., and British India General Insurance Co. vs Captain Itbar Singh, AIR 1959 Supreme Court 1331, referred to.
