% Section 15 of the provided that when a marriage was dissolved by a decree of divorce, it shall be lawful for either of the spouses to marry again, where either there was no right of appeal or where there was such a right of appeal, the time for appealing, had expired, without the appeal being presented or the appeal having been presented, was dismissed.
Proviso to the section provided that it shall not be lawful for either of them to remarry unless at the date of such marriage at least one year had elapsed from the date of decree in the court of first instance.
This proviso was deleted by the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976.
A decree for dissolution of marriage was granted by the Additional District Judge against the petitioner wife on the ground of cruelty under section 13(i a) of the .
The petitioner wife 's appeal to the High Court was dismissed in limine.
The petitioner wife filed a Special Leave Petition in this Court.
A preliminary objection was raised on behalf of the respondent husband 1099 that the petition had become infructuous inasmuch as the respondent husband had meanwhile married again on 17th August, 1986, just a month after the dismissal of the petitioner 's appeal by the High Court.
Over ruling the preliminary objection and directing the Special Leave Petition to be placed for hearing, ^ HELD: Under the law laid down in the , monogamy is the rule and a party can only contract valid second marriage after the first ceases to exist in the manner envisaged by section 15.
This rule is an integral part of the proceedings by which alone both the parties to the decree can be released from their incapacity to contract a fresh marriage.
[1102E F] Prior to the Amendment Act of 1976, the proviso to section 15 laid down a period of waiting of one year between the passing of a decree for divorce by the court of first instance and the remarriage of any of the spouses.
The deletion of this proviso, by the Marriage Laws (Amendment Act), 1976 and doing away with the period of waiting has given rise to a question of great difficulty.
[1103A B] The section, when it speaks of a case where there is a "right of appeal" does not in terms cover the case of an application for special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
[1103B C] Under Article 133(c) of the a special leave petition can be filed within 90 days from the date of the disposal of the appeal by the High Court.
Therefore, a successful party cannot take away the right of presenting an application from the other spouse by marrying immediately after the High Court 's judgment and must wait till that period was over and make sure whether an application for special leave has been filed in the Supreme Court.
[1103C D] Chandra Mohini Srivastava vs Avinash Prasad Srivastava Ors.
; , , followed.
In the instant case, the High Court having dismissed the appeal on 16th July, 1986, the petitioner could have presented a special leave petition within ninety days therefrom i.e. till 14th September, 1986.
Till that period was over, it was not lawful for either party to marry again as provided by section 15.
[1104C D] 1100 Though the respondent has denied any knowledge of the filing of the appeal in the High Court or of its dismissal, and has justified the second marriage on August 17, 1986, this has been controverted by the petitioner, by filing a copy of the registered notice dated May 31, 1986, intimating the respondent of the filing of the appeal.
It was, therefore, incumbent on the respondent to have apprised himself as to whether the appeal in the High Court was still pending; and if not, whether the period for filing a special leave petition to this Court had expired.
[1104A C] Catterall vs Sweetman, [1845] 9 Jur. 951, 954, referred to.
