% Section 6(3B) of the Gujarat Agricultural Land Ceiling Act of 1960 entitles a family, consisting of more than five members comprising a person and other members of the categories mentioned therein, viz.(i) minor son, (ii) widow of pre deceased son, (iii) minor son or unmarried daughter of a pre deceased son, where his or her mother is dead, to hold land in excess of the ceiling area to the extent of one fifth of such area for each member in excess of five, provided the total area does not exceed twice the ceiling area.
The ceiling area prescribed was 45 acres.
The family of the respondent landholder consisted of nine members including himself, his mother, wife, three minor sons and three minor daughters.
The holding of the family consisted of 60 acres and 4 gunthas.
The Revenue Tribunal held that the landholder was not entitled to the benefit of s.6(3B) of the Act.
In counting the members of the family, it excluded from consideration the mother and three minor daughters of the landholder on the view that the applicant and his wife would count as one unit and his minor sons would count as four units and ruled that there were only five members in the family for the purpose of counting the unit, notwithstanding the fact that the family consisted of nine members and also comprised of other members belonging to the specified category.
In the writ petition, the High Court held that the landholder 's family consisted of nine members inasmuch as his mother and his wife as also his minor daughters were members of his family.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended for the appellant State that in applying the test whether or not the family consisted of five 1069 members regard must be had only to the members of family belonging to the specified category, namely minor sons, in so far as the composition of the family of the landholder was concerned, so to say, that the landholder, his wife and his three minor sons were the only five members of the family for the purpose of section 6(3B) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.1 Two tests must be satisfied cumulatively for being eligible to claim the benefit of section 6(3B) of the Gujarat Agricultural Land Ceiling Act, 1960: (1) the size of the family should exceed five, (2) it must consist of members one or more of whom belong to one or other of the specified categories.
All the ingredients of section 6(3B) are satisfied in the instant case.[1074G] 1.2 The expression "family" has not been defined in the Act.
The Court has, therefore, to go by the concept by family as it is commonly understood, meaning, a group of persons consisting of parents and their offsprings living together in one household.
In that view, that family of the landholder consisted of eight members including himself, his wife, three minor sons and three minor daughters.
The family of the landholder thus consists of more than five members.
The family also includes persons of one of the specified categories viz., the minor sons.
[1074A C, E F] 2.
It cannot be said that in ascertaining whether or not the precondition is satisfied only the members of the specified category should be taken into account.
For, to do so would be to kill the letter as well as the spirit of the benevolent provisions aimed at relieving the distress of family members subject to one or other of the socio economic handicaps.
[1075D E; 1071C D] 3.
Computation of the extent of the additional land must be made by applying the formula embodied in section 6(3B).
On a true interpretation of the provision "each member in excess of five" must of logical necessity mean each "such" member of the specified handicapped category viz. three minor sons.
Under the circumstances, for each minor son in excess of the five members, the holder was entitled to one fifth of the ceiling area in excess of the prescribed ceiling.
That is to say he was entitled to three fifth of the prescribed ceiling area over and above the ceiling area provided the total retainable holding of the family did not exceed twice the ceiling area.
The holding of the family consisted of 60 acres and 4 gunthas.
And making a computation on the aforesaid basis 1070 having regard to the fact that the ceiling area was 45 acres, the family would be entitled to additional 27 acres (45/5=9x3=27).
Thus he would be entitled to hold 72 acres (45+27=72) whereas the holding of the respondent consisted of only 60 acres.
Therefore, the holding of the family was not in excess of the prescribed ceiling as computed in the aforesaid manner.
[1075F G; 1076B C] Nathekhan vs Mamlatdar, Vadgam, G.L.R. 25(3) 1473 approved.
