% Rule 5 of the Andhra Pradesh (Roads and Buildings) Engineering Service Special Rules, 1967 lays down that for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer, a Graduate Assistant Engineer should be (a) a full member or approved probationer, (b) a direct recruit should put in six years service as Assistant Engineer and (c) a promotee Assistant Engineer should put in five years service.
There is no provision for giving preference to one category over the other for promotion.
Rule 23(a) of the Andhra Pradesh State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1962 empowers the appointing authority to commence the probation of a person appointed to the service with retrospective effect.
Rule 33(a) of these rules mandates the determination of the seniority of a person in a service by the date of first appointment.
The appellants were directly recruited as Assistant Engineers in April 1966.
Respondents 3 and 4 were temporarily appointed Assistant Engineers by transfer on 14th August, 1959 and 19th May, 1960 respectively.
Their services were regularised with effect from 19th May, 1961 by an order dated 3rd May,1967 in exercise of the powers under section 23(a) of the General Rules.
The appellants sought promotion to the post of Executive Engineer on the basis that they were senior to the promotee Assistant Engineers respondents.
Their case was that the Chief Engineer was hot competent to make the order under s.23(a) of the General Rules.
The State Government vide their order dated August 10, 1983 decided that the seniority of the direct recruits and promotees has to be determined with reference to their regular appointment of the category of Assistant Engineers and not from the date of confirmation in the said category and declared that the seniority of the appellants was far below the respondents and they would be considered for promotion in their turn alongwith others.
25 A writ petition filed by the appellants in the High Court challenging the said order was dismissed by a Single Judge, and that dismissal was upheld in appeal.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD: The law relating to inter se seniority in a cadre is well settled.
If there be a rule indicating the manner in which such seniority has to be fixed, that is binding.
In the absence of such a rule, length of service is the basis for fixing Inter se seniority.
In the instant case, there is no provision in the Rules under consideration that direct recruits would have preference over promotees for purposes of inter se seniority.
In the absence of such a rule the guidelines indicated in the General Rules, which provide that seniority shall be determined by the date of first appointment to the service, have to be followed.
Respondents 3 and 4 have put in longer service than the appellants in the post of Assistant Engineer.
Their services had been regularised with effect from May 19, 1961 in exercise of the powers under Rule 23(a) of the General Rules, which date is not anterior to their appointment as Assistant Engineer.
The regularisation is thus not vitiated on account of arbitrariness.
The appellants would, therefore, rank below respondents 3 and 4 in the cadre and the promotional benefit would be given to them after the claim of the respondents 3 and 4 has been duly considered.
