% In 1961 the Andhra Pradesh Revenue Subordinate Services Rules were brought into force, the cadre under the rules being Deputy Tehsildars.
Till then the rules in force in the erstwhile State of Madras were applicable to Andhra Pradesh.
Rule 3 of the 1961 Rules provides for appointment of Deputy Tehsildars by direct recruitment or by transfer from members of the Andhra Pradesh Ministerial Service employed in the Revenue Department.
It also provides that the substantive vacancies in the category of Deputy Tehsildars shall be filled or reserved to be filled by direct recruitment and recruitment by transfer in the proportion of 1:1 A writ petition was filed before the Andhra Pradesh High Court by some direct recruit Deputy Tehsildars disputing the seniority over them assigned to a group of promotees.
The Single Judge dismissed the same holding that the petitioners had no casuse of action within the frame of the rules.
This was upheld by the Division Bench, deriving support from Rule 33(a) of the Andhra Pradesh State and Subordinate Services Rules 1962.
Against this a Special Leave Petition was filed before this Court.
Meanwhile, the State Government amended Rule 4(e) of the Andhra Pradesh Revenue Subordinate Service Rules to the effect that the inter se seniority between direct recruits to the category of Deputy Tehsildars and promotees to the category of Deputy Tehsildars shall be 1119 determined from the date of confirmation in the substantive vancancies in that category in the proportion of 1:1 as provided in sub rule (b) of Rule 3.
The validity of the amendment was questioned by a number of promotees (the appellants herein) before the State Administrative Tribunal with particular emphasis on its retrospective application.
The Tribunal examined the matter at length and upheld the validity of the enactment.
It also directed the State Government to proceed to determine the seniority accordingly.
The said directions of the Tribunal are assailed in the appeals by Special Leave and the Writ Petition filed in this Court.
Dismissing the appeals, and the writ petitions, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 The State is entitled to prescribe the manner of computing inter se seniority and in the absence of such prescription, length of service is the basis.
Rule 33 of the Andhra Pradesh State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1962 contained prescription regarding seniority and has different provisions to meet varying situations.
Sub rule (a) thereof which provides that seniority of a person is to be determined "by the date of his first appointment to such service" has obviously been misinterpreted on account of the presence of the words "unless he has been reduced to a lower rank as a punishment".
It is appropriate to interpret that rule to mean that the date of first appointment is intended to refer to continuous appointment only and the words "unless he has been reduced to a lower rank by way of punishment" are really redundant.
This interpretation will have prospective application, as otherwise limitless litigation would crop up.
[1124F G; 1125C] 1.2 Rule 4(e) before amendment in 1980 provided that the seniority of Deputy Tehsildars would be determined with reference to the date of allotment maintained and ranking assigned by the Andhra Pradesh Public Service Commission in the merit list of the particular selection.
That was confined to inter se seniority of direct recruits and did not cover inter se seniority between recruits of the two sources.
In 1980, Rule 4(e) was amended and the State Government prescribed the manner of providing inter se seniority among the recruits of the two categories.
The amended rule provided the date of confirmation in the substantive vacancy as the basis.
Rule 3(b) thereof fixed the reservation of direct recruits with reference to substantive vancancies at 50% and Rule 4(e) made provision with reference to seniority in the substantive vancancies, with reference to the date of confirmation.
The amendment is within the competency of the State Government and is not open to challenge.
This is a rule made under the proviso to Article 309 of the 1120 Constitution and the rule can be given retrospective operation.
But the State Government, while amending the rule, should have taken into consideration the practical problems which would arise as a consequence of retrospectivity.
To allow the amendment to have retrospective operation is bound to create problems.
Hence Rule 4(e) as amended on 9th October, 1980, shall not have retrospective effect and would operate prospectively.
[1125D G; 1126A, E] 2.
Though Rule 3(b) fixes the ratio as 1:1 in respect of substantive vacancies, the recruitment has not been regular and systematic.
Rules have binding effect and they bind the State and the citizens alike once they are in force.
In order that law may regulate conduct, the State has to feel bound by its own laws and by willingly abiding by the law, exhibit an ideal situation for the citizens to emulate.
The rule shall henceforth be followed scrupulously by effecting recruitment at regular intervals according to the scheme of the rule.[1126E G] [The State Government has been directed to determine the vancancies available to be filled by direct recruitment within four months and to fill up the same within four months thereafter and to draw a seniority list on the basis of rule 4(e) on or before 31.12.88.]
