% The prosecution case as appearing from the Fardbeyan or the FIR lodged by P.W. 3, a social worker was that on 12.12.1987 at about 7.00 A.M. he was going to his brother in law and just as he reached the main gate of the Sadar Hospital, he saw seven persons: (1) Hare Krishna Singh.
(2) Sheo Narain Sharma, (3) Ram Kumar Upadhyaya, (4) Jagdish Singh 's nephew Paras Singh of Birampur, (5) Hare Krishna Singh 's brother in law, Paras Nath Singh of Dhobaha, the appellants and two more whom he could not identify.
All these persons were armed with rifle, gun and pistol and were standing near the northern side of the eastern gate, of the Hospital.
At that time two Rickshaws were coming from the eastern side.
In the front rickshaw the deceased Jitendra Choudhary, was sitting along with another person and in the rear rickshaw were his two sisters, PW I and PW 2.
As the rickshaw of the deceased came close to these seven persons, Hare Krishna Singh fired at the deceased from his gun, whereupon the latter fell down from the rickshaw with the rifle which he was carrying.
The other persons also fired upon the deceased as a result of which he died.
After that Hare Krishna Singh picked up the rifle of the deceased and took to his heels.
After investigation by PW 9, the charge sheet was submitted against all the appellants and they were put up for trial.
The prosecution examined as many as 9 witnesses of whom PWs.
1, 2, 3 and 8 were eye witnesses.
The defence of the appellant Hare 2 Krishna Singh was that while he was going to Patna along with appellant Ram Kumar Upadhyaya and one Madan Singh in a rickshaw, and that when the rickshaw in which the deceased was travelling came close to him, the deceased fired at him and that he sustained injuries.
He examined five witnesses DWs.
1 to 5, to prove the nature of injury sustained by him.
The defence of Paras Singh of Dhobaha was that he had not visited the village for the last fifteen years, while the defence of the other remaining appellants was a denial of their complicity in the crime.
The Additional Sessions Judge accepted the prosecution case, and convicted and sentenced the appellants to various periods of imprisonment.
On appeal by the appellants the High Court affirmed the convictions and sentences.
In the appeals by certificate to this Court it was contended: (a) on behalf of Hare Krishna Singh, appellant in Crl.
A. No. 690/82 that the prosecution having failed to explain the injury sustained by Hare Krishna Singh in the same occurrence, such injury being a serious one, the prosecution witnesses should be disbelieved, and that in such circumstances it should be held that the plea of the appellant of self defense shall be probabilised and that the prosecution must have withheld the true facts as to the genesis and origin of the occurrence, and that in any event a great doubt had been cast on the prosecution case and the benefit of that doubt should go to the appellant.
(b) on behalf of Paras Singh of Birampur, the nephew of Jagdish Singh, the sole appellant in Cr. A. No. 616/82 that in the FIR his name was not mentioned, that PW 3 failed to identify him in the T.I. Parade, that PW 8 did not attend the T.I. Parade, and that he was not present at the time of occurrence.
(c) on behalf of Sheo Narain Sharma the remaining appellant in Crl.
A. No. 690/82 and Ram Kumar Upadhayaya sole appellant in Crl.
A. No. 615/82, that no specific overt act had been attributed to either of them and the fact that they were found in the company of Hare Krishna Singh and Paras Singh of Dhobaha could not be sufficient to impute common intention to them.
Dismissing Criminal Appeal No. 690 of 1982 in so far as it relates to Hare Krishna Singh and Paras Singh of Dhobaha, and allowing it in 3 respect of Sheo Narain Sharma and acquitting him of all the charges; and allowing Crl.
A. Nos. 615 and 616 of 1982 and setting aside the convictions and sentences of Ram Kumar Upadhayaya and Paras Singh of Birampur and acquitting them of all the charges.
^ HELD: 1.
It is not an invariable rule that the prosecution has to explain the injuries sustained by the accused in the same occurrence.
The burden of proving the guilt of the accused is undoubtedly on the prosecution.
The accused is not bound to say anything in defence.
The prosecution has to prove the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubts.
If the witnesses examined on behalf of the prosecution are believed by the court in proof of the guilt of the accused beyond any reasonable doubt, the question of the obligation of the prosecution to explain the injuries sustained by the accused will not arise.
[12E F]] 2.
When the prosecution comes with a definite case that the offence has been committed by the accused and proved its case beyond any reasonable doubt, it becomes hardly necessary for the prosecution to again explain how and in what circumstances the injuries have been inflicted on the person of the accused.
[12G] 3.
Simply because the accused has received injuries in the same occurrence, it cannot be taken for granted that the deceased or the injured person was the aggressor and consequently, he had to defend himself by inflicting injury on the deceased or the injured person.
[13B C] 4.
It is not the law or invariable rule that whenever the accused sustains an injury in the same occurrence the prosecution has to explain the injuries failure of which will mean that the prosecution has suppressed the truth and also the origin and genesis of the occurrence.
[13D E]] 5.
Common intention under section 34 IPC is not by itself an offence.
But, it creates a joint and constructive liability for the crime committed in furtherance of such common intention.
[16E F] 6.
As no overt act whatsoever has been attributed to the appellants, Ram Kumar Upadhyaya and Sheo Narain Sharma, it is difficult to hold, in the facts and circumstances of the case, that they had shared the common intention with Hare Krishna Singh and Paras Singh of Dhobaha.
When these two appellants were very much known to the eye witnesses PW 3 and 8 non mention of their names in the evidence as to 4 their participation in firing upon the deceased, throws a great doubt as to their sharing of the common intention.
The conviction and sentences of these two appellants cannot therefore be sustained.
They are therefore acquitted of all the charges.
[16F G] 7.
The Additional Sessions Judge has not believed the case of R Hare Krishna Singh that he had sustained a bullet injury in the same occurrence and he has given reasons therefor.
The High Court has, however, come to the finding that Hare Krishna Singh was admitted in the hospital in an injured condition immediately after the occurrence.
In the facts and circumstances of the case the prosecution is not obliged to account for the injury and that the failure of the prosecution to give a reasonable explanation of the injury would not go against or throw any doubt on the prosecution case.
All the eye witnesses have stated that the appellant Hare Krishna Singh had fired on Jitendra Choudhary as a result of which he died.
The prosecution witnesses have been believed by the Additional Sessions Judge and High Court.
In these circumstances it cannot be thought that the materials on record including the statement of Hare Krishna Singh under section 313 Cr.
P.C. probablise any case of self defence or that the deceased had inflicted on him the injury by firing at him from his rifle.
The appellant Hare Krishna Singh has therefore, been rightly convicted and sentenced.
[13E G; 14B C, F] 8.
As regards Paras Singh of Dhobaha he was found with the accused persons including Hare Krishna Singh.
It is not disputed that he is the brother in law of Hare Krishna Singh as has been described in the FIR.
It is the categorical evidence of PWs.
1, 2, 3 and 8 that Paras Singh of Dhobaha had fired at the deceased.
He has been identified by PW1 in the T.I. Parade.
In these circumstances there is no reason to interfere with the order of conviction and sentence passed by the Courts below.
[14F G]] 9.
The prosecution has not been able to identify the appellant Paras Singh of Birampur with the description of Jagdish Singh 's nephew as given in the FIR.
PW. 3 failed to identify the appellant in the T.I. Parade.
PW. 8 did not attend the T.I. Parade.
In such circumstances, the High Court was not justified and committed an error of law in relying upon the statements of PWs 3 and 8 made before the police mentioning the names of Paras Singh of Birampur.
The prosecution has failed to prove the complicity of Paras Singh of Birampur in the crime and that he was present at the time of occurrence.
His conviction and sentence cannot therefore be sustained and are set aside.
He is acquitted of all the charges.
[15C F] 5 Bhaba Nanda Sharma vs State of Assam, ; ; Ramlagan Singh vs State of Bihar, ; Onkarnath Singh vs State of U.P., ; Bankey Lal vs State of U.P., and Bhagwan Tana Patil vs State of Maharashtra, , relied on.
Lakshmi Singh vs State of Bihar, ; Mohar Rai vs State of Bihar; ; ; Jagdish vs State of Rajasthan; , ; Munshi Ram vs Delhi Administration and State of Gujarat vs Bai Fatima, , distinguished.
