% The respondent retired from State Government service on September 1, 1987, on attaining the age of superannuation.
About a year after his retirement, the respondent was served with a chargesheet containing allegations of misconduct and negligence for the period he was in service.
Enquiry into the charges was held and respondent was afforded full opportunity to defend himself.
On the conclusion of the enquiry a report was submitted by the Collector, holding that one of the two charges was established while the other charge was partly proved, and that the respondent 's action was helpful to one of the parties which amounted to a serious default on his part as a Government servant, and it was recommended that since the respondent has already retired from service, a lenient view should be taken and reduction in pension to the extent of Re. 1 per month be made.
The State Government accepted the findings and issued orders reducing the amount of pension payable to the respondent by 50% permanently under Rule 188 of the Bombay Civil Services Rules.
The respondent challenged the validity of the Government order before the High Court.
A Division Bench of the High Court allowed the writ petition and quashed State Government 's order on the ground that the State Government had no authority in law to take any disciplinary proceedings against respondent as he had already retired from service and the initiation of disciplinary enquiry and the order of punishment were unauthorised and illegal.
Allowing the appeal by the State.
partly, 32 ^ HELD: 1.1 Rule 188 of the Bombay Civil Services Rules empowers the Government to reduce the amount of pension of a Government servant whose service has not been thoroughly satisfactory.
Rule 189 expressly confers power on the Government to withhold or withdraw any part of the pension payable to Government servant for misconduct which he may have committed while in service, after giving opportunity of defence in accordance with the procedure specified in Note I of Rule 33 of the Bombay Civil Services Conduct Discipline and Appeal Rules.
The State Government 's power to reduce or withhold pension by taking proceedings against Government servant even after retirement is thus expressly preserved by the aforesaid rules.
[34C, F H] 1.2 The High Court committed a serious error in holding that the State Government had no authority to initiate any proceedings against the respondent.
The purpose of the enquiry was not to inflict any punishment, and the proceedings were initiated for determining respondent 's pension.
The proceedings were taken in accordance with the Rules 188 and 189 of the Rules.
[35C E] 1.3 The Government had power to reduce the pension payable to the respondent but having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, the reduction of pension by 50% was too harsh and disproportion ate to the misconduct proved against the respondent.
The State Government should have taken into consideration the fact that the respondent had retired from service and the reduction of pension by 50% would seriously affect his living.
The order of the High Court and the State Government 's order reducing pension by 50% are set aside and the State Government is directed to reconsider the question of reduction of respondent 's pension.
[35E F; 36E G] B. J. Shelet vs State of Gujarat & ors.
; , , distinguished.
M. Narasimhachar vs The State of Mysore, [1960] 1 SCR 981 and State of Uttar Pradesh vs Brahm Datt Sharma & Anr., [1987] 2 SCC 179, referred to.
