% The first respondent was appointed a Sub Charge, Cantonment General Hospital, Lucknow by the Cantonment Board by an appointment letter dated 23.4.1969, and was confirmed in that post on 1.12.1969.
The conditions of service of the employees of the Cantonment Board, a statutory board, were governed by the provisions of the Cantonment Funds Servants Rules, 1937.
At the time of appointment, the services of the respondent were not transferable as per the provisions of the Rules as then prevailing.
His appointment letter also did not include any condition for transfer from one Board to another.
By a notification dated 16.12.1972, the Rules were amended and a new rule, being rule 5 C was added to provide for the transfer of the services of the employees of the Cantonment Boards from one post in one Board to another post in another Board within the same State.
The G.O.C. in Chief, Central Command by his order dated October 27, 1986 transferred the first respondent from the Cantonment General Hospital, Lucknow, to the Cantonment General Hospital, Varanasi, and the incumbent at Varanasi in turn being transferred to the Cantonment General Hospital, Bareilly.
Being aggrieved by the order of transfer passed under rule 5 C of the Rules, the first respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the order of transfer on the ground that rule 5 C was ultra vires the provisions of the and as such, void.
63 The High Court struck down rule 5 C as being ultra vires the provisions of the and held that the services of the employees of the Cantonment Board are neither centralised nor is there a common State level service and that rule 5 C having provided for the transfer of the employees of one Board to another Board by the GOC in Chief, Central Command is beyond the rule making power of the Central Government as contained in clause (c) of sub section (2) of section 280 of the as it stood before it was amended.
It accordingly quashed the order of transfer dated October 27, 1988 passed by the GOC in Chief, Central Command.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants: (1) that after the amendment of clause (c) of sub section (2) of Section 280 of the conferring on the Central Government the power to lay down the conditions of service of the employees of the Boards, which include the power to make rules for transfer, rule 5 C is valid being in conformity with the provisions of the rule making power under section 7.80(2)(c) of the Act, and (2) that the respondent would not be in the least prejudiced by the transfer inasmuch as full safeguard has been provided for in rule 5 C.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that: (1) service under the Cantonment Board is not a centralised service or a service at the State level, and (2) the transfer of an employee from one Cantonment Board to another would mean the termination of the appointment of the employees in the Cantonment Board from which he is transferred and a fresh appointment in the Board where he is so transferred.
Dismissing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was justified in striking down rule 5 C of the Rules and in quashing the order of transfer of the respondent.
[172G] 2.
Rules framed under the provisions of a statute form part of the statute.
Rules have statutory force.
But before a rule can have the effect of a statutory provision two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (1) it must conform to the provisions of the statute under which it is framed; and (2) it must also come within the scope and purview of the rule making power of the authority framing the rule.
If either of these two conditions is not fulfilled the rule so framed would be void.
[69F G] 3.
When Rule 5 C was inserted in the Rules, it was void as being 64 contrary to and in excess of the rule making power of the Central Government as contained in the unamended clause (c) of sub section (2) of Section 280 of the Act.
It does not become valid merely because of the amendment of clause (c), conferring power on the Central Government to frame rules relating to conditions of service.[69C] 4.
The position remains the same even though sub section (2) of Section 281 of the Act has specifically provided that after the rules are framed and published they shall have effect as if enacted in the Act.
In spite of the provision of sub section (2) of Section 281, any rule framed under the has to fulfil the aforementioned two conditions regarding their validity.
[69G H] Jestamani vs Scindia Steam Navigation Company, ; , distinguished.
The Cantonment Board are statutory and autonomous bodies controlled entirely by the .
Each Cantonment Board is an independent body functioning within its limited jurisdiction.
The Board is the appointing authority of its employees.
The services under the Cantonment Board is not a centralised service nor is it a service at the State level.
[70C] 6.
One autonomous body cannot transfer its employee to another autonomous body even within the same State, unless the services of the employees of these two bodies are under a centralised or State level service.
[70E F] In the instant case, the GOC in Chief, Central Command is not the appointing authority of the respondent or the employees of the Cantonment Board, and so transfer of the respondent by the GOC in Chief is not permissible.
[70E] Om Prakash Rana vs Swarup Singh Tomar, ; , referred to.
Even in spite of substituted clause (c) of sub section (2) of Section 280 the Central Government will not be entitled to frame rules for transfer of an employee from one Cantonment Board to another within the State for the reasons: (t) the Cantonment Boards are autonomous bodies; (2) the service under the Cantonment Board is neither a centralised service nor is it a service at the State level and (3) any such transfer of an employee will mean termination of service of the 65 employee in the Cantonment Board from where he is transferred and a fresh appointment by the Cantonment Board which he joins on such transfer.
[72B C] 8.
The Central Government, however, has power to frame rules about transfer of servants of the Board in exercise of its powers under clause (c) of subsection (2) of Section 280 of the Act within the region in respect of which it has jurisdiction.
For example, the respondent in the instant case, could be transferred from one hospital of the Cantonment Board, Lucknow, to another hospital under the same Board.
[72E F] 9.
The Central Government had better consider the question of making the Cantonment Board Service a centralised service so 85 to enable one Cantonment Board to transfer its employees to another Cantonment Board.
[72D],,
