% The appellants are direct recruit Section officers and were appointed in substantive vacancies of Section officers in accordance with the quota reserved for direct recruits.
The inter se seniority of the direct recruits and promotees is fixed in accordance with the quota and rota system.
According to the C.S.S. Rules, 1962, the substantive vacancies of Section officers are manned by direct recruits and promotees and a quota of one fifth of the substantive vacancies has been reserved to be filled up by direct recruits.
The remaining substantive vacancies of Section officers are to be filled up by appointment of persons included in the select list i.e. by promotion.
The direct recruits on their appointment against substantive vacancies become senior to the promotees, as is in the present case.
The promotion of Section officers to Grade I post of C.S.S. Rules is made in accordance with the provisions of sub rule 2 of rule 12 of the said Rules framed in 1962.
According to this rule the direct recruits were eligible for promotion to Grade I in C.S.S. even though they have not rendered 10 years service, when promotee Section officers junior to them are considered for promotion to Grade l.
The promotee Section officers had to render 10 years ' approved service as Section officer before being considered for promotion to Grade I.
This rule had been 148 amended from time to time, the last of which was in 1984 by way of Notification No. 5/9/80 CS.
I dated 29th December, 1984 which prescribed 8 years of approved service as Section officer as condition of eligibility for being considered for promotion to Grade I post in C.S.S.
This amendment was challenged before the Central Administrative Tribunal which dismissed the applications, holding that the amended rule is valid, just and equitable and no exception can be taken to it, and that it is not ultra vires of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Aggrieved by the said order three appeals have been preferred before this Court, by way of special leave.
It was contended that the amendment purports to entrench upon the prospects of the directly recruited Section officers for being considered for promotion to Grade l in as much as they are left out of the zone of consideration while their juniors i.e. the promotee Section officers are eligible for being considered for promotion to Grade I.
This condition of eligibility has no nexus to suitability for promotion to the post and as such is in violation of the equality clause in Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
It was contended that for purposes of seniority in service the senior will be considered for promotion before those who are junior to them in service, and that the condition of eligibility as laid down in the said rule has no reference to suitability for promotion to the post and as such it is arbitrary and so void.
The system prior to the amendment worked out satisfactorily and the direct recruit Section officers who were promoted to Grade I post performed their duties attached to the higher post duly and satisfactorily, and therefore the amendment is arbitrary and inequitable, and that this amendment works out to the serious prejudice of the direct recruit Section officers.
It was submitted that the effect of the amendment is to neutralise and negative the decision of this Court in H.V. Pardasani & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors., which held that the rules of seniority on the basis of quota rota basis are unexceptionable.
On behalf of the promotee Section officers it was contended that the inter se seniority between direct recruit Section officers and promotee Section officers is fixed in accordance with the quota rota rule and thus has no reference to the length of service.
The promotee Section officers have not been considered for promotion m spite of their rendering service as such for more than 13 years, whereas the direct recruit 149 Section officers who were appointed much later were considered and promoted purely on the ground of seniority.
This has created frustration in the minds of the promotees and in order to obviate this, the Government has amended the proviso and that the amendment is neither arbitrary nor unjust.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The rule in question which prescribes on uniform period of qualified service cannot be said to be arbitrary or unjust or violative of Articles 14 or 16 of the Constitution.
The rule making authority, by the amendment made in 1984, has brought in an uniform eligibility qualification of 8 years ' approved service to be rendered by the Section officers both promotees and direct recruits before coming within the zone of consideration for promotion to Grade I.
Thus it treats all Section officers equally and there is no discrimination between the Section officers.
The directly recruited Section officers are not totally excluded from the zone of consideration for promotion.
They will be considered like the promotee Section officers as soon as they have rendered eight years ' approved service as Section officers.
The eligibility conditions imposed has a nexus to the object sought to be achieved, viz. enlisting experienced officers of proven merit to man the higher posts by way of promotion.
[158B; 156B D] 2.
The validity of rule providing for fixation of seniority between the direct recruits and promotees in the grade of Section officer on the basis of quota reserved for direct recruits (i.e. 1/5 of the total substantive vacancies) has already been upheld by this Court.
But this does not mean that the direct recruits who are senior to the promotees are entitled to be considered for promotion to a higher post even though they do not fulfil the eligibility qualification specified in the rule framed by the rule making authority.
The rule making authority is competent to frame rules laying down eligibility condition for promotion to a higher post, and it cannot be said that a direct recruit who is senior to the promotees is not required to comply with the eligibility condition and he is entitled to be considered for promotion to the higher post merely on the basis of his seniority.
The submission that a senior Section officer has a right to be considered for promotion to Grade I post when his juniors who have fulfilled the eligibility condition are being considered for promotion to the higher post, is wholly unsustainable.
[155G; 156A B; 157D F] H.V. Pardasani & Ors.
vs Union of India, , followed.
150 3.
When qualifications for appointment to a post in a particular cadre are prescribed, the same have to be satisfied before a person can be considered for appointment.
Seniority in a particular cadre does not entitle a public servant for promotion to a higher post unless he fulfils the eligibility condition prescribed by the relevant rules.
A person must be eligible for promotion having regard to the qualifications prescribed for the post before he can be considered for promotion.
Seniority will be relevant only amongst persons eligible.
Seniority cannot be substituted for eligibility nor can it over ride it in the matter of promotion to the next higher Post.
[157G H: 158A]
