% These appeals and the special leave petitions were directed against the judgment and order of the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal, quashing the panel of names prepared by the State Government under r. 8 of the Andhra Pradesh Medical & Health Service Special Rules, 1982 to fill up the promotional post of Professor of Cardiology as on 1st July, 1983, reckoning the teaching experience of all the Assistant Professors in that super speciality in order of seniority, holding that the Assistant Professors of Cardiology in different medical colleges in the State who had the requisite five years ' teaching experience under r. 5 of the Rules having the alternate qualification in cl.
(b) of Annexure II to the Rules were eligible for promotion as such, and directing the State Government to draw up a fresh panel after considering the claims of all such Assistant Professors of Cardiology treating them as possessing the requisite teaching experience in terms of r. 5 for the promotional post of Professor of Cardiology as on 1st July, 1983.
There were four vacancies in the post of Professor of Cardiology.
On 1st July, 1983, the State Government prepared a panel of all Assistant Professors of Cardiology in Government Medical Colleges in the State having the requisite teaching experience under r. 5 after obtaining the post graduate qualification as specified in the Annexure II, and included in the panel the names of Dr. G. Subramanayam, Dr. A. Rajagopala Raju and Dr. Soghra Begum, Assistant Professors of Cardiology, who had on the crucial date 1st July, 1983 five years ' teaching experience after obtaining their post graduation degree in DM (Cardiology) as enjoined by r. 5 read with the first proviso thereto, and by order dated the 17th August, 1983, promoted them to the post of Professor of Cardiology.
174 The respondents Dr. R. Murali Babu Rao and Dr. G. Sai Gopal then moved the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal assailing the impugned order of promotion, characterising the action of the State Government in the matter of computation of five years ' teaching experience after post graduation degree in DM (Cardiology) as being wholly arbitrary and irrational.
The appellant C.H. Umesh Chandra came up in appeal as the view expressed by the Tribunal prejudicially affected him.
He had obtained his post graduate degree in MD in Medicine in December, 1975 and his second post graduate degree in DM (Cardiology) in April, 1980.
In view of the fact that he had obtained his second post graduate degree in DM (Cardiology) in April, 1980, he sought to support the stand of the Government as he had a better chance of promotion to the post of Professor of Cardiology.
After these matters were heard and the judgment was reserved by this Court, a similar question came up before the Court in State of Orissa vs Dr. Sivsanker Lal Bajoria & Anr.
, Civil Appeal No. 4456 of 1986 by Special Leave granted to the State Government of Orissa against the judgment and order of the High Court, evolving a rule of substantial compliance, and therefore, these matters were re listed.
In the Civil Appeal No. 4456 of 1986, the Court issued notice to the Medical Council of India to clarify its stand as to the eligibility of Assistant Professors/Readers in Cardiology to the promotional post of Associate Professor/Professor in Cardiology and in particular to the import of the term 'two years special training ' within the meaning of Regulation 5(2)(b) of the Indian Medical Council Regulations, 1970, framed under section 33 of the .
The Court desired the Indian Medical Council to specify the particular institution where such training was imparted.
An affidavit sworn to by Assistant Secretary on behalf of the Medical Council of India was filed, placing its point of view.
Dismissing the appeals and the special leave petitions, the Court ^ HELD: The issue involved was of far reaching importance to the entire medical profession as similar problem was faced by the State Governments in promoting Readers / Associate Professors in a speciality to the post of Professor in that speciality in the medical colleges.
[179E F] In these cases, the entire controversy was due to the failure of the 175 State Government to give the benefit of the teaching experience gained by the Assistant Professors after they had obtained their post graduate degree in MD/MRCP in Medicine under cl (b) of Column 5 in serial No 17 of Annexure II.
[187G] Rule 4 of the Rules in terms speaks of the eligibility of such class of Assistant Professors of Cardiology for promotion to the post of Cardiology who possess five years ' teaching experience.
The expression 'teaching experience ' as defined in r. 5 speaks of 'teaching experience in the speciality concerned in a medical college or an institute recognised by the Medical Council of India after obtaining post graduate qualification as specified in Annexure II '.
The words used are 'after obtaining post graduate qualification ', it does not speak of the second postgraduate qualification.
Rule 5, therefore, takes in both the qualifications specified in clauses (a) and (b) of Column 5 in serial No. 17 of annexure II, namely, (a) DM (Cardiology) and (b) MD/MRCP in Medicine with two years ' training in Cardiology.
On the crucial date, 1st July, 1983, cl.
(b) was very much there and the Government was bound to consider the claims of the aforesaid respondents like other officers belonging to that class before drawing up a panel under r. 8.
There was no warrant for the submission that since under r. 9(2), an Assistant Professor with the requisite five years ' teaching experience after obtaining his second post graduate degree in DM (Cardiology) would have preferential claim over those having the qualification mentioned in cl.
(b) i.e. MD/MRCP in Medicine with two years ' training in Cardiology, the State Government was entitled to ignore the claims of the latter class altogether.
On its plain construction, r. 9(2) is a rule of preference and has, therefore, to be applied at the stage of making appointments to the post of Professor of Cardiology and not while drawing up a panel under r. 8.
The Government was obviously misled by the wrongful assumption (i) that since alternate qualification in cl.
(b) of Column 5 in serial 'No. 17 of Annexure II had been deleted by GOMS No. 789 dated 12th December, 1983, it was not necessary for it to consider the claims of the aforesaid respondents and others similarly situate in drawing up a list of eligible Assistant Professors of Cardiology, and (ii) that such officers were rendered ineligible by reason of r. 9(2) and, therefore, their claims needed not to be considered.
The Tribunal was, therefore, justified in quashing the impugned panel prepared by the State Government under r. 8 of the Rules and in directing the Government to prepare a panel afresh after considering the claims of all the Assistant Professors of Cardiology with five years ' teaching experience after their post graduation in MD/MRCP in Medicine with 2 years ' training in Cardiology.
[189C H; 190A B] 176 There was no substance whatever in the contention that the alternate qualification in cl.
(b) being in conflict with the recommendation of the Medical Council of India, must be deemed to have been replaced by implication and was non est w.e.f. 31st May, 1977.
The Government had no doubt the recommendations of the Council, conveyed by the letter of the Secretary dated 26th April, 1978, that after 31st May, 1977, for all teaching posts higher than Tutor in higher specialities i.e. Cardiology/Neurology/Gastro Enterology/Thoracic Surgery/ Neuro Surgery/Plastic Surgery/ Paediatric Surgery/ Urology, the candidates must possess the post graduate qualification in the speciality concerned i.e. DM/M.Ch.
after MD/MS or other equivalent qualification, as might be approved by the Council from time to time.
The letter also went on to say that the existing qualification MD/MS or an equivalent qualification with two years ' special training in a recognised training centre in the speciality concerned, would cease to be sufficient qualification for appointment to the aforesaid teaching posts from that date.
Nevertheless, the Government failed to appreciate that the recommendation of the Council was only recommendatory and could not override a rule framed under the proyiso to article 309 of the Constitution.
The panel had to be drawn up by the State Government strictly in conformity with the rules of recruitment made under the proviso to article 309 and not on the basis of the recommendation of the Council.
[190C F] As was manifest from the affidavit filed by the Indian Medical Council, the Council is only a recommendatory body.
Constituted under section 3 of the Act, the Indian Medical Council is an expert body intended and meant to control the minimum standards of medical education and to regulate their observance.
A fortiori, the recommendations made by the Council or the Regulations framed by it are only recommendatory and not mandatory.
It is not for the Council to prescribe qualifications for recruitment to posts of Professors.
Readers and Lecturers; it can only lay down broad guidelines therefor.
Such qualifications have necessarily to be prescribed by the framing of Rules under the proviso to article 309.
The right to be considered for promotion is a condition of service and it can only be regulated by a rule framed under the proviso to article 309.
The Medical Council in its affidavit accepted that there were no special guidelines laid down for Cardiology, and asserted that some Universities/Institutions might have prescribed the syllabus.
The contention of the State Government and the other appellants that the recommendations of the Medical Council as conveyed by the letter of the Secretary dt.
26th April, 1975, rendering Assistant Professors of Cardiology, having the alternate qualification of 177 post graduate degree in MD/MRCP in Medicine, ineligible for promotion to the post of Professor of Cardiology even though they had the requisite five years ' teaching experience, appeared to be wholly misconceived and unwarranted.
[190G H; 191E H; 192A] The present case was concerned with the meaning of the expression 'teaching experience ' occurring in r. 5 of the Rules, and with the class of officers who, after their appointment as Assistant Professors of Cardiology on having obtained post graduate degree in MD/MRCP had been teaching the subject Cardiology for years together.
Indeed, the alternate qualification specified in cl.
(b) of column 5 in serial No. 17 of Annexure II takes in this class of officers and makes them eligible under r. 5.
On the crucial date, 1st July, 1983, cl.
(b) was still there and the Government was bound to consider the claims of such officers before drawing up a panel under r. 8.
[193C E] Emphasis was laid by counsel for the State Government and other appellants on the words 'with two years training in Cardiology ' with the submission that none of the respondents had the requisite training.
The expression 'special training ' is defined in r. 7 as the work done by an Assistant Professor in the concerned recognised unit and exclusively devoted to the speciality.
The question then arises for the applicability of r. 7, there are two conditions to be fulfilled, firstly, there must be an institution set up either by the Medical Council of India or by the Government or Universities exclusively devoted to imparting teaching in the different courses of Cardiology, and secondly, such an institution should have been recognised by the Government.
There was no material on record to establish that there was any such recognised unit either in the State of Andhra Pradesh or elsewhere.
That apart, it could not be appreciated why the Associate Professors, Readers, Assistant Professors of Cardiology, teaching Cardiology in the medical colleges for years together, should not be regarded as having special training in Cardiology within the meaning of cl.
(b) of column 5 in the serial No. 17 of Annexure II.
Any other view would lead to a very anomalous situation.
It would be a travesty of justice if the officers belonging to the class like the respondents representationists Dr. R. Murali Babu Rao and Dr, G. Sai Gopal, Assistant Professors of Cardiology with five years ' teaching experience after their post graduation in MD/MRCP in Medicine as on the 1st July, 1983, were not empanelled by the State Govt.
under r. 8 to fill up vacancies in the post of Professor of Cardiology, even though they possessed the requisite qualifications under r. 5 of the Rules.
It must be remembered that the alternate qualification in cl.
(b), namely MD/MRCP in Medicine with two years ' training in 178 Cardiology was still there and it was not open to the Government to ignore the same merely because it was in conflict with the recommendation of the Medical Council of India, as conveyed in the letter of the Secretary dated 26th April, 1976.
[193F H; 194A E] There were many distinguished Assistant Professors/Readers/ Associate Professors of Medicines in the medical colleges in the different States, teaching Cardiology as a subject, who had gained sufficient expertise and knowledge in the different branches of Cardiology, and it would be unfortunate if such Assistant Professors/Readers/Associate Professors of Medicine were, merely because they were MD/MRCP in Medicine, considered ineligible for appointment to the post of Professor of Cardiology, even though they had the requisite teaching experience in the many branches of Cardiology for the last 15 to 20 years in the medical colleges.
In view of this, the expression 'five years ' teaching experience ' occurring in r. 5 of the Rules as well as the phrase 'with two years ' training in Cardiology ' in cl.
(b) of column 5 in serial No. 17 of Annexure II of the Rules, must receive a liberal construction.
The experience gained by them while teaching in different branches of Cardiology should be treated as sufficient to meet the requirements of r. 5 of the Rules as well as of cl.
The Court expressed the hope that the Medical Council of India, the Union Government and the State Governments as also the State Medical Councils would give a second thought to the problem and try to evolve a solution to the problem by which the right of such persons to be considered for promotion to the post of Professor of Cardiology could be kept preserved without allowing any fall in the standards of further education.
[196H; 197A D] State of Madhya Pradesh vs Km.
Nivedita Jain, ; and Union of India & Ors.
vs S.B. Kohli & Anr., , referred to.
