% The enquiry officer 's report was not made available to the respondent before the disciplinary authority passed the final order recording the finding of guilt against him.
The Central Administrative Tribunal held in favour of the respondent.
In the special leave petition it was contended for the Union of India that the only authority which really and actually holds the delinquent guilty need not afford any opportunity to him before finding of guilt is recorded and the material on which the authority acts.
Referring the matter to a larger Bench the Court observed: In the event of failure to furnish the report of the Enquiry officer the delinquent is deprived of crucial and critical material which is taken into account by the real authority who holds him guilty namely.
the Disciplinary Authority.
He is the real authority because the Enquiry officer does no more than act as a delegate and furnishes the relevant material including his own assessment regarding the guilt to assist the Disciplinary Authority who alone records the effective finding in the sense that the findings recorded by the Enquiry officer standing by themselves are lacking in force and effectiveness.
Non supply of the report would therefore constitute violation of principles of natural justice and accordingly will be tantamount to denial of reasonable opportunity within the meaning of Article 333 (2) of the Constitution.
[214B C] There can be glaring errors and omissions in the report.
Or it may 210 have been based on no evidence or rendered in disregard of or by overlooking evidence.
if the report is not made available to the delinquent.
this crucial material which enters into the consideration of the Disciplinary Authority never comes to be known to the delinquent and he gets no opportunity to point out such errors and omissions and disabuse the mind of the Disciplinary Authority before he is held guilty or condemned.
Serving a copy of enquiry report on the delinquent to enable him to point out anomalies, if any, before finding about guilt is recorded by the Disciplinary Authority is altogether a different matter from serving a second show cause notice to enable the delinquent in the context of the measure of the penalty to be imposed, which has been dispensed with by virtue of the amendment to article 311(2) by 42nd Amendment of the Constitution.
[211E H] Since the question whether it is the right of the delinquent to pursuade the Authority which makes up its mind as regards the guilt of the delinquent that such a finding is not warranted in the light of the Keport of the Enquiry officer was not directly in issue and has neither been presented nor discussed in all its ramifications in C.A. No. 537 of 1988 (Union of India & Ors.
vs M. Sivagnam) decided on February 8, 1988 by a Bench comprising of three Judges? and the Secretary.
Central Board of Excise & Customs & Ors.
vs K.S. Mahalingam; , decided by a Bench of two Judges, relied on by the petitioners to contend that the point is directly or at any rate by necessary implication covered in their favour, the matter is referred to a larger bench on considerations of propriety.
[214D G]
