% Section 5A(1) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963, requires a dealer to pay purchase tax on the taxable goods purchased in circumstances in which no tax is payable, if he (a) consumes such goods in the manufacture of other goods for sale or otherwise, or (b) disposes of such goods in any manner other than by way of sale in the State, or (c) despatches them to any place outside the State except as a direct result of sale or purchase in the course of inter state trade or commerce.
The assessee company, a manufacturer and dealer in ceramics was sought to be assessed to tax under section 5A of the Act for the assessment years 1974 75, 1975 76 and 1976 77 among other things for the purchase turnover of cashew shells and consumed stores, lime shells etc., purchased by it.
The assessee contended that cashew shells were used by them as fuel for manufacturing products and, therefore, by virtue of notification S.R.O. 732/73 the purchase turnover of cashew shells was exempt from tax.
In the alternative, it was contended that the purchases in question were not liable for levy of tax since none of the conditions prescribed in clause (a), (b) or (c) of section 5A(1) of the Act were satisfied, and that lime shells and certain consumed stores had been used in the maintenance of the kiln and the factory, and were not taxable in view of the conditions prescribed in section 5A.
The assessing authority and the First Appellate Authority brought these purchases to tax under section 5A(l) of the Act.
The Tribunal rejected the assessee 's claim of exemption under the said notification.
However, it held that these items were not taxable under section 5A of the Act.
It took the view that the cashew shells had been used only as fuel in the kiln for the manufacture of tiles and other goods and, hence, clause (a) of section 5A(1) of the Act was not satisfied, there being no consumption of the 249 cashew shells in the manufacture of other goods or otherwise, that there was no disposal of lime shells or the consumed stores which were used up for the maintenance of the factory and kiln and that there was also no consumption of those goods in the manufacture of other goods for sale or otherwise.
The High Court upheld the decision of the Tribunal.
Dismissing the special leave petitions by the Revenue, ^ HELD: l. Goods used for ancillary purpose like fuel in the process of manufacture, do not fall within section 5A(1)(a) of the Act.
Consumption must be in the manufacture as raw material or of other components which go into the making of the end product, to come within the mischief of the section.
Cashew shells do not tend to the making of the end product.
These had been used as fuel in the kiln and did not get transformed into the end product.
These had not been used as raw material in the manufacture of the goods but only as aid in the manufacture of goods by the assessee.
Cashew shells, therefore, do not attract levy of tax under the said section.
The same is the position with regard to the lime shells and consumed stores, which have been used only in the maintenance of the kiln and the factory and not used in the manufacture of the end product.
[252E G] 2.
Disposal means transfer of title in the goods to any other person.
The expression "dispose" means to transfer or alienate.
Clause (b) of section 5A(1) requires that the goods in question should be transferred to some person otherwise than by way of sale.
In the instant case, there was no evidence of transfer of cashew shells, the lime shells or the consumed stores at all.
These were used by the assessee himself as fuel in the case of cashew shells for maintenance of kiln.
Therefore, there was no disposal of the goods as known to law.
Sub clause (b) of section 5A(I) was, therefore, not applicable.
[253G H; 254A B]
