% The State of Bihar had a Directorate of Indigenous Systems of Medicines which was a part of its Health Department and one Dr. Nagesh Dwivedi was its Director.
On 6.5.1978 the State Government created a separate Directorate of Indigenous Medicines, the Director being from one of the systems of medicines consisting of Ayurvedic, Unani and Homeopathic.
At the time of creation of the separate Directorate, the Government sanctioned the posts of two Deputy Directors for each of the two remaining systems.
The State Government had in the meanwhile prescribed a 50 point roster to implement the policy of reservation to posts and appointments for members of the backward classes under article 16(4).
It was laid down that 'if in any grade, there is only one vacancy for the first time, then it will be deemed to be unreserved and for the second time also, if there be only one vacancy, then it will be deemed to be reserved '.
Acting upon this roster the Government reserved the post of Deputy Director (Homeopathic) for a scheduled caste candidate.
The Public Service Commission on being moved by the Government, issued an advertisement inviting applications from members of the scheduled caste and the appellant was selected for appointment to the post.
Respondent No. 4 challenged the selection of the appellant in the High Court by filing a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
In October, 1982 an additional post of Deputy Director (Ayurvedic) was created and filled.
The High Court allowed the writ petition and quashed the said advertisement and the consequent order of appointment of the appel 131 lant.
The High Court was of the view that the post of Director and three Deputy Directors could not be clubbed together for reservation of posts and appointments.
Nor could the posts of Deputy Directors Homeopathic, Ayurvedic and Unani which form distinct and separate systems of medicines be grouped for purposes of reservation.
The appellant contended that there were four posts in the Directorate of Indigenous Medicines and all the posts were Class I posts and therefore according to the 50 point roster the post of Director having been treated as unreserved by the Rotational system, the post of Deputy Director (Homeopathic) was rightly reserved for a scheduled caste candidate.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: The posts of the Director and those of the Deputy Directors constitute different cadres of the service.
It is manifest that the post of the Director of Indigenous Medicines, which is the highest post in the Directorate carried on a higher grade or scale, could not possibly be equated with those of the Deputy Directors on a lower grade or scale.
In view of this, according to the 50 point roster, if in a particular cadre a single post falls vacant, it should, in the case of first vacancy, be considered as general.
That being so, the State Government could not have directed reservation of the post of Deputy Director (Homeopathic) which was the first vacancy in a particular cadre i.e. that of the Deputy Directors, for candidates belonging to the schedule castes.
Such reservation was not in conformity with the principles laid down in the 50 point roster and was impermissible under article 16(4) of the Constitution and clearly violative of the guarantee enshrined in article 16(1) of equal opportunity to all citizens relating to public employment.
Clause (4) of article 16 is by way of an exception of the proviso to article 16 (i).
The High Court rightly held that the reservation of the post of Deputy Director (Homeopathic) amounted to 100% reservation which was impermissible under article 16(4) as otherwise it would render the guarantee of equal opportunity in the matter of public employment under article 16(1) wholly elusive and meaningless.
[137F H; 138A C] If there is only one post in the cadre, there can be no reservation under article 16(4) of the Constitution.
The whole concept of reservation for application of the 50 point roster is that there are more than one posts, and the reservation as laid down by this Court in M.R. Balaji 's case can be upto 50%.
The Government cannot, for instance, declare that the post of the Director of Indigenous Medicines shall be reserved 132 for candidates belonging to scheduled castes.
The Directorate is a paramedical service with Director as its head and the three Deputy Directors belonging to three distinct and separate disciplines viz.
Homeopathic, Unani and Ayurvedic under him.
In the para medical system the three posts of Deputy Directors pertain to three distinct systems and therefore each of them is an isolated post by itself.
The same principles should, we think, as in the case of Director, apply.
We refrain from expressing any opinion on the aspect whether the isolated posts like those of the Deputy Directors can be subjected to the 50 point roster by the rotational system as it does not arise in the present case.
Assuming that the 50 point roster applied, admittedly, the first vacancy in the cadre of Deputy Directors was that of the Deputy Director (Homeopathic) and it had to be treated as unreserved, the second reserved and the third unreserved.
The first vacancy of the Deputy Director (Homeopathic) in the cadre being treated as unreserved according to the roster, had to be thrown open to all.
A candidate belonging to the Scheduled caste had therefore to compete with others.
[138C G] The three posts of Deputy Directors of Homeopathic Unani and Ayurvedic are distinct and separate as they pertain to different disciplines and each one is isolated post by itself carried in the same cadre.
There can be no grouping of isolated posts even if they are carried on the same scale.
The Government of India instructions relating to reservations of posts and appointments for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes contained in the Brochure on Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Services and which have been issued to carry out the mandate of article 16(4) consistent with the equality clause under article 16(1) and 16(2) and the requirements of article 335, namely, the maintenance of efficiency of administration clearly show that there can be no grouping of one or more isolated posts for purposes of reservation.
To illustrate, Professors in medical colleges are carried on the same grade and scale of pay but the posts of Professor of Cardiology, Professor of Surgery, Professor of Gynecology pertain to particular disciplines and therefore each is an isolated post.
[138H; 139A F] Article 16(4) is an exception to article 16(1) and article 16(2) and therefore the power to make a special provision for reservation of posts and appointments in favour of the backward classes must not be so excessive which would in effect efface the guarantee of equal opportunity in the matter of public employment or at best make it illusory.
We are not aware of any decision of this Court where excessive reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens to the extent of 100% has been upheld, except in the application of the carry forward rule.
[139G H] 133 M.R. Balaji & Ors.
vs State of Mysore, [1963] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 439; T. Devadasan vs Union of India & Anr., ; ; State of Kerala & Anr.
vs N.M. Thomas & Ors., ; ; Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; State of Karnataka vs Shivaji Y. Garge (C.A. No. 4117 of 1984 decided on 19th October, 1984; K.C. Vasanth Kumar & Anr.
vs State of Karnataka, [1985] Suppl.
S.C.C. 714 and Arati Ray Choudhury vs Union of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
