% This Criminal Appeal against the judgment and order of the Gujarat High Court and the connected Special Leave Petitions against the orders of the various Designated Courts in the State constituted under the Terrorist & Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987, raised common questions for consideration.
It was enough to set out the facts in the appeal.
There was an armed clash involving the appellants, as a result whereof the police apprehended the appellants and produced them before the Designated Court.
The appellants moved an application for bail which was rejected by the Designated Court.
The appellants moved the High Court under section 439 read with section 482 of the Code.
The High Court rejected the bail application on the ground that it had no jurisdiction to entertain such an application under section 439 of the Code or by recourse to its inherent powers under section 482.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellants appealed to this Court for relief by special leave.
On the view the Court took as to the nature of the function of the Designated Courts in dealing with the bail applications within the constraints of section 20(8), it was not necessary to deal with the facts of the connected special leave petitions directed against the orders of the different Designated Courts, rejecting the bail applications.
Allowing, the appeal and the special leave petitions partly, the Court, ^ HELD: These cases mainly raised two questions of substantial 226 importance.
The first was as to the jurisdiction and powers of the High Court to grant bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or by recourse to its inherent powers under section 482 to a person held in custody for an offence under sections 3 and 4 of the Terrorist & Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987, and secondly, as to the nature of the restraint placed on the power of the Designated Courts to grant bail to such a person in view of the limitations placed on such power under section 20(8) of the Act.
[246G H] The Act being a special Act must prevail in respect of the jurisdiction and power of the High Court to entertain an application for bail under section 439 of the Code or by recourse to its inherent powers under section 482.
Under the scheme of the Act, there is complete exclusion of the jurisdiction of the High Court in any case involving the arrest of any person for an offence punishable under the Act or any rule made thereunder.
There is contrariety between the provisions of the Act and the Code.
Under the Code, the High Court is invested with the various functions and duties in relation to any judgment or order passed by a criminal court subordinate to it.
The Act creates a new class of offences called terrorist acts and disruptive activities and provides for a special procedure for the trial of such offences.
The jurisdiction and power of a Designated Court are derived from the Act and it is the Act that must primarily be looked to in deciding the question before the Court.
Where an enactment provides for a special procedure for the trial of certain offences, it is that procedure that must be followed and not the one prescribed by the Code.
[239B C; 240A,D] No doubt, the legislature has, by the use of the words 'as if it were ' in section 14(3) of the Act, vested a Designated Court with the status of a Court of Session, but the legal fiction contained therein must be restricted to the procedure to be followed for the trial of an offence under the Act i.e. such trial must be in accordance with the procedure prescribed under the Code for the trial before a Court of Session, in so far as applicable.
[240D F] Though there is no express provision excluding the applicability of section 439 of the Code similar to the one contained in section 20(7) of the Act in relation to a case involving the arrest of any person for an offence punishable under the Act or any rule thereunder, yet that result must, by necessary implication, follow.
The source of power of a Designated Court to grant bail is not section 20(8) of the Act, as it only places limitations on such power, but it does not necessarily follow that the power of a Designated Court to grant bail is relatable to section 439 of the Code.
The 227 Designated Court is a 'court other than the High Court or the Court of Session ' within the meaning of section 437 of the Code.
The exercise of the power to grant bail by a Designated Court is not only subject to the limitations placed by section 20(9) which in terms provides that the limitations on grant of bail specified in section 20(8) are in addition to the limitations under the Code or any other law for the time being in force on the grant of bail.
It, therefore, follows that the power derived by a Designated Court to grant bail to a person for an offence under the Act is derived from the Code and not section 20(8) of the Act.
The controversy as to the power of the High Court to grant bail under section 439 of the Code must also turn on the construction of section 20(8) of the Act.
[241B E] In view of the explicit bar in section 19(2), there is exclusion of the jurisdiction of the High Court.
It interdicts that no appeal or revision shall lie to any court, including the High Court, against any judgment, sentence or order, not being an inter locutory order, of a Designated Court.
While it is true that Chapter XXXIII of the Code is still preserved, as otherwise the Designated Court would have no power to grant bail, still the source of power is not section 439 of the Code but section 437, being a court other than the High Court or the Court of Session.
Any other view would lead to an anomalous situation.
If it were to be held that the power of a Designated Court to grant bail was relatable to section 439, it would imply that not only the High Court but also the Court of Session would be entitled to grant bail.
The power to grant bail under section 439 is unfettered by any conditions and limitations like section 437.
It would run counter to the express prohibition contained in section 20(8) of the Act.
The Court upheld the view of the High Court that it had no jurisdiction to entertain an application for bail under section 439 or under section 482 of the Code.
[243G H; 244A B,D] As regards the approach which a Designated Court has to adopt while granting bail in view of the limitations placed on such power under section 20(8), the sub section in terms places fetters on the power of a Designated Court on the grant of bail and limitations specified therein are in addition to the limitations under the Code.
In view of these more stringent conditions, a Designated Court should carefully examine every case before it for finding out whether the provisions of the Act apply or not.
A prayer for bail ought not to be rejected in a mechanical manner.
[244E G] The Designated Courts had not in these cases carefully considered the facts and circumstances and had rejected the bail applications mechanically.
In the criminal appeal, the facts were already set out.
In 228 the special leave petitions Nos.
2369 and 2469 of 1967, the prosecution had been started at the instance of the management of a textile mill.
The other cases had arisen out of communal riots.
Normally, such cases have to be dealt with under the ordinary procedure prescribed by the Code, unless offences under sections 3 and 4 of the Act are made out.
The Designated Courts are under a duty to examine the circumstances closely from this angle.
That had not been done.
It was, therefore desirable to set aside the orders passed by the various Designated Courts and remit the cases for fresh consideration.
[246D F] The appeal and the special leave petitions partly succeeded.
While upholding the judgment and order of the High Court, dismissing the applications for bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Court granted leave and set aside the impugned orders passed by the various Designated Courts in the State, dismissing the applications for bail, and directed them to consider each particular case on merits as to whether it fell within the purview of section 3 and/or section 4 of the Act, and if so, whether the accused in the facts and circumstances of the case were entitled to bail while keeping in view the limitations on their powers under section 20(8) of the Act.
Where the Designated Courts find that the acts alleged in the police report or complaint of facts under section 14(1) do not fall within the purview of section 3 and/or section 4 of the Act, they shall in exercise of the powers under section 10 of the Act transfer the cases for trial to the ordinary criminal courts.
The accused persons, enlarged on bail by this Court, should continue to remain on bail until their applications for bail were dealt with by the Designated Courts with advertence to the observations made above.
[246F H; 247A B] In Re the Special Courts Bill, 1978, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 476; Balchand Jain vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; Ishwar Chand vs State of Himachal Pradesh, I.L.R. (1975) H.P. 569 and V.C. Shukla vs State through C.B.I., , referred to.
