% This writ petition was originally filed in this Court by two members of the Delhi Higher Judicial Service, namely, Shri R.L. Gupta and Shri S.B. Aggarwal, but as the Court was of the view that the case of Shri S.B. Aggarwal should be considered independently, he was asked to file a separate petition, and this petition was confined to Shri R.L. Gupta only.
The petitioner, Shri R.L. Gupta, who had become a member of the Delhi Judicial Service on its initial constitution on August 2, 1971 and was confirmed in the said service as a sub judge on August 6, 1971, was working as an Additional District and Sessions Judge, Delhi, when on 14.5.1981, on the establishment of the Delhi Legal Aid and Advice Board, he was sent on deputation as the first Member Secretary of that Board.
Thereafter, when the Government of India on April 26, 1985 appointed a Commission of Inquiry presided over by Shri Justice Ranganath Misra, Judge, Supreme Court of India, to enquire into the allegations in regard to the incidents of organised violence following the assassination of Smt.
Indira Gandhi, the late Prime Minister of India, the Central Government by letter dt.
May 27, 1985, requested the Delhi High Court to spare the services of the petitioner for being appointed as Secretary to the Commission above mentioned and upon the petitioner 's expressing his willingness to work as Secretary to the said Commission, he was permitted by the High Court to go on deputation to the Commission with effect from 1st June, 1985 at his own risk.
Within three months from the date on which the petitioner had joined the Commission as its Secretary, the Chief Justice of the Delhi High Court wrote to Shri Justice Ranganath Misra, that it had been decided by the High Court to place the petitioner on probation on the Delhi Higher 256 Judicial Service as his turn had come for the same and, therefore, he might be relieved from the Commission to enable him to report to the High Court as soon as possible not later than ten days from the receipt of that communication.
Shri Justice Ranganath Misra thereupon wrote to the Chief Justice of the Delhi High Court that the petitioner had got himself acquainted with the working of the Commission and it was difficult at that juncture to relieve him in public interest.
The letter of Shri Ranganath Misra was considered by the High Court at its meeting held on 22.11.1985, when a resolution was passed to the effect that Shri R.L. Gupta, who had been on deputation with the Delhi Legal Aid & Advice Board, was asked to revert back to his parent cadre for being considered to be placed on probation, but he, instead of reverting back, went on a second deputation as Secretary to R.N. Misra Commission of Inquiry at his own request and risk; he was asked vide High Court 's endt.
dated 26.8.85 to come back to parent cadre within ten days otherwise the next person would be placed on probation, and Mr. R.L. Gupta refused to come back and got it intimated through Justice R.N. Misra vide letter dt.
19.8.85 that he had come at his own risk.
The Resolution further said that the case of Shri R.L. Gupta for being placed on probation was considered and as he had declined to be available to be placed on probation at his own risk, the same had been rejected and that the officers next to him were then considered and five officers Shri Jaspal Singh and four others were selected for being placed on probation against regular vacancies.
By the above said resolution, Shri Jaspal Singh and four others were allowed to supersede the petitioner.
Further, twelve more officers were placed on probation.
Thus, in all seventeen judicial officers were allowed to supersede the petitioner.
On completion of the work of the Commission of Inquiry on October 31, 1986, the petitioner was posted as Additional District & Sessions Judge, and placed on probation for a period of two years with effect from April 4, 1987.
Aggrieved by the supersession, the petitioner filed this writ petition before this Court, questioning the validity of the supersession on several grounds, some of them being common to the petitioner and SHRI S.B. Aggarwal who had been impleaded as petitioner No. 2.
Since the case of the petitioner could be disposed of on a short ground, the Court did not express its opinion on the grounds common to the petitioner and Shri S.B. Aggarwal and other judicial officers working in the Delhi Higher Judicial Service, and the contentions on those grounds were left open.
257 Allowing the writ petition, the Court, ^ HELD: The short question which arose for consideration in this case was whether the supersession of the petitioner made by the High Court by placing seventeen officers, junior to him, on probation before he was placed on probation was valid or not.
No rules governing the deputation of an officer working in the judicial department were produced before the Court.
The case, therefore, had to be determined on the principles of justice, equity and relevant judicial precedents.
[265F; 266A B] It was not disputed that the petitioner would have been placed on probation as a matter of course on 22.11.85 if he had been serving as an Additional District and Sessions Judge and would have continued to be senior to Shri Jaspal Singh who was placed on probation on that date.
[268C D] In regard to the quality of the work rendered by the petitioner in the capacity of the Secretary to the Commission of Inquiry headed by Shri Justice Ranganath Misra, the certificate issued by Shri Justice Ranganath Misra on 29.11.86 inter alia said: "Shri Gupta handled his job with ability and efficiency.
He impressed me as a brilliant judicial officer.
I found him to be well versed in law.
He exhibited character, courage and sagacity.
I was impressed by his sense of social vision, legal acumen and capacity to comprehend human problems." [268D G] On his return to the Delhi Judicial Service from the Commission of Inquiry, his being placed on probation by the High Court with effect from 4.4.87, raised the question for consideration whether it was just and reasonable to deprive the petitioner of his seniority only because he was not working in the Delhi Higher Judicial Service during the period when his juniors were allowed to supersede him.
[268G H; 269A] The Court was not impressed by the submission made on behalf of the High Court that the petitioner having been informed by the High Court that he was going on deputation at his own risk, he could not retain his seniority over his juniors who were placed on probation during the period of deputation.
It is well settled that many officers have to be sent on deputation in the public interest to other departments in order to meet the exigencies of public service and that before sending them on deputation their consent is invariably taken.
Merely because they have given their consent to go on deputation they could not be allowed to suffer unless there is a specific rule to the contrary or other 258 good reason for it.
That is the ratio of the decision in State of Mysore vs M.H. Bellary, ; , and the decision in State of Mysore and another vs P.N. Nanjundiah and another, The petitioner was not even sent on deputation to a department where his services could be absorbed permanently.
He was sent on deputation to a Commission which was asked to enquire into a certain matter of public importance which was to be over in a short time.
The Commission itself was to become functus officio on the submission of its report.
The Commission was presided over by a Judge of the Supreme Court of India and it was not possible for the petitioner to give up his post as Secretary of the Commission without the permission of the Chairman of the Commission and return to the Delhi Judicial Service.
The Chairman of the Commission found it difficult to relieve the petitioner in the midst of the inquiry.
The object of placing an officer on probation is only to assess whether he is suitable for the post to which he is appointed.
It is not necessary that such assessment should always be made by the appointing authority unless there is any legal impediment.
Such assessment can also be made by the authority under whom the officer works while on probation.
In this case, the authority under whom the petitioner worked while on deputation was a Judge of the Supreme Court of India who had approved the service of the petitioner as could be seen from the certificate issued .
by him on 29.11.86, referred to above.
Even though it was stated that the petitioner was sent on deputation to the Commission of Inquiry at his own risk, it would be unjust to hold that the High Court could have on the facts and circumstances of this case passed orders which would have the effect of superseding the petitioner.
The Court could not appreciate the implication of the observation made in the resolution of the High Court that the petitioner had refused to come back and got it intimated through Justice R.N. Misra vide demi official letter dt.
19.9.85 that he had come on deputation at his own risk '.
It was not truly a case of refusal by the petitioner to go back to the Delhi Higher Judicial Service, nor could it be said that he was responsible for what Shri Justice R.N. Misra had written, and the same could not be used against him for depriving him of his seniority.
The stand taken by the High Court in this case could not, therefore, be upheld.
Shri B. Dutta, Additional Solicitor General of India appearing on behalf of the Union of India supported the case of the petitioner.
[269A H; 270F H] No innocent officer should be exposed to the grave risk to which the petitioner in this case was exposed.
The petitioner was promoted as an Additional District & Sessions Judge under rule 16 of the Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules in 1976.
The post to which he was prom 259 oted was called a temporary post although truly it was not a temporary post.
There was no chance of its abolition at all.
Yet it was called a temporary post because it was in excess of the strength of the posts in the Delhi Higher Judicial Service which had been fixed at 16 by rule 4 read with the Schedule attached to the Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules in the year 1970.
If the schedule had been amended from time to time by increasing the number of the posts keeping pace with the reality of the situation, perhaps, the strength should have been increased to 50 by now.
In the circumstances, by appointing the Judicial officers of the Higher Judicial Service to temporary posts instead of appointing them to permanent posts, the Delhi Administration has virtually made a mockery of the rules of recruitment.
To place a Judicial officer, promoted to the Higher Judicial Service, on probation nearly after 9 years after his promotion, as in this case, was a mere farce.
Ordinarily, an officer should be on probation from the date of his appointment.
Is it just and reasonable to place an officer on probation nearly 9 years after his appointment and then turn him out of service if his services are found to be not satisfactory during the period of probation, which would fall in the 10th and 11th year of his service in that cadre? [270H; 271A F] The petitioner in this case should have been placed on probation on 22.11.85 even though he was on deputation on that date and on his confirmation he is entitled to maintain his seniority above Shri Jaspal Singh.
The Court directed that the petitioner would be deemed to have been on probation from 22.11.85 and his services would be regulated accordingly.
The petitioner would also be deemed to be above Shri Jaspal Singh in the seniority list of officers in the Delhi Higher Judicial Service.
[273C D] OBSERVATlONS: The Administration should know that the work in the Courts has increased by two or three times during the last decade, but the number of judges has remained constant.
This has led to frustration amongst the litigants, lawyers and judges.
This frustration gives rise to tensions including the tension prevailing in the city of Delhi now.
It is reported that the Delhi High Court has been pressing for the appointment of more judges.
It has urged for the sanction of 169 additional posts in the Delhi Judicial Service.
In the courts manned by the officers of the Delhi Judicial Service (who on promotion will be members of the Delhi Higher Judicial Service), there were pending as on 1.9.87, 51,173 Regular Suits, 1210 Small Cause Suits, 974 Civil Appeals, 10,592 Rent Cases.
There were 97,943 cases pending before the courts of Chief and Addi 260 tional Chief Metropolitan Magistrates, and 2,35,033 cases pending before other magistrates as on 1.9.87.
The Delhi Administration appears to have not taken any serious notice of the appalling situation prevailing in the Delhi Courts.
The Administration should look at the recommendation of the High Court as one intended to give relief to the suffering litigants who waste their valuable time near the courts for years waiting for justice.
This is a problem which should be solved on a war footing.
The Delhi Administration should straightaway increase the strength of the Delhi Judicial Service at least by 150, the number of posts in the Delhi Higher Judicial Service, at least by 40, should establish court premises in different parts of Delhi, and see that the pending cases, in the order of lakhs, many of which lingering for the last ten years and more, are disposed of within two years.
If the total strength is increased at all levels, the farce of placing the judicial officers on probation after nearly ten years will also end.[271G H; 272A E] The Government should not consider finance as a constraint because by not appointing sufficient number of judges, the Government is suffering more financially.
The Government itself being a big litigant is subjected to several orders of stay, prohibitation, injunction etc.
, leading lo delay in completion of several projects and works.
The indirect effects of frustration amongst the people lead to a greater financial drain.
If by any chance the arrears of cases come down, then the vacancies in the Judicial posts may not be filled up.
The Court expressed the hope that the Union of India and Delhi Administration would sanction at least 150 more posts in the Delhi Judicial Service and about 40 posts in the Delhi Higher Judicial Service and also take immediate steps to establish additional courts.
The expenditure on judicial administration should not be subjected to the constraints of non plan expenditure.
The judicial department is not an unproductive department.
Peace and tranquillity that will result from quick disposal of cases is much more valuable than the economic goods produced by factories.
Delay in disposal of cases affects the gross national product adversely.
Quick disposal of cases will save millions man hours now being wasted near the courts.
It is imperative that every State should increase the strength of the Judicial officers at least by thirty per cent immediately; otherwise, there would be a catastrophe in about a year or two.
The Court expressed the hope that this warning would not go unheeded.
[272F H; 273A C] The State of Mysore vs M.H. Bellary, [1964] 7 S.C.R. 471, State of Mysore & Anr.
vs P.N. Nanjudiah & Anr., , and O.P Singla & Anr., etc., vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; 261
