% The appellants had filed a suit for partition of property claiming 1/3rd share.
A preliminary decree was passed by the trial court.
Respondent No. 1 (defendant No. 9 in the suit) challenged the decree before the High Court in first appeal.
The appeal was disposed of on compromise whereby the appellants plaintiffs ' claim to l/3rd share was accepted, but it was agreed that half of the share of the plaintiffs would go to the defendant No. 9, provided he paid Rs.40,000 to the plaintiffs in two instalments, the first one of Rs.10,000 by 31.7.1979 and the second of the remaining amount, by 28.2.1980, failing which payment within time, the decree passed by the trial court would stand confirmed as per the terms of the compromise.
The first instalment was paid within time, but the remaining amount was not paid.
The defendant No. 9 made an application before the High Court on 28.8.1981 for extension of time for payment of the second instalment.
The High Court by its order dated 31.8.1981 allowed the application.
The appellants moved this Court by special leave, challenging the said order dated 31.8.1981 of the High Court.
The appellants inter alia contended that an order based on the consent of the parties could be modified only with the further consent of the parties and it was not open to the Court to alter the terms otherwise.
If the High Court had issued notice on the application for extension of time made by the defendant No. 9 to the plaintiffs appellants, they would have placed before the Court the circumstances showing that it was against the cause of justice to allow the prayer of the defendant No. 9 and specially so after such a long delay.
There was no justification whatsoever for the High Court to condone the delay and extend the period for deposit of the money, they contended.
288 The contesting respondents argued that the 6th term of the com promise dealing with the consequence of the default in payment of the instalments was penal in nature and illegal, and that the clause being severable from the other terms of the compromise should be ignored.
It was further argued that it was not correct to suggest that the Court had no power to permit the respondent No. I to make the deposit later.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: There was no merit in the argument that the impugned clause 6 of the agreement was illegal being penal in nature.
It had to be noted that the plaintiffs had in the trial court obtained a decree for partition for their l/3rd share in the suit properties and there was presumption in favour of correctness of the decree.
At the appellate stage, one of the three branches of the parties, represented by the heirs of Brajgopal, and uncle of the plaintiffs appellants, was satisfied with the share allotted to them and the interest of defendant No. 9, second uncle of the plaintiffs, was identical to their interest.
The situation was acceptable to the defendant No. 9 also but he wanted to acquire half the share of the plaintiffs on payment of consideration, fixed at Rs.40,000.
The amount was to be paid by way of price.
It had not been suggested by the defendant No. 9 or his heirs that the entire compromise should be ignored on account of the impugned clause 6 thereof.
They had been relying upon the compromise except the default clause which alone was sought to be ignored.
That part of the compromise was in substance an agreement for transfer by the plaintiffs of half of their share for a sum of Rs.40,000 to be paid within stipulated time.
The market price of the property was higher, and a beneficial right was bestowed on the defendant No. 9 to acquire the property for a considerably low amount.
In this background, the said defendant was subjected to the condition that if he had to take the advantage of the bargain, he was under a duty to pay the stipulated amount within the time mentioned in the agreement.
On failure to pay within time, he was to be deprived of that special benefit.
Such a clause could not be considered a penalty clause.
The expression 'penalty ' is an elastic term with many different shades of meanings, but it always involves an idea of punishment.
The impugned clause in this case did not involve infliction of any punishment, it merely deprived the defendant No. 9 of a special advantage in case of default.
[293A H: 294A] The High Court assuming it had the power to do so, was not justified in allowing the prayer of the defendant No. 9 to make a grossly belated payment.
Even where such a power exists, it is not to be exercised liberally.
[294B C] 289 Justice was manifestly in favour of the plaintiffs and against the contesting respondents.
The clause in question was not a forfeiture clause.
[294E] The grievance of the plaintiffs that they were not afforded reasonable opportunity to contest the prayer of the defendant was also well founded; notice of the application for extension of time should have been directly sent to the plaintiffs.
The Court did not consider it necessary to remand the matter to the High Court for a fresh consideration, as it had come to a final conclusion on merits in favour of the plaintiffs.
[294G; 295B] The order dated 31.8.1981 of the High Court was set aside and the application filed by respondent No.1 defendant No. 9 for extension of time was rejected.
[295C D] Charles Hubert Kinch vs Edward Keith Walcott & Ors.
, A.I.R. 1929 P.C. 289; Banku Behari Dhur vs J.C. Galstaun & Anr., A.I.R. 1922 P.C. 339; Jagat Singh & Ors.
vs Sangat Singh & Ors., A.I.R. 1940 P.C. 70 and Smt.
Periyakkal & Ors.
vs Smt.
Dakshyani; , , referred to.
