% The appellant tenant took on rent the suit premises from the respondent landlord on a monthly rent of Rs.120 and executed a rent note in his favour on 19th April, 1975.
Clause 4 of the rent note provided that the tenant was to run the 'business of English Liquor Vend, and do sale of liquor in the shop. ' The respondent filed a petition for eviction under section 13 of the Haryana Urban (Control of Rent & Eviction) Act, 1973 against the appellant on the ground of ground of rent from 1st April, 1979 to 31st August, 1979 and change of user from liquor vend business to that of general merchandise.
The appellant tendered the entire arrears of rent at the first date of hearing, and contested the eviction petition by filing a written statement contending that after March, 1979 the licence of liquor vend in his favour was not renewed, and he had to discontinue that business at the suit premises, and had to start the business of general merchandise.
It was, further, contended that the purpose of user still remained commercial and that there was no clause in the rent note prohibiting the appellant to change to any other business.
The Rent Controller held that the appellant had changed the user of the shop in dispute and that he was liable for eviction under the Act.
346 The Appellate Authority dismissed the appeal.
The High Court also dismissed the Civil Revision and upheld the order of eviction.
Allowing the Appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The business purposes must be adjudged in the light of the purposes of the Rent Act in question which is to control the eviction of tenants therefrom.
[349C] 2.
In the expanding concept of business nowadays and the growing concept of departmental stores, it cannot be said that there was any change of user in the instant case, when the tenant converted the use of the building from liquor vend business to that of general merchandise.
The building was rented for the purpose of carrying on a business.
It was used for another business which would not in any way impair the utility or damage to the building, and the business could be conveniently carried on in the said premises.
No nuisance was also created.
The case would, therefore, not attract the mischief of section 13(2)(ii)(b).
[349D, 350E] 3.
So far as the High Court of Punjab and Haryana held in the Full Bench decision in Sikander Lal vs Amrit Lal, (1984 Punjab Law Reporter 1) that allied business would not amount to change of user but for a business which is not allied for the business for which it was let out would amount to change of user come within the mischief of clause (b) of section 13(2)(ii) of the Act, the same must be read with reservation.
[348H, 349A] 4.
When Parliament legislates to remedy a defect or a lacuna in the existing law, and the judiciary interprets them, it has to be borne in mind that the meaning of an expression must be found in the felt necessities of time.
[349G H, 350C D] Duport Steels Ltd. & others vs Sirs and others, at 541.
referred to.
