% Aggrieved by his non inclusion in the Select List for promotion of State Police Service officers to the I.P.S. cadre, though two of his junior officers had been selected, Hiranyalal, respondent in both the appeals, filed a Civil Rule in the Guwahati High Court, which stood transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal, Guwahati.
The Tribunal held respondents non selection bad in law on the ground that the Selection Committee had taken into consideration certain adverse remarks in his Confidential Character Rolls, which had not been communicated to the respondent till the date of the meeting of the Selection Committee and which were later expunged on his representation.
The Tribunal however went a step further, and on the basis of its own assessment of the respondent 's Confidential Rolls, assumed that he was entitled to be characterised "very good" and should be deemed to have been selected.
After taking this view, the Tribunal passed the operative order directing the respondent to be appointed to the Indian Police Service with effect from the date on which his immediate junior was appointed.
It is this operative order which is being mainly challenged in these appeals by the Union Public Service Commission and the State of Assam.
The Tribunal also held that it was obligatory on the part of the 303 Selection Committee to have recorded the reasons for superseding those who were senior.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: (1) The Selection Committee could not have taken into consideration the adverse remarks entered in the records which had not been communicated to the respondent, and in any case could not have taken into consideration these remarks which were subsequently set aside by the State Government.
[306B C] (2) The legal effect of the setting aside of the adverse remarks would be that the remarks must be treated as non existent in the eye of law.
The Selection Committee had, therefore, fallen in error in taking into account these adverse remarks, which in the eye of law did not exist and which could not have been lawfully taken into consideration.
[306C D] (3) The jurisdiction to make the selection vested in the Selection Committee.
How to categorize in the light of the relevant records and what norms to apply in making the assessment are exclusively the functions of the Selection Committee.
The Tribunal could not make a conjecture as to what the Selection Committee would have done or to resort to conjectures as to the norms to be applied for this purpose.
[306D,E,G] (4) The Tribunal could not have substituted itself in place of Selection Committee and made the selection as if the Tribunal itself was exercising the powers of the Selection Committee.
[307A B] (5) The Tribunal should have directed that the Selection Committee reconsider the matter on the footing that there was no adverse remarks against the respondent and make a proper categorization on the basis of the records by ignoring the adverse remarks but by applying the same standard and test adopted by it.
[308E F] (6) The Selection Committee shall reconsider the impugned select list prepared in 1983 as if it was deciding the matter on the date of the selection on the footing that the adverse remarks made against the respondent which were subsequently set aside did not exist in the records and shall consider the question as to whether he would have been appointed or Respondent No. 11 Shri Sardar Pradeep Kar would have been appointed on the basis of the categorization to which each of them was entitled having regard to the C.C. Rolls (ignoring the adverse remarks against Respondent No. 1 which were subsequently quashed), 304 and if the respondent 's claim is accepted, on reconsideration in the light of the aforesaid exercise, the order of appointment should provide for his appointment with effect from the date on which he would have been appointed if he was selected when the original selection was made in 1983 and he should be given all the benefits.
[310E G] (7) The Selection Committee was making a selection and when some one was selected in preference to the other, it could not be said that it amounted to supersession of a junior by a senior.
The concept of supersession is relevant in the context of promotion and not in the context of selection.
[309E F] (8) The Tribunal has committed an error in taking the view that the law enjoined the Selection Committee to record the reasons and failure to do so would vitiate the selection.
It appears that the Tribunal did not properly realise the effect of the relevant provision having been amended at the time when the Selection Committee made its selections.
[309F G] (1) Gurdial Singh Fijji vs State of Punjab, ; (2) State of Mysore vs Syed Mahmood, ; ; (3) Ram Das vs Union of India, ; referred.
(4) State of Gujarat vs section Tripathy, [1986] 2 SCC III 1973, distinguished.
