% The Supreme Court issued certain directions in respect of petitioner No. 9 regarding accommodation and reinstatement in service in a writ petition filed on behalf of forty petitioners, working in Pension Paying officer, Pokhara, in Nepal, praying for directions to the Union of India, regarding their permanency and other benefits applicable to similar Union Government employees.
In the petition for contempt, it was alleged that these directions were not implemented, and that consequent to the filing of the writ petition, the authorities, especially local officers, were ill treating the Petitioners.
On notice being issued, affidavit on behalf of respondents Nos.
1 to 3 and 5 were filed tendering unconditional apology, and explaining their positions regarding the implementation of the Court 's orders.
Respondent No. 6, who was the officer ln charge of the Pension Paying officer and who was responsible for the implementation of the Court 's orders, also tendered an unconditional apology and stated, in his affidavit, that petitioner No. 9 was dispossessed of the residential accommodation on 14th August, 1987, by which time the Court 's orders of 7th August, 1987 had not been received by him, and the accommodation had already been given to another person, that petitioner No. 9 was later restored to service and given possession of similar accommodation and that the rent paid by the petitioner for the private accommodation will be paid out of Government account, and requested for condonation 281 of delay in implementing the orders of this Court.
Disposing of the Petition, ^ HELD: This Court records it serious concern and disapproval of the growing conduct of parties and public officers, in particular, of ignoring the directions of the Court and the multiplying instances of confrontation.
[285F] The Court, including the apex one is a part of the State and is a built in mechanism of the Constitution to administer justice in accordance with law.
For discharging that duty, the Court has got to adopt an attitude of critical assessment of situations connected with litigation brought before it for adjudication.
The manner of functioning of the Court in accord with the Rule of Law has to be dispassionate, objective and analytical.
The Judges who preside over these courts do not act with a sense of superiority; nor do they look down upon others in the community.
[285F G] In order that the system may efficiently work and the purpose for which the courts are established is duly served, it is necessary that everyone within the framework of the Rule of Law must accept the system, render due obedience to orders made and in the event of failure of compliance, the rod of justice must descend down to punish.
Everyone within the system must realise this situation and should not unnecessarily get into a confrontation.
[285H; 286A B] In the instant case, there is some material which if probed into further, might have established that respondent No. 6 had notice of the order of this Court before physical dispossession of the petitioner was effected.
There is allegation of adoption of an attitude of resentment by respondent No. 6 or for the matter of that the local officers, when the writ petition was filed in this Court.
That backdrop could supply the motive for the delay in complying with the directions of this Court.
It is, however, not considered expedient to probe further into the matter on account of the fact that there has been compliance and each of the respondents has tendered unqualified apology which is accepted and the contempt notice is discharged.
[285D E; 286B]
