% The respondent firm filed a classification list before the Assistant Collector, Excise, and sought approval for treating sawn timber and dried timber as non excisable on the ground that sawing of timber logs into sizes did not amount to manufacture.
The Assistant Collector held that conversion of the timber logs into sawn timber satisfied the conditions of manufacture since it involved transformation, whereby a new and different article with the distinct name, character or use, which was different from the timber logs, emerged, and, therefore, excise duty was leviable under Tariff Item 68.
On appeal, the Collector concurred with the Assistant Collector.
Allowing the appeal of the respondent, the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal held that no new product emerged by sawing of timber into several sizes.
Hence the appeal by the Revenue under Section 35(L) of the .
Dismissing the appeal by the State, ^ HELD: 1.1 Excise duty becomes chargeable only when a new and different article emerges having a distinct name, character and use.
This is a question of fact depending upon the relevant material whether, as a result of activity, a new and different article emerges having a distinct name, character and use.
[365B D] 1.2 'Manufacture ' implies a change, but every change is not manufacture and yet every change of an article is the result of treatment, labour and manipulation.
But something more was necessary and there must be transformation; a new and different article must emerge having a distinct name, character or use.
[365E F] 364 Having regard to the facts of the case, as found by the Tribunal which was the final fact finding authority and regard being had to the principles for determining the questions which were correctly applied by the Tribunal, the conclusion of the Tribunal that no new product emerged by sawing of timber into several sizes is unassailable.
[365F G] Union of India vs Delhi Cloth General Mills, ; ; Allenburry Engineers Pvt.
Ltd. vs Ramakrishna Dalmia & Ors., ; and State of Orissa & Ors.
vs The Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. & Anr., ; , referred to.
