% Four agreements were entered into between the respondent and the appellant Union of India through the Executive Engineer, Northern Railway, followed by a supplementary agreement.
All the four contracts were executed and completed by the respondent on diverse dates.
The respondent accepted four final bills and gave no claim declaration in respect of the four contracts.
Thereafter, the respondent wrote to the Additional Chief Engineer, R.E.N.R., that Rs.1,91,137 were due on account of work executed and asked for a reference of the dispute to the Arbitrator.
A reply was sent to the respondent that there was no dispute between the parties and no question of appointment of any Arbitrator arose.
The respondent then filed an application in the Court of Civil Judge for the appointment of an Arbitrator under Section 20 of the (`the Act ').
The application was dismissed as being barred by limitation.
An appeal from the decision of Civil Judge was allowed by the High Court.
The appellants then moved this Court for relief by this appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The sole question involved in this appeal was whether the Civil Judge was right in dismissing the application and whether the application under section 20 was within time.
[404H] It is well settled in view of the decision of this Court in Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivendrum vs T.P.K.K. Amsom and Besom, Kerala, ; that Article 137 would apply to any petition or application filed under any Act in a Civil Court.
The words "any other application", this Court held under Article 137, cannot be read on the principle of ejusdem generis to be applications under the Civil Procedure Code other than those mentioned in Part I of the third division.
[405A B] 403 There are two aspects of the matter.
One is whether the claim made in the arbitration is barred by limitation under the relevant provisions of the limitation Act, and secondly, whether the claim made for application under section 20 is barred.
To be a valid claim for reference under section 20 of the , it is necessary that there should be an arbitration agreement and secondly, differences must arise to which the agreement in question applied, and thirdly, that must be within time as stipulated in section 20 of the Act.
In this case, there was an arbitration agreement as found by the High Court, covering the disputes.
It was also obvious that differences had existed.
There was assertion of claim and denial of it.
As such, the dispute was liable to be referred to arbitration in terms of the agreements between the parties.
The question was whether there was a valid claim under section 20 of the Act to be referred in accordance with law.
[407C E, G H] In view of the well settled principles, it would be entirely wrong to mix up the two aspects, namely, whether there was any valid claim for reference under Section 20 of the Act and, secondly, whether the claim to be adjudicated by the arbitrator was barred by lapse of time.
The second is a matter which the arbitrator would decide unless on admitted facts a claim is found at the time of making an order under Section 20 of the Act, to be barred by time.
To be entitled to ask for a reference under section 20 of the Act, there must be entitlement to money and a difference or a dispute in respect of the same.
It is true that on completion of work the right to get payment would normally arise and it is also true that on settlement of the final bill, the right to get further payment gets weakened but the claim subsists, and whether it does subsist is a matter which is arbitrable.
In this case, the claim for reference was made within three years commencing from April 16, 1976, and the application was filed on December 18, 1976.
[408A D] The High Court was right in this case.
See in this connection the observations of this Court in Major (Retd.) Inder Singh Rekhi vs D.D.A., ; The appeal failed.
[408D] Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum vs T.P.K.K. Amsom and Besom, Kerala, ; ; Wazirchand Mahajan & Anr.
vs Union of India, ; ; Mohd. Usman Military Contractor, Jhansi vs Union of India, Ministry of Defence, ; Jiwnani Engineering Works P. Ltd. vs Union of India, and Major (Retd.) Inder Singh Rekhi vs D.D.A., ; referred to. 404
