% In respect of sale of raw petroleum coke by petitioner to respondent there were three agreements, providing for sale, petitioner 's right to shift raw petroleum coke at the risk and expense of the respondent in case of failure of Respondent to shift the same as agreed, and the Respondent 's liability to pay interest on the value of stock not uplifted.
There was default in payment and petitioner stopped supplies to respondent, filed a suit and obtained an order of attachment of stocks of raw petroleum coke, to the extent of Rs.6 crores, of the Respondent.
The respondent filed an appeal as also an application for stay of the suit under Section 34 of the .
Meanwhile the petitioner terminated the agreement.
Thereafter the respondent filed a suit and the Court passed an order for restoration of supplies.
On an appeal by the petitioner, this Court stayed the order of restoration of supplies, and recorded the compromise terms, pursuant to which all proceedings were withdrawn by the parties.
The petitioner 's claim were referred to an Arbitrator, who passed an interim award, according to which the petitioner was not entitled to any interest nor any shifting charges.
The petitioner challenged the said award, when it was filed in High Court.
The High Court dismissed the petition and this special leave petition is against the High Court 's order.
It was contended before this Court that the Arbitrator has failed to give a reasoned award and so it is bad in law.
Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
It is obligatory in England now after the Arbitration , that the award should give reasons.
The purpose of Section 12 of the Act requiring the tribunal to furnish a statement of reasons if requested to do so before it gave its decision is to enable the person whose property or whose interests were affected, to know, if the decision was against him, what the reasons were.
[435B C] 'Law of Arbitration ' by Justice R.S. Bachawat.
First Edition 1983 pp.
320 and 321, referred to.
2.1 In India, there has been a trend that reasons should be stated in the award.
The reasons that are set out must be reasons which will not only be intelligible but also deal with the substantial points that have been raised.
When the arbitration clause required the arbitrator to give a reasoned award, the sufficiency of the reasons depend upon the facts of the particular case.
He is not bound to give detailed reasons.
[435C D] 2.2 The Court does not sit in appeal over the award and review the reasons.
The Court can set aside the award only if it is apparent from the award that there is no evidence to support the conclusions or if the award is based upon any legal proposition which is erroneous.[435D E] 2.3 The award in question is unassailable.
According to the Arbitrator, because of the letter dated 18th October, 1982 of the petitioner addressed to the Respondent stating that if the outstandings and interest are not paid, further supplies would not be made, has been acted upon by the petitioner, which had not delivered any coke to the respondent, or made any offer to do so, the petitioner was not entitled to the interest in respect of the period from 18th October, 1982 onwards, nor to shifting charges in respect of any shifting on or after 18th October, 1982.
On this reasoning, he had given the award.
How the Arbitrator has drawn inference is apparent from the reasons.
No proposition was stated in the aforesaid reasons, which could be objected to as an error of law.
The reasons given by the Arbitrator meet the requirements of a reasoned award.
It is apparent that the arbitrator has not acted irrelevantly and unreasonably.
[432E G; 434G H] 2.4 Arbitration procedure should be quick and that quickness of the decision can always be ensured by insisting that short intelligible indications of the grounds should be available to find out the mind of the arbitrator for his action.
This was possible in the instant case where the arbitrator has spoken his mind, and he is clear as to how he acted 428 and why he acted in that manner.[434H; 435A] Champsey Bhara and Company vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company Ltd., AIR, ; Hindustan Steelworks Construction Ltd. vs Shri C. Rajasekhar Rao, 3 S.C. 239; Siemens Engineering and Manufacturing Company of India Ltd. vs Union of India, [1976] Suppl.
S.C.R. 489; Rohtas Industries Ltd. and Another vs Rohtas Industries Staff Union and others; , and Dewan Singh vs Champat Singh, ; , referred to Bremer Handelsgesellschaft vs Westzucker, [1981] 2 Lloyd 's Law Reports 130, referred to.
