% A Charter Party agreement was entered into between the appellant Food Corporation of India, and the respondent Shipping Company for transportation of bulk cargo from Australia to India.
After the cargo was delivered, the respondent Company raised disputes regarding certain items and claimed demurrage and overtime charges.
As per the agreement, the disputes were referred to joint arbitration by two Arbitrators, one each appointed by each of the parties.
The appellant appointed its Arbitrator with a specific condition that he should give reasons for his award, and sent a copy of this letter to the arbitrator appointed by the respondent.
The award was made and duly signed by the two Arbitrators at Calcutta and Bombay respectively.
The award, which was a non speaking one and did not contain reasons for the award but directed the appellant Corporation to pay a lump sum amount to the respondent Company, was filed in the High Court of Bombay.
The High Court rejected the objection petition filed by the appellants for setting aside the award.
In the appeals, by special leave, it was contended that the High Court of Bombay had no jurisdiction to entertain the filing of the award since no cause of action arose in Bombay and that the Arbitrators had not complied with the mandate given to them to state the reasons and, therefore, the award was liable to be set aside for reasons of misconduct, irregularity and lack of competence.
Dismissing the appeals, by special leave, 367 ^ HELD: There was no mandate given by both the parties to the arbitration agreement to both the arbitrators to state reasons.
The arbitrators could not act on the mandate of one of the parties.
[368G] Unreasoned award is bad.
Though the recent trend is that there should be a reasoned award, and that would be in consonance with the principles of natural justice, in a case where two men of commerce entered into arbitration in respect of money claim under the Charter Party Agreement and the award has awarded a lump sum amount, the reasons are not far too seek.
It is really an accounting of the rival claims of the parties.
[368H, 369A B] Therefore, on the facts of the case, there is no legal misconduct as such in not giving reasons.
[369B C] There is a specific finding by the Single Judge of the High Court that the agreement was signed at Bombay which was affirmed by the Division Bench.
Hence the High Court had the jurisdiction to entertain the filing of the award.
[368E F]
