% Appellant took the tenancy of the premises in question on an agreed monthly rent of Rs.22 + Rs.2.20 per month on account of Education Cess.
Respondent purchased the house on December 3, 1976.
Appellant was in arrears of rent from 1.6.1976 to 30.11.76.
In response to the notice issued by the Respondent, appellant sent a money order to Respondent treating him as the Muktyar or agent of the previous landlord.
The respondent refused the money order.
Thereafter the appellant filed an application in the trial court for fixing the standard rent of the premises under the provisions of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947.
The Respondent filed a suit claiming arrears of rent and possession of the suit premises on the ground of non payment of arrears of rent and bona fide requirement under section 12(3) and section 13(1) of the Act.
Trial Court passed an order fixing the interim rent of Rs.20 and directed the appellant to pay all arrears of rent and future rent accordingly.
Appellant deposited the arrears and thereafter made payment not monthly but at some irregular intervals.
The Trial Court held that the respondent had failed to prove that he was in bona fide need of the suit premises, but passed a decree for eviction on the ground that the Appellant had committed default in payment of rent as contemplated under section 12(3)(b) of the Act.
On appeal these findings were confirmed by the Additional District Judge.
The Appellant filed a Writ Petition in the High Court, which was dismissed.
In the appeal by special leave, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that payments of rents were made with substantial regularity and that no decree for eviction could be passed against the Appellant.
The contention of the Respondent was that there was irregularity in the deposit of the rent and that the appellant was liable to be evicted on the ground of default in payment of rent.
462 Disposing of the appeal this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Section 12(3)(a) of the Act will not be applicable since there was dispute regarding the amount of standard rent.
Section 12(3)(b) is applicable, which makes it clear that no decree for eviction can be passed in a suit for recovery of possession on the ground of non payment of standard rent or permitted increases instituted by the landlord against the tenant, if on the first day of the hearing of the suit or on or before such a date, as the court may fix, the tenant pays or deposits in court the standard rent and permitted increases then due and thereafter continues to pay or deposits in court regularly such rent and permitted increases till the suit is finally decided and also pays the costs of the suit as directed by the court.
[466E F] 2.
As ordered by the Trial Court, the monthly rent should have been deposited on the fifth day of each succeeding month.
There were a few defaults committed by the Appellant varying from 2 to 3 days into a maximum of 23 days.
On the other hand, rent for most of the months had been deposited in advance.
In the circumstances of the case the Appellant had been depositing the rent with reasonable punctuality and can be regarded as having deposited the rent 'regularly ' as contemplated in Section 12(3)(b) and it is incorrect to say that exact or mathematical punctuality was required in the deposit of rent by a tenant to take advantage of the provisions of Section 12(3)(b).
[467G H; 468A C] (Mranalini B Shah and another vs Bapalal Mohanlal Shah, , followed.
[The decree for eviction was set aside and the court directed that the suit filed by the Respondent shall stand dismissed.]
