% Respondents 1 to 3 were prosecuted for an offence punishable under section 111 read with section 135 of the Customs Act, 1969, on the basis of recovery of primary gold from their house.
Respondent No. 3 was convicted and respondents Nos. 1 & 2 were acquitted.
Later, the same persons were sought to be prosecuted under section 85 of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 relying on the find of the primary gold from the very same premises at the time and on the occasion of the same raid at the house of the said respondents, which had given rise to the prosecution under the Customs Act, as stated above.
The respondents 1 to 3 contended that the new trial was barred.
The trial Magistrate accepted this plea and ordered the prosecution to be dropped.
The Sessions Judge confirmed the order of the trial court.
The High Court affirmed the decision of the Courts below, holding that the trial was barred by virtue of section 403 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Cr. P.C.).
The State then approached this Court by this appeal.
Allowing the appeal in part, the Court, ^ HELD: The ingredients required to be established in respect of an offence under the Customs Act are altogether different from the ones required to be established for an offence under the Gold (Control) Act.
In respect of the former, the prosecution has to establish that there was a prohibition against the import into Indian sea waters of goods which were found to be in the possession of the offender.
In respect of the offence under the Gold (Control) Act, it is required to be established that the offender was in possession of primary gold.
In regard to the latter offence, it is not necessary to establish that there is any prohibition against the import of gold.
Mere possession of gold of purity not less than 9 carats in any unfinished or semi finished form would be an offence under the Gold Control Act.
[454F H; 455A] 451 The respondents were tried and acquitted for the offence under the Customs Act in connection with the possession of gold.
Their trial would be barred by section 403(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, provided they are sought to be prosecuted on the "same facts" for any offence for which a different charge from the one made against them might have been made under Section 236 and for which they might have been convicted under Section 237, Criminal Procedure Code.
[455D E] In order to establish their plea of bar under Section 403(1), the respondents have to establish that (1) there must have been a 'doubt ' as to whether the offence under the 'Customs Act ' could be proved or whether the offence under the 'Gold (Control) Act ' would be proved and (2) that in the context of this doubt an alternative charge could have been framed under Section 236.
[456C] On a true interpretation of Section 236, it would appear that the Section would be attracted where the offence would fall either under one or the other of the two alternative charges.
It would not be attracted if an offence could fall under both of the alternative charges.
What is contemplated by section 236 is framing of an alternative charge where on the facts of the case an offence would fall under one of the two alternative charges, but the act would not constitute an offence under both the charges.
This point is made clear by the illustrations to Section 236.
In this case, the respondents could be found guilty of both the offences in the context of the possession of gold.
If it is established that there was a prohibition against the import of gold and that the respondents were found in possession of gold which they knew or had reason to believe was liable to be confiscated, they would be guilty of that offence.
They would also be guilty of an offence under the Gold (Control) Act, provided the gold was of a purity of at least 9 carats.
They would have violated the provisions of 'both ' the Customs Act and the Gold (Control) Act if the aforesaid ingredients were established.
It is not as if in case they were found guilty of an offence under the Customs Act, they could not have been found guilty under the Gold (Control) Act or vice versa.
Upon being found guilty of both the offences, the Court may impose a concurrent sentence in respect of both the offences or the sentences could be ordered to run consecutively.
There was, therefore, no question of the framing of an alternative charge one under the Customs Act and the other, under the Gold (Control) Act.
If the ingredients of both the offences are satisfied, the same act of possession of gold would constitute an offence both under the Customs Act and also under Gold (Control) Act.
It could not, therefore, be said that they 452 could have been tried on the same facts for an alternative charge in the context of section 236 Cr.
P.C. at the time of the former proceedings.
The submission urged in the context of Section 403(1) could not succeed.
[456C H; 457D F] A separate charge could have been framed in respect of the distinct offence under the Gold Control Act.
The conclusions reached by the Court brought the matter squarely within the parameters of the law settled by this Court in the State of Bombay vs section L. Apte & Anr., [1961] 3 S.C.R. 107.
[459A B] Section 403(1) does not come to the rescue of the respondents 1 to 3; section 403(2) of the Code clearly concludes the matter against them.
The High Court was in error in holding that the subsequent trial was barred.
The appeal was accepted on this point and the decision of the Courts below and the High Court was reversed.
That 20 years has elapsed since the date of the seizure was no ground for not proceeding further with the matter as the offence in question was a serious economic offence which undermines the entire economy of the Nation.
But the Sessions Judge had quashed the proceedings not only on this ground but also on the basis of certain factual findings which counsel for the appellant himself found difficult to assail at this juncture.
The operative order of the High Court could not, therefore, be disturbed in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case.
The finding of the lower courts and the High Court was reversed on the question of maintainability of the subsequent prosecution but no further order could be passed in the circumstances.
[460A F] Maqbool Hussain vs State of Bombay & Ors.
etc., [1953] SCR Vol.
IV P 730; State of Bombay vs S.L. Apte & Anr., [1961] 3 S.C.R. p. 107, referred to.
