% The appellants ' lands were among those sought to be acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 by means of a notification under section 4, followed by a declaration under section 6.
The Notification and the declaration were challenged by way of a Writ Petition on the short ground that the appellants had not been heard before making the declaration.
When the Writ Petition was heard, a statement on behalf of the Government was made, to the effect that the notification under section 6 was being withdrawn.
On the basis of this statement the Writ Petition was disposed of as withdrawn.
Thereafter the appellants were heard under section 5A and a fresh declaration under section 6 was issued.
The appellants filed a Writ Petition and again challenged the Notification under section 4 as vitiated by mala fides and non application of mind.
The High Court rejected the same.
Another question raised before the High Court was that the withdrawal of the earlier declaration had the automatic effect of rendering the Notification under section 4 ineffective and infructuous.
The High Court rejected that contention as well.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Once there is a valid declaration under section 6, the scope of the notification under section 4 will get exhausted.
This principle cannot clearly apply to a case where the declaration under section 6 proves to be invalid, ineffective or infructuous for some reason.
There is no distinction between a case where a declaration under section 6 is declared invalid by the Court and a case in which the Government itself withdraws the declaration under section 6 when some obvious illegality is pointed out.
[444E, 445B] 442 Girdhari Lal Amrit Lal vs State, ; ; State vs Haider Bux, ; and State vs Bhogilal Keshavlal, ; followed.
State vs Vishnu Prasad Sharma, ; distinguished.
Ajit Singh vs State, AIR 1972 Bombay 177 disapproved.
Between the date of withdrawal of the earlier Writ Petition and the issue of the second declaration under section 6, the Government had issued a fresh Notification under section 4 for the acquisition of certain lands.
The lands in the two Notifications under section 4 do not completely overlap, but some fields are common in both.
No declaration under section 6 had been issued in furtherance of the second notification under section 4 when the High Court heard the matter.
In respect of the lands covered by the first notification under section 4 which are also covered by or comprised in the second notification under section 4, further proceedings regarding acquisition shall be taken in accordance with law only in pursuance of the latter notification and the proceedings initiated by the first notification should be deemed to have been superseded.
[445C F]
