% The respondent 's brother was carrying on his business in the front portion of the ground floor of the premises in question, which belonged to the father of the respondent.
The appellant purchased the said running business from the brother of the respondent.
After purchasing the business, the appellant became a tenant under the father of the respondent.
In the rear portion of the ground floor of the premises, one Mrs. Janaki Ammal was residing as a tenant.
Mrs. Janaki Ammal vacated the said residential portion and the appellant took that portion also on rent from the father of the respondent.
The ownership of the premises in question was transferred in favour of the respondent by his father.
On 9.6.1982, an agreement was entered into in respect of both the portions specifying that the lease should remain in force till 8.5.1983.
After the expiry of the said period, the respondent instituted a petition for eviction of the appellant in the Court of the Controller under section 10(3)(a)(iii) of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960, on the ground that the premises in question were needed by his wife for carrying on her business which she was carrying on somewhere else.
The appellant contended inter alia that the requirement of the wife of the respondent was not bona fide.
The Controller dismissed the petition, holding that the tenancy in question was in respect of both the residential and non residential portions and the respondents could not seek eviction of the appellant as the major portion of the demised premises was of residential character.
Aggrieved by the decision of the Controller, the respondent preferred an appeal before the Appellate Authority.
The Appellate Authority dismissed the appeal.
The respondent filed a revision petition before the High Court.
The High Court allowed the revision petition holding that it was not necessary for the respondent to establish that his requirement was bona fide as the question of the bona fides of a landlord 's requirement did not 385 arise in a case under section 10 (3)(a)(iii) of the Act.
It, however, held the claim of the respondent to be bona fide.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellant filed this appeal before this Court for relief by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The crucial question which arose for consideration in this case was whether a landlord, who sought eviction of a tenant from a non residential building (other than a non residential building used for keeping a vehicle or adapted for such use) under section 10 (3)(a)(iii) of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 (the Act) was required to prove that he required the said building for his own use or for the use of any member of his family bona fide.
[390C D] The Act was enacted to amend and consolidate the law relating to the regulation of the letting of residential and non residential buildings and the control of the rents of such buildings and the prevention of unreasonable eviction of the tenants therefrom in the State of Tamil Nadu.
The Act is an ameliorating piece of legislation.
Similar Acts are in force in almost all the States in India.
The provision in question section 10(3)(a)(iii) has to be examined against this background.
[390D;392G] Having regard to the pattern in which clause (a) of sub section (3) of section 10 of the Act is enacted and also the context, the words "if the landlord required it for his own use or for the use of any member of his family", found in sub clause (ii) of section 10 (3)(a) of the Act, have to be read also into sub clause (iii) of section 10 (3)(a) of the Act.
Subclauses (ii) and (iii) both deal with the non residential buildings.
They could have been enacted as one sub clause by adding a conjunction 'and ' between the said two sub clauses, in which event the clause would have read thus: 'in case it is a non residential building which is used for the purpose of keeping a vehicle or adapted for such use, if the landlord required it for his own use or for the use of any member of his family and if he or any member of his family is not occupying any such building in the city, town or village concerned which is his own, and in case it is any other non residential building, if the landlord or any member of his family is not occupying for purposes of a business which he or any member of his family is carrying on, a non residential building in the city, town or village concerned which is his own. ' If the two sub clauses are not so read, it would lead to an absurd result.
The non residential building referred to in sub clause (ii) is a building used for the purpose of keeping a vehicle or adapted for such use, and all other non 386 residential buildings fall under sub clause (iii).
The State legislature cannot be attributed with the intention that it required a more stringent proof by insisting upon proof of bona fides of his requirement or need also when a landlord is seeking eviction of a tenant from a garage than in the case of a non residential building occupied by a large commercial house for carrying on business.
It is no doubt true that the Court, while construing a provision should not easily read into it words not expressly enacted, but having regard to the context in which a provision appears and the object of the statute in which the said provision is enacted, the Court should construe it in a harmonious way to make it meaningful.
[398C H; 399A] In the present case, by insisting on the proof of the bona fide of the requirement of the landlord, the Court is not doing any violence to the statute nor embarking upon any legislative action.
The Court is only construing the words of the statute in a reasonable way having regard to the context.
[399E] By merely proving that the premises in question is a non residential building and that the landlord or any member of his family is not occupying, for the purpose of a business which he or any member of his family is carrying on, any residential building in the city,town or village concerned which is his own, the landlord cannot in the context in which section 10 (3)(a)(iii) appears, get a tenant evicted.
He must show in view of clause (e) of section 10 (3) that his claim is bona fide.
The word 'claim ' means "a demand for something as due", or "to seek or ask for on the ground of right", etc.
In the context of the Rent Control Law, which is enacted for the purpose of giving protection to the tenants against unreasonable evictions and for the purpose of making equitable distribution of buildings amongst persons who are in need of them, in order to prove that his claim is bona fide, a landlord should establish that he deserves to be put in possession of the premises which is in the occupation of a tenant.
Any decision on the question whether a landlord deserves to be put in possession of a premises in the occupation of a tenant should naturally depend upon the bona fides of the landlord 's requirement or need.
The word 'claim ' in clause (e) of section 10(3) of the Act should, therefore, be construed as 'the requirement ' of the landlord or his deservedness.
Since clause (e) of section 10(3) of the Act is also applicable to a petition filed under sub clause (iii) of section 10(3)(a) of the Act, it becomes necessary to examine whether the requirement of the landlord is bona fide; otherwise, a landlord will be able to evict a tenant to satisfy his whim by merely proving the ingredients mentioned in section 10(3)(a)(iii) of the Act.
If the requirement of "claim" being "bona fide" as contained in section 10(3)(e) is construed 387 to mean that genuineness of the need of the landlord for the non residential building is not to be considered and the circumstances that the landlord on the date of making the application is factually carrying on business and has no non residential building of his own in his occupation in the city, town or village concerned, is to be construed sufficient to make his claim bona fide, the tenancy of no non residential building will be secure.
It will be preposterous to attribute such an intention to the legislature.
The need of the landlord should be genuine.
The landlord should bona fide need the premises for his own use and occupation or for the occupation by any of the members of his family, as held by this Court in Phiroze Bamanji Desai vs Chandra Kant M. Patel and Ors., ; and Mattulal vs Radhe Lal; , [399F H; 400A G] The High Court was in error in this case in holding that the landlord need not prove that his requirement was bona fide but that his claim was bona fide as provided in clause (e) of section 10(3) of the Act.
The High Court made a distinction between 'requirement ' and 'claim ' without there being a difference.
[400H; 401A] The Court was of the view that M/s. Mahalakshmi Metal Industries vs K. Suseeladevi, ; M. Abdul Rahman vs section Sadasivam, 'and A. Khan Mohammed vs P. Narayanan Nambiar & Ors., 99 Law Weekly 965, relied upon by the respondent, were wrongly decided and were liable to be over ruled.
The Court overruled them.
A landlord seeking eviction of a tenant from a non residential premises under section 10(3)(a)(iii) of the Act should in order to succeed in his petition, establish that he bona fide requires the premises in addition to proving the other ingredients referred to therein.
The judgment of the High Court set aside.
Since the High Court had approached the case from a wrong angle, the Court directed the High Court to decide the case afresh in the light of what the Court had said in this appeal.
Case remanded to the High Court to decide it afresh.
If the High Court found that the case should be remanded to the Trial Court to enable any of the parties to lead evidence on the question of bona fide requirement of the landlord, it might remit the case to the Trial Court.
[401B D] Mahalakshmi Metal Industries vs K.Suseeladevi, ; M. Abdul Rahman vs section Sadasivam, , and A. Khan Mohammed vs P.Narayanan Nambiar and others, 99 Law Weekly 965, overruled.
388 Moti Ram vs Suraj Bhan and Others, ; ; Neta Ram vs Jiman Lal, [1962] 2 Supp.
S.C.R. 623; Nathala Sampathu Chetty vs Sha Vajingjee Bapulal, [1967] 1 Mad.
L.J. 289; Madras District Central Co operative Bank Limited, Mylapore Branch, Madras 4 vs A. Venkatesh, 99 Law Weekly 714; M/s. Thilagaraj Match Works, through its partner section Chidambaram vs C. Sundresan, [1985] 1 Mad, Law J. 106; P. Thanneer Malai Chettiar vs S.J. Dhanraj and another, ; Seaford Court Estates Ltd. vs Asher, at 164; M. Pentiah and Ors.
vs Muddala Veeramallappa and Ors., at 314; Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board, etc.
vs R. Rajappa Chandrakant M. Patel & Ors., [1974] 3 S.C.R.267 and Mattulal vs Radhe Lal, [1975] 1 S.C.R.127,referred to.
