% The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court questioning the vires of section 4 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949.
He did not, however, mention the particulars of the premises of which he claimed to be the owner, and in respect of which he was making a grievance.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition in limine.
Hence the appeal.
It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that section 4 of the Act was ultra vires the Constitution and violative of article 14, and would be an interference with the fundamental right guaranteed under article 19(1)(g) and was unreasonable, and unjust inasmuch as it provided that rent prevalent in 1938 should be taken as the basis for the determination of higher rent and that pegging the rent prevalent in 1938 as the basic rent, was inequitable and unjust in the background of the tremendous rise in prices, and that the provisions of fixation of rent in other States were different and were more fair and just and reasonable in comparison.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 A petition challenging the constitutional validity of certain provisions must be in the context of certain facts and not in abstract or vacuum.
[109E]i 108 In the instant case, the essential facts necessary to examine the validity of the Act are lacking.
On this ground the petition was rightly rejected and this Court is not inclined to interfere with the order of the High Court on this ground alone.
[109E F] 2.1 Article 14 does not authorise the striking down of a law of one State on the ground that in contrast with a law of another State on the same subject its provisions are discriminatory or different.
Nor does it contemplate a law of the Centre or of the State dealing with similar subjects being held to be unconstitutional by a process of comparative study of the provisions of two enactments.
The source of authority for the two statutes being different, article 14 can have no application.
[113C D] 2.2 Each legislature in the several States has provided the method of determination of fair rent on the basis of legal conditions, as judged to be, by each such legislature.
The legislative wisdom of such legislation is not a ground on which the validity of the Act can be challenged.
[113B] 2.3 It must be the function of the legislature of each State to follow the methods considered to be suited for that State, that would be no ground for judging the arbitrariness or unreasonableness of a particular legislation in question by comparison.
What may be The problem in Madras may not be the problem in Punjab.
[113H; 114A] The Act in question was passed in 1949 and it pegged the rent prevalent in the similar houses in 1938 and as such is not unreasonable per se.
The rises started tremendously after the end of the Second World War after the partition of the country.
It cannot, therefore, be said that per se there is unreasonableness in fixing the prices in 1938 level.
[114A B] One of the objects of the Act was to restrict the increase in rent.
With that object, the Act as provided certain provisions as to fixation of the fair rent.
Therefore, having regard to the specific preamble of the Act there is nothing unreasonable in the Scheme contemplated under section 4 of the Act.
[114B C] Prabhakara Nair and others vs State of Tamil Nadu and others; , and M/s. Raval & Co. vs K.C. Ramachandran and others; , 2 S.C.R. 629, referred to. 109
