% The petitioner was apprehended on April 2, 1987 on information provided by his associate that he was the main person directing illegal remittances of money to foreign countries.
He was formally arrested on April 3, 1987 and remanded to judicial custody till April 13,1987.
His associate was in the meantime enlarged on bail and being apprehensive that the petitioner too may be released on April 13, 1987 when his application was to come up, an order of detention made under Section 3(1) of the COFEPOSA Act was served on him on that day.
The application for bail filed by him was actually allowed the same day i.e. April 13,1987.
Petitioner 's representation against the detention was rejected and a Writ of Habeas Corpus under Article 226 of the Constitution was dismissed by the High Court.
In the Special Leave Petition arising out of the High Court 's Order and the Writ Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, it was contended that the impugned order amounts to double detention as the petitioner was already in jail when the detention order was made, and that it was essential for the detaining authority to have been aware of the fact that the petitioner was already in jail and was likely to be released on bail and further he had to be satisfied that compelling necessity existed for the detention, none of which conditions were satisfied.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: 1.
A perusal of the grounds of detention clearly indicates that the detaining authority was conscious of the fact that the petitioner was in judicial custody and was apprehensive that he would be released on bail when an application for bail moved on his bahalf was going to be heard on April 13, 1987.
The order passed on the bail application of the 495 petitioner 's associate was also referred to therein.
Thereafter, the detaining authority had mentioned his satisfaction about the necessity of the detention.
[497F H] 2.
The object of detention has to be prevention of a detenu from indulging in activities prejudicial to the conservation of foreign exchange resources, and not to frustrate his trial in a criminal case nor as a punitive measure.
[498B] In the instant case the role of the petitioner has been detailed in the grounds showing how he got illegally siphoned the foreign exchange to the tune of about 2 crores of rupees out of the country.
The grounds also refer to the statements made by his associates which indicate that offences in respect of which the detenu was accused of were so interlinked and continuous in character and were of such nature that they fully justified the detention order.
In the circumstances, the satisfaction of the detaining authority specifically recorded cannot be doubted.
[498C,D,G] Suraj Pal Sahu vs State of Maharashtra, ; , referred to.
Merely because the prayer for bail made on behalf of the petitioner was not opposed on behalf of the respondents before the Magistrate, it cannot be said that his detention was not called for.
Having regard to the circumstances arising in the case, no such inference is permissible to be drawn in favour of the petitioner.
[498H; 499B] Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah, , distinguished.
