The father and brothers of Respondent No. 1 were running a proprietary business, which was later converted into a partnership firm by a regular deed.
On the death of the father, the two brothers had effectively taken control of the business and excluded Respondent No. 1.
The suggestion to reconstitute the partnership made repeatedly by Respondent No. 1 had been ignored.
The two brothers represented before the Income Tax Officer that a new deed of partnership had been executed on 15.1.1979 to be effective from 1.1.1979 in which Respondent No. 1 had no interest and on that basis the Income Tax Officer passed an order.
In the suit filed by Respondent No. 1, he challenged the partnership deed as being illegal and void and prayed for a decree for dissolution of the partnership firm and for accounts.
Valuation of the suit was put as Rs.150 i.e., Rs.50 each for declaration, rendition of accounts, and for profit to the share of the plaintiff.
Court fee was paid accordingly.
The defendants in the suit denied the allegations made in the plaint and also challenged the valuation as being grossly undervalued and arbitrary.
The issue relating to the correct valuation and pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
The defendants challenged the order by a Civil Revision Application which was dismissed by the High Court.
This appeal by special leave is against the High Court 's order.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that while relief to the tune of lakhs of rupees had been claimed, the plaint had been tentatively valued for Rs.50 only, which is preposterous.
The contention of Respondent No. 1 was that a Plaintiff has the absolute right to put on the plaint any 508 value he wishes and the court has no jurisdiction to examine the matter.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
It is true that in a suit for accounts the correct amount payable by one party to the other can be ascertained only when the accounts are examined and it is not possible to give an accurate valuation of the claim at the inception of the suit.
The plaintiff is, therefore, allowed to give his own tentative valuation.
Ordinarily the Court shall not examine the correctness of the valuation chosen, but the plaintiff cannot act arbitrarily in this matter.
If a plaintiff chooses whimsically a ridiculous figure it is tantamount to not exercising his right in this regard.
In such a case it is not only open to the Court but its duty to reject such a valuation.
[512D E] 2.
In the instant case the valuation put by the plaintiff on the plaint is arbitrary and unacceptable.
However, the question is remitted to the trial court for reconsideration.
It is open to the trial court to take into consideration the statement in the plaint that the plaintiff has been ousted from the partnership business.
If the court comes to the conclusion that the tentative valuation of the suit would be beyond its pecuniary jurisdiction, it shall pass an appropriate order under Order VII of the Code of Civil Procedure.
[512F G] Smt.
Tara Devi vs Sri Thakur Radha Krishna Maharaj, ; Meenakshisundaram Chettiar vs Venkatachalam Chettiar, ; , relied on.
Aizaz Ahmad vs Nazirul Hasan, AIR 1935 Allahabad 849; Attar Singh vs Manohar Singh, ILR (1947) Nagpur 933; Mata Ram vs Daulat ILR (1938) Nagpur 588 (F.B.); Salahuddinhyder vs Dhanoolal, [1945] ILR XXIV Patna 334; Shama Pershad Sahi vs Sheopershad Singh XLI I.C. 95 (Patna); Gouri Lal and others vs Raja Babu, AIR 929 Patna 626, approved.
Krishnaji Hari vs Gopal Narayan.
AIR 1936 Bombay 166 and Ishwarappa vs Dhanji, AIR 1932 Bombay 111, overruled.
