This appeal was directed against the judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court, setting aside the order of the trial court acquitting the appellants, and convicting them under section 302 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and sentencing each of them to undergo imprisonment for life.
The prosecution case was that on 4.1.1982 Ram Pratap Singh deceased had gone to Collectorate, Panna where he noticed that Om Prakash and Raghvendra, who were inimical to him, were shadowing him in the Collectorate.
He requested Rajendra Singh PW 14, Chhotey Bhaiya.
PW 5, and Mohd. Tohid, PW 16, to accompany him on his return journey as he sensed danger to his life, and sent Tohid to purchase bus tickets with a direction that he should meet him at the octroi toll barrier on the Ajaigarh Road from where he proposed to take the bus.
Thereafter, he alongwith Rajendra Singh, PW 14 and Chhotey Bhaiya.
PW 15, proceeded to Chungi Chowki (octroi Post) on the Ajaigarh Road.
While they were waiting for Tohid, Ram Pratap Singh went for drinking water from a well nearby.
When he was just in the process of drinking water, gun shots were fired towards him, causing injuries to him.
Upon this, he ran towards his associates and fell down near Rajendra Singh and Chhotey Bhaiya.
The prosecution further alleged that on hearing the gun shots, Rajendra Singh and Chhotey Bhaiya saw the appellant Brajendra armed with a.315 rifle and Awadesh armed with a 12 bore gun running away.
Rajendra Singh and Chhotey Bhaiya, armed with a rifle and a gun respectively, fired shots towards the assailants and the assailants also fired towards them.
On hearing gun fire, V.P. Pathak, Sub lnspector of Police, PW 20, rushed to the spot with Constable Lakhan Singh, PW 12.
Rajendra Singh, PW 14 gave him information about the incident, which was recorded by him (Dehati Nalishi exhibit P. 12 at 3.10 P.M.) V.P. Pathak, 514 sent the Dehati Nalishi to Kotwali Panna through Lakhan Singh, Constable, for recording the first information report.
Pathak, sub inspector then prepared the panchnama and spot map Ex P. 17 on the same day.
A charge sheet was submitted against five accused persons, including the two appellants Brajendra and Awadesh for trial for offences under section 312 read with section 34 and section 307 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
The Trial Court disbelieved the testimony of the two eye witnesses, Rajendra Singh, PW 14 and Chhotey Bhaiya, PW IS, and referring to a number of circumstances which made the prosecution story doubtful, acquitted the accused.
On appeal by the State Government, the High Court disagreed with the reasons recorded by the Trial Court, and placing reliance on the testimony of the eye witnesses, i.e. Rajendra Singh and Chhotey Bhaiya, allowed the State appeal, set aside the acquittal of the appellants and convicted them under section 302 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and awarded a sentence of life imprisonment to each of them.
The appellants appealed to this court against the decision of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The High Court on an appraisal of the evidence came to the conclusion that the prosecution had proved its case beyond all reasonable doubt.
It referred to a number of decisions of this Court in considering the scope of its jurisdiction in interfering with an order of acquittal passed by the trial court, but while applying the principles, it failed to appreciate that the view taken by the trial court was reasonable and plausible.
While considering an appeal against acquittal, the High Court must, in appreciating the evidence, keep in mind that if on appraisal of evidence and considering relevant attending circumstances it is found that two views are possible, one held by the trial court for acquitting the accused, and the other, for convicting the accused, in such a situation, the rule of prudence should guide the High Court not to disturb the order of acquittal made by the trial court.
Unless the conclusions of the trial court drawn on the evidence on record are found to be unreasonable, perverse of unsustainable, the High Court should not interfere with the order of acquittal.
The High Court in this case made an attempt to explain away the infirmities in the testimony of the eye witnesses in setting aside the order of acquittal.
The High Court disregarded the rule of judicial prudence in converting the order of acquittal to conviction, and committed error in interfering with the order of acquittal.
[519G H; 520A B] 515 The first information report, exhibit P. 12, showed that the occurrence took place at 14.15 hours while the report was lodged at 15.10 hours.
The evidence on record and the attending circumstances indicated that the first information report was not lodged at 15.10 hours; instead it was lodged at about 17.00 hours.
The testimony of Rajendra Singh, PW 14, regarding the lodging of the first information report was contradictory.
The statement of V.P. Pathak, PW 20, the investigating officer, clearly indicated that the first information report was written after 17.00 hours and it was not recorded at the time it purported to have been lodged.
There were material contradictions in the testimony of Rajendra Singh PW 14 and the investigating officer.
Since the Sub Inspector, the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police had reached the place of occurrence within a few minutes of the incident, the delay in lodging the first information report was highly suspicious.
Why this delay when all officers and the eye witnesses were present at the spot, and the police station was at a distance of two furlongs? The obvious reason appeared to be that the names of the assailants were not known, as most likely, the eye witnesses had not seen the assailants and they were not present at the scene of the occurrence.
In all likelihood, they arrived at the scene after the incident, and since the names of the assailants were not known, the F.l.
R. was lodged with delay after deliberation.
This view finds support from the testimony of Tohid PW 16 and other circumstances.
There were material contradictions in the statements of the three witnesses Rajendra Singh PW 14, Chhotey Bhaiya, PW 15 and Tohid, PW 16, and in view of the same and, further in view of the discrepancy regarding the delay in the lodging of the first information report, it was apparent that till the first information report was lodged, nobody knew who the assailants were and that was why Rajendra Singh could not disclose the names of the assailants to Tohid on his arrival at the scene of occurrence after he had been sent to bring the bus tickets.
[520H; 521A C. E; 522H; 523A] The prosecution relied upon the recovery of the two empty cartridges to connect the appellants with the commission of the crime.
The recovery of these empty cartridges was not made on 4.1.1982; instead, these cartridges were recovered on 5.1.82, although the spot map of the scene of occurrence was prepared on 4.1.82 itself.
It was interesting to note that the spot where these cartridges were recovered was shown in the spot map prepared on 4.1.82 although the recovery was made on S.1.82.
The witnesses in whose presence the recovery of the cartridges was made had not supported the prosecution.
Moreover, it was the admitted case of the prosecution that there was an exchange of fire from both sides by the assailants and by Rajendra Singh and 516 Chhotey Bhaiya but no other cartridges were recovered by the Investigating officer.
The investigating officer did not take into possession the licensed rifle and gun of Raghavendra Singh and Awadesh, nor was any effort made to secure the evidence of the ballistic expert to prove that the empty cartridges had been fired from the respective weapons.
These circumstances indicated that the empty cartridges were not recovered; instead, the investigating officer had planted those cartridges to support the prosecution case.
[523B E] On the evidence on record, it was apparent that the Chungi Chowki (octroi toll barrier) was manned by the employees of the Municipal Board, who were present at the spot, and in addition to them, there was Home Guard office adjacent to the toll barrier and there were residential houses near the barrier and the place of occurrence was a busy public place.
It came into evidence that large number of persons had gathered at the scene of occurrence, but no employee of the toll barrier or Home Guard once or local resident came forward to support the prosecution case.
The District Magistrate, the superintendent of Police and other officers had also reached the spot within minutes of the incident, but none of them entered the witness box to support the prosecution case.
The prosecution produced Udai Singh PW 17 and Kali Charan PW 19, who were residents of Uttar Pradesh and close relatives of the deceased.
Their presence at the scene of occurrence as highly doubtful and their testimony was not free from doubt as they were highly interested persons.
The trial court rightly discarded their testimony as their statements had been recorded by the police after two months of the occurrence.
without there being an explanation for the delay.
[523F H; 524A B] The injuries mentioned in the testimony of Dr. Jain who had carried out the post mortem examination of the dead body of Ram Pratap Singh, could not be caused in the manner and from the place where the assailants were alleged to be present at the time of firing, and the same were inconsistent with the testimony of the eye witnesses and the site plan.
The trial court had discussed this question at length and the Court agreed with the findings of the trial Court.
In the opinion of the doctor, the person who caused injuries to the deceased was at a higher level than the deceased; this was wholly inconsistent with the testimony of the eye witnesses.
Though medical expert 's opinion is not always final and binding, in this case, it corroborated the other circumstances which indicated that the eye witnesses had not seen the actual occurrence.
[524B; 525E H] 517 The prosecution had failed to prove its case beyond all reasonable doubt and the High Court committed error in interfering with the trial court 's order of acquittal.
Order of the High Court and the appellant 's conviction were set aside and order of the trial court was restored and the appellants were acquitted.
[526A B] G.B. Patel & Anr.
vs State of Maharashtra, ; and Sheo Swarup vs King.
Emperor, A.l.R.
