The Education Department of the State of Haryana which was administering Adult Education Centres for providing functional literacy to illiterates in the age group of 15 35 years and Non Formal Education Centres to impart learning by Special Contact Courses to student drop outs from schools in the age group of 6 15 years, appointed the petitioners as supervisors from time to time since the years 1978 on a fixed salary and continued to treat them as temporary gov ernment servants by giving them a deliberate break in serv ice of one day after the lapse of every six months.
Contend ing that this was violative of articles 14 and 16 since they were discharging similar duties as other Supervisors such as respondents 2 6 in the Education Department who had been absorbed as regular government servants, the petitioners prayed for issue of a Writ directing the State Government to give them the same scale of pay and benefits of continuous service, etc.
by declaring them to be permanent government servants.
The State Government contended that the petitioners were not full time employees, that their mode of recruitment was different from the mode of recruitment of regular Supervi sors, that the nature of functions discharged by them was different from those of the latter and that they had been appointed on six monthly basis as the posts were sanctioned from year to year in view of the temporary nature of the schemes.
The documentary evidence placed on record established that the petitioners were functioning as full time Supervi sors and had been 715 given the status equivalent to masters of formal schools and their functions were also like the Block Education Officers of formal schools.
Allowing the petition partly, HELD: The petitioners are entitled to be paid on the same basis of same pay scale as per which respondents 2 to 6 who are discharging similar duties as Supervisors just like the petitioners, are being paid.
(i) The Respondent State has failed to establish its plea that the nature of the duties are different.
In the regular cadre, the essential qualification for appointment is B.A. B.ED.
Petitioners also possess the same qualification viz., B.A., B.ED.
In fact many of them even possess higher degrees such as M.A., M.ED.
In what manner and in what respect are the duties and functions discharged by those who are in the regular cadre different? The petitioners having discharged the initial burden of showing similarity in this regard, the burden is shifted on the Respondent State to establish that these are dissimilar in essence and in substance.
We are unable to uphold the bare assertion made in this behalf by the State of Haryana in its Counter affidavit.
[723F G] (ii) So long as the petitioners are doing work which is similar to the work performed by respondents 2 to 6, from the stand point of 'Equal work for equal pay ' doctrine, the petitioners cannot be discriminated against in regard to pay scales.
Whether equal work is put in by a candidate, select ed by a process whereat candidates from all parts of the country could have competed or whether they are elected by a process where candidates from only a cluster of a few vil lages could have competed is altogether irrelevant and immaterial, for the purpose of the applicability of 'Equal work for equal pay ' doctrine.
A typist doing similar work as another typist cannot be denied equal pay on the ground that the process of selection was different inasmuch as ultimately the work done is similar and there is no rational ground to refuse equal pay for equal work.
It is quite possible that if he had to compete with candidates from all over the country, he might or might not have been selected.
It would be easier for him to be selected when the selection is limited to a cluster of a few villages.
That however is altogether a different matter.
It is possible that he might not have been selected at all if he had to compete against 716 candidates from all over the country.
But once he is select ed, whether he is selected by one process or the other, he cannot be denied equal pay for equal work without violating the said doctrine.
[723B E] (iii) Whether appointments are for temporary periods and the Schemes are temporary in nature is irrelevant once it is shown that the nature of the duties and functions discharged and the work done is similar and the doctrine of 'Equal pay for equal work ' is attracted.
[724B C] (iv) The petitioners have been appointed in the context of a Scheme which is by the very nature of things transient and temporary.
No doubt it has been extended from year to year.
But by the very nature and scope of the scheme, once the objective of Adult Education is accomplished in the sense that the illiterate adults of the cluster of villages become literate pursuant to the education imported at the centres, the need for adult education would diminish progressively and ultimately cease.
Having regard to these facts and circumstances we do not think that the Respondent State can be accused of making appointments on a temporary six months ' basis with any ulterior or oblique motive.
In our opinion, therefore, the prayer of the petitioners to absorb them as regular employees on a permanent basis from the date of their initial appointment has no justification.
That however does not mean that the petitioners should be deprived of the legitimate benefits of being fixed in a pay scale corre sponding to the one applicable to respondents 2 to 6 by treating them as employees who have continued from the date of initial appointment by disregarding the breaks which have been given on account of the peculiar nature of the Scheme.
While, therefore, the petitioners cannot claim as a matter of right to be absorbed as permanent and regular employees from the inception, they would be justified in claiming pay on the basis of the length of service computed from the date of their appointment depending on the length of service by disregarding the breaks which have been given for a limited purpose.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the present case, ends of justice would be met if the petition ers are paid the difference in salaries with effect from the date of the institution of the Writ Petition viz. September 18, 1985.
But it will be convenient to direct the implemen tation with effect from September 1, 1985.725B G; 726A B] 717
