An agreement for distribution of the film "Savere Wali Gadi" was entered into on 19th March, 1983 between the petitioner as the distributor and the respondent as the producer.
The agreement contained an arbitration clause.
A sum of Rs.3.40 lakhs paid to the respondent and acknowledged by him earlier to the agreement was deemed to have been adjusted against the first instalment.
In or about 1984 about Rs. 3 lakhs were further advanced to the respondent.
As per the agreement the respondent was to hand over the prints of the film by 10th August, 1983, but it was not done.
On 11th March, 1985 a further agreement was entered into between the parties whereby the respondent agreed to pay a total sum of Rs.6.50 lakhs to the petitioner for giving up his distribution rights in the first agreement.
The first agreement was accordingly irrevocably cancelled and superseded by the subsequent agreement.
The respondent took up the matter with Motion Pictures Association to de register the film in the name of the petitioner.
The Motion Picture Association stated that de registration would be allowed only when the respondent pays Rs.6.50 lakhs to the petitioner or deposits the amount with the Association.
The petitioner 's claim before the Association was that the respondent committed breach of the subsequent agreement.
A civil suit was filed in the High Court for recovery of Rs.6.50 lakhs with interest, by the petitioner against the respondent.
Later, an application under section 20 of the was made.
The Single Judge held that the first agreement had revived and directed the 528 filing of the agreement.
On appeal, the Division Bench confirmed the order.
This special leave petition is against the order of the Division Bench of the High Court.
Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 Whether in any particular case there was a complete novation of a contract in the sense that the new contract replaced or substituted the old contract, could depend upon the facts and circumstances of the case.
[531B C] 1.2 When the agreement of 1985 was entered into, it was the intention of the parties that the earlier agreement would be superseded and a new arrangement was sought to be brought about whereby the rights of the petitioner under the earlier agreement were to be yielded for a sum of Rs.6.50 lakhs.
This amount of Rs.6.50 lakhs was never paid by the respondent, and it was the case of the petitioner that the earlier agreement stood cancelled.
The petitioner who claimed rights under the earlier agreement, sought the continuation of his registration of distributorship.
This registration could continue only by virtue of the earlier agreement which had revived.
[530G HG; 531B] Babulal Marwari and others vs Tulsi Singh and others, A.I.R. 1940 Patna 121, refered to.
2.1 Sub section (1) of Section 20 of the gives an option to the parties by the use of the expression 'may ', but the other sub sections, if the conditions are fulfilled, make it obligatory for the Court to direct filing of an arbitration agreement.
[532G] 2.2 Indubitably, there was an arbitration clause in the agreement.
The parties have applied for reference.
The Division Bench has reiterated that the original agreement dated 19th March, 1983 which ceased to have effect and came to an end by the agreement dated 11th March, 1985 stood revived by virtue of the two letters dated 15th July, 1985 and 11th September, 1985 by the appellant.
It is clear that the petitioner in the above letters fell back on the original contract of 19th March, 1983.
This was accepted by the respondent.
Hence there was at all relevant times a valid and binding contract between the parties.
That contract contained an arbitration clause.
There was nothing to disentitle the parties to have their rights adjudicated in terms of an arbitration clause.
The civil suit filed does not by itself preclude filing of proper arbitration agreement between the parties.
There being no impediment 529 in filing the arbitration agreement which was subsisting at the relevant time when the High Court directed that the arbitration agreement be filed, that discretion should not be interfered with.
[532G H; 531F G]
