This was an appeal under Section 130 E of the against the judgment and order of the Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi.
D The appellant imported 58 bales of Woollen rags from Canada, and filed the bill of entry for release of the goods, described as woollen rags.
The goods were found by the Customs authorities to be acrylic rags and not woollen rags.
The Collector of Customs ordered confiscation of the goods under section 111(d) and (m) of the , but in lieu of confiscation, the appellants were given the option under section 125 of the Act to clear the goods on payment of redemption fine of Rs.50,000.
The appellants appealed to the Central Board of Excise and Customs which sustained the order of confiscation but reduced the redemption fine to Rs.20,000 and also directed that the goods be released after they were mutilated to the satisfaction of the Collector of Customs so as to render them unfit for use except as rags, and after payment of appropriate duty.
The appellants moved a revision against the Board 's order, whereon the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal passed an order, directing that the goods be released on payment of customs and other related duties with countervailing duty leviable under the Central Excise Tariff and subject to Board 's order about payment of redemption fine and mutilation of the goods.
The appellants then moved this Court for relief by this appeal under Section; 130 of the .
Disposing of the appeal the Court, 602 ^ HELD: Per Ranganath Misra, J. (on behalf of R.S. Pathak, CJ.
and on his own behalf) on 17th December, 1986, this Court had directed waiving of the redemption fine.
The appellants complained that a part of the goods was not traceable, whereupon notice was issued to the Calcutta Port Trust which was joined as respondent No. 2 to the appeal.
The only question surviving for examination was as to the availability of the goods, return whereof had to be made to the appellants, and in case the whole or part of the goods was not traceable, in what way the direction of the Tribunal for return of the goods had to be worked out.
[605G H] In view of the provisions of the Act, viz sections 45, 47, 125 and 126, there can be little scope to dispute that until the goods are cleared for home consumption, the scheme of the Act requires the goods to remain in the hands of the Customs authorities and obviously the statutory authority to account for the goods would be of the authorities under the Act charged with the responsibility of keeping the goods.
[606G H] 19 bales were alleged to be missing and parts of some of the available goods were alleged to have been taken out and made into independent bales.
These allegations were not accepted by the respondent No. 1.
The Respondent No. 2 denied any liability.
In case, it was ultimately found that the Customs authorities by themselves had the total liability to account for the goods or in case their said liability had to be shared by the Calcutta Port Trust and even though one or both were liable to account for the goods and they had failed to do so, in what manner the appellants would be compensated were matters which required factual consideration, warranting reception of evidence.
This proceeding before the Court was not appropriate for looking into this part of the grievance.
In this situation, the order of the Tribunal as modified by this Court for the return of the goods could not be fully given effect to.
The Court considered it appropriate to require the Tribunal to finally dispose of this question.
In case the goods were not finally traceable and the liability to account for the goods was fixed on one or both of the respondents, the Tribunal would decide what amount of compensation in lieu of the goods should be payable to the appellants.
[607A E] Per B. C. Ray, J.
On 17th December, 1986, this Court had passed an order, directing inter alia the waiving of the demand of penalty, and also directing 603 the Port Trust authorities, to which notice had been issued, to disclose the location of the goods.
The Port Trust Authorities stated in their counter affidavit that out of the 58 bales only 45 bales were landed, short of 13 bales, and that the Collector had confiscated the entire consignment and removed 6 bales from I.K.P.D. to their confiscated godown and balance 39 bales had been lying at different points of docks, at the sole risk of the customs.
[610D,F] The appellant contended that it was prepared to pay the customs duty as demanded in compliance with the order of this Court and to take delivery of the goods but as the goods had been lost and were not traceable from the control and custody of the Customs authorities, the customs authorities were liable to pay the value of 39 bales of woollen rags on C.l.
F. basis.
The customs authorities submitted that the value of the imported goods could not be determined in this appeal as a suit had to be brought for such issue, and that it was the responsibility of the Port Trust to indemnify the appellant for the loss.
[611C E] The imported goods had been unloaded from the ship in the Customs area.
The Collector of Customs had confiscated the goods.
Goods in the Customs area are under the Control of the officers of the Customs as per the provisions of section 141 of the said Act.
After confiscation of the goods in dispute, the same had vested in the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 126 of the Act.
The Calcutta Port Trust, respondent No. 2, had averred that the goods remained in the Customs area and were subsequently confiscated by the Collector of Customs.
The said goods were not handed over to the custody of the Port Trust.
[611G H; 612A B] It was the Customs authorities who were in possession and control of the said goods and they were liable to pay the value of the goods to the appellant as damages to compensate the appellant.
Not a single document was produced before the Court by the Customs Authorities showing that the goods had been handed over to the custody and possession of the Board of Trustees and that the Board had issued any receipt for that as required by Section 42 read with section 43 of the .
Under no circumstances could the Board of Trustees be held responsible for the loss or destruction of the said imported goods.
The respondent No. 1 was liable for the loss or damage caused to the appellant by the destruction of the said goods in the custody and possession of the Customs authorities.
[612B F] It was not Possible for this Court while hearing the appeal under 604 Section 130 E of the against the order of the Appellate A Tribunal to ascertain/determine the money value of the goods lost or destroyed from the possession and custody of the Customs authorities.
The appellant might take appropriate proceedings for determination of the damages and recovery of the same in accordance with law.
[612F G] State of Bombay (now Gujarat) vs Memon Mahomed Haji Hasam, , relied upon by the appellant.
