The appellant was granted a permanent Commission in the Indian Army in 1958 and appointed as a Second Lieutenant.
He rose to the level of Lt. Colonel on 27th February, 1975.
In March, 1976 he was directed to report to the Military Hospital for his psychiatric examination, where his medical classification was reduced from shape I to shape III, and he was posted as GLO and treated as Major.
There was however no specific order reducing him in rank.
In December, 1976, appellant 's Classification was upgraded to shape II and in September, 1977 to shape I.
But it was decided that he should be subjected to special review before restoration of his rank.
In a special report the Brigade Commander recorded appreciation of the appellant 's work, and recommended his promotion as Lt. Colonel.
But the Army Headquarters directed the appellant to the Military Hospital for further examination on the ground that an earlier incident of 1963 had been overlooked when the appellant was graded as shape I.
On this examination, the appellant was permanently downgraded as shape II.
In 1980, the appellant filed a writ petition in this Court, challenging the action of Army Headquarters and his downgrading.
This Court directed that he should be restored to the rank of Acting Lieutenant Colonel from the date he was reverted and that his claims to advancement, pay, arrears of pay, etc. should be considered and disposed of within six months (See After lodging his claims, the appellant waited for a reasonable time and then filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The respondent contended that there was nothing wrong in the recategorisation and the directions of the Supreme Court had been fully complied with.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
647 In this appeal by special leave, the appellant contended that a prejudicial approach developed against him in the Headquarters establishment without any justification and he had been unduly subjected to psychiatric examination from time to time, and on the basis of the records built up against him adverse opinion had been forthcoming which resulted in recategorisation from shape I to shape II.
To remove the apprehension of bias, this Court directed that the appellant may be examined by a Board consisting of three Experts with an outsider as Chairman.
After considering the report of the Experts Committee this Court allowed the appeal in part and, ^ HELD: 1.
The appellant 's medical category shall be taken as being continued to be shape I from 1977 and on that basis his promotional entitlements shall be finalised by the respondents within three months hence.
It is open to the respondents to release the appellant from service after this has been done.
[655F] 2.
The report of the Expert Committee makes it clear that there was no justification for the appellant to be subjected to psychiatric test in 1978 following which he was recategorised as shape II.
[654G] 3.
This subject of categorisation on the basis of psychiatric test is technical and should ordinarily be left to experts available in the Defence Department and the guidelines indicated by the Department should be followed.
This Court has no intention to disturb the discipline of the Defence Department, but on the basis of material available on the record and on the basis of the report of the Committee of Experts, the appellant is entitled to limited relief.
Though there was no order reducing him from the rank of Acting Lieutenant Colonel to Major, he was treated as having been so reduced.
Then followed the frequent psychiatric examinations without any real justification.
This recategorisation, in these circumstances, was without any justification.
[654H; 655A B] [Reiterating that it would like the discipline of the Defence Department to be maintained by itself in the interest of the nation, this Court observed that this case may not be taken as a precedent.] [655F G]
