The respondent No. 1 in this appeal was manufacturing Spun yarn.
In the manufacture of the said product, the respondents used as raw material cellulosic fibres and non cellulosic fibres.
Prior to 7th July, 1983, the respondents had filed a classification list in respect of the spun yarn manufactured by them showing the same as covered by Item No. 18 (III) (i) in the first schedule to the Central Excises and Salts Act, 1944 ("Central Excises Act").
This classification was on the basis that the spun yarn was manufactured by them out of non collulosic synthetic waste.
The said classification list was approved by the excise authorities on 7th July, 1983.
A supplementary classification list was approved on 15th October, 1983.
Samples were drawn out of the spun yarn manufactured by the respondents and sent for chemical analysis.
Reports were submitted by the Chemical Analyser.
On 7th February, 1984, the Superintendent of Central Excises issued a demand notice against the respondent No. 1 on the footing that there was short payment of excise duty as the goods manufactured by the respondents were liable to be classified under Central Excises Tariff Item No. 18(III) (ii).
The respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court, challenging the notice of demand.
On 9th February, 1984, the Assistant Collector of Central Excises passed an order modifying the approval granted to the classification lists submitted by the respondents and classifying the aforesaid product of the respondents under Item No. 18(III) (ii) of Schedule I of the Central Excises Act, on the basis of which the Superintendent, Central Excises, issued on the 10th February, 1984, a notice to the respondent No. 1, calling upon them to show cause why duty short levied should not be recovered from them under the provisions of section 11 A of the Central Excises Act.
A second similar show cause notice was also issued.
The Assistant Collector passed orders of adjudication dated 5th 839 March, 1984, modifying the classification lists and confirming the demand made under the aforesaid notice of demand.
The respondents petitioners thereupon amended their aforesaid writ petition to challenge the two show cause notices and the orders of adjudication.
The petitioners also filed an appeal before the Collector of Central Excises against the said orders of adjudication.
The High Court allowed the writ petition in part, quashing the notice of demand for the period 15th August, 1983 to 6th February, 1984, and the orders modifying the classification lists, and directing the Collector, Central Excises to hear the appeal of the petitioners on merits considering their evidence in respect of the period from 7th February, 1984 onwards.
The High Court took the view that the show cause notice served on the petitioner could be treated as valid only in respect of the period from 7th February, 1984, onwards and not retrospectively from 15th August, 1983 to 6th February, 1984.
The Union of India, the Collector of Central Excises and other Excise officers then moved this Court by this appeal against the decision of the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: If the Cellulosic spun yarn made by a manufacturer with the aid of power contains man made fibre of non cellulosic origin, it will fall under Item No, 18(III) (ii), but if it does not contain any man made fibre of non cellulosic origin, it will fall under Item No. 18(III) (i) and duty would be leviable there at a lower rate.
[843B C] Under the provisions of Section 11 A of the Central Excises Act, before any demand is made on any person chargeable in respect of non levy or short levy or under payment of duty, a notice requiring him to show cause why he should not pay the amounts specified in the notice must be served on him.
In this case, no such notice was served.
The aforesaid notice of demand dated 7th February, 1984, was in violation of the provisions of Section 11 A and is bad in law, and the High Court was fully justified in quashing the same.
[843G H;844G H] The appellants contended that although the notice of demand might be set aside, the notice to show cause dated 9th/10th February, 1984, should be treated as a valid notice in respect of the period from 15th August, 1983 to 6th February, 1984 and the period from 7th February, 1984, onwards.
The notice referred to the service of notice of demand dated 7th February, 1984 on the respondent No. 1.
The notice set out as an established fact that the classification lists submitted by the 840 respondents had been modified by the Assistant Collector, and the only matter with respect to which the respondents were asked to show cause was with regard to the quantification of the amount of short levy which was liable to be recovered from the respondent No. 1.
The Notice could not be regarded as a show cause notice against the modification of the classification lists in respect of the aforesaid period.
The show cause notice was bad in law and of no legal effect as far as the earlier period was concerned.
Under Section 11 A of the Central Excises Act, the notice can relate only to a period of six months period to the issue of that notice except in cases where it is alleged that the short levy or payment has occurred by reason of fraud, collusion or wilful misrepresentation or suppression of facts or contravention of the provisions of the said Act or rules, as contemplated in the proviso to sub section (1) of Section 11 A.
No such case was made out in the said show cause notice.
The said show cause notice must be struck down in so far as the period upto 6th February, 1984, was concerned and could be regarded as a proper show cause notice only in respect of the subsequent period from 7th February, 1984 onwards.
Under the said show cause notice, the question of short levy or non levy of excise duty prior to 6th February, 1984, could not be gone into by the Collector and the High Court was right in the view it took.
[845B C;846A E] Gokak Patel Vokkart Ltd. vs Collector of Central Excise, Belgaum, ; , referred to.
