This was an appeal by certificate under Section 66(A)(ii) of the Indian Income tax Act against the judgment of the Bombay High Court on a reference of the question whether expenditure incurred by the company in the accounting period relevant to the assessment period was allowable as deduction in determining the profits of the company for the assessment year.
The assessee respondent had a factory at Shahabad.
Under a tripartite agreement between the government, the assessee and the Municipality of Shahabad, the assessee had undertaken to supply water and electricity to Shahabad and to concrete the road from the factory to the railway station.
Under clause 23, in consideration of these amenities to be provided by the assessee company, the Government undertook not to include any properties of the company within the limits of Shahabad Municipality, etc.
for a period of fifteen years from the date of the agreement.
According to the assessee, certain expenditure was incurred during the year of account under the said agreement, on the laying of pipelines, installations and accessories of which the Shahabad Municipality had become the owner under the agreement, and this amount was claimed as deduction.
The Income tax Officer disallowed the amount.
On appeal by the Company, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner allowed the deduction.
The Revenue preferred an appeal to the Incometax Appellate Tribunal, which passed an order, directing the Incometax Officer to scrutinize the expenditure, and allowed the deduction to the extent that it did not result in the company becoming the owner of any asset.
The High Court in deciding the reference held that the expenditure in question was revenue expenditure and was liable to be allowed 918 as deduction, and answered the question referred in the affirmative and in favour of the assessee.
Revenue appealed to this Court against the decision of the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: Water supply lines were laid as a result of the expenditure incurred, but these water pipelines were not the assets of the assessee but of the Shahabad Municipality and it was not as if the expenditure resulted in bringing into existence any capital asset for the company.
The only advantage derived by the assessee by incurring the expenditure was that it obtained an absolution or immunity, under normal conditions, from the levy of certain municipal rates, taxes and charges.[922E] As observed by this Court in Empire Jute Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1980] 124 I.T.R. S.C. p. 1, there may be cases where the expenditure, even if incurred for obtaining an advantage of enduring benefit, may nonetheless be on revenue account and the test of enduring benefit may break down.
It is not every advantage of enduring nature acquired by an assessee that brings the case within the principles laid down in this test.
What is material is the nature of the advantage in a commercial sense and it is only where the advantage is in the capital field that the expenditure would be disallowable on application of this test.
If the advantage consists merely in facilitating the assessee 's trading operations or enabling the management and conduct of the assessee 's business to be carried on more effectively or more profitably while leaving the fixed capital untouched, the expenditure would be on revenue account, even though the advantage may endure for an indefinite future.
[922H;923A C] In this case, the advantage secured by the assessee by making the expenditure was the securing of absolution or immunity from liability to pay municipal rates and taxes under normal conditions for a period of fifteen years.
If these liabilities had to be paid, the payments would have been on revenue account and hence the advantage secured was in the field of revenue and not capital.
As a result of the expenditure there was no addition to the capital assets of the assessee company and no change in its capital structure.
The pipelines which came into existence as a result of the expenditure belonged to the Municipality.
The expenditure was liable to be allowed as deductible from the profits under Section 10(2) (xv) of the Indian Income tax Act.
[923F H;924A] 919 Atherton vs British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd., [1924] 10 Tax Cases 155, 192 and Empire Jute Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1980] 124 I.T.R. S.C.p. 1, referred to.
