This appeal arose out of a case under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act.
The assessee firm (assessee) had been appointed as distributor by the Travancore Cochin Chemicals Ltd. (the "said company") to effect sale of their product under an agreement.
In the assessment of the assessee firm for the period 1967 68 under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, final assessment was completed and the turnover as reported by the assessee was accepted and tax, levied on that basis.
Later, the assessing authority alleged that certain transactions in the aforesaid period had been wrongly excluded from the turnover reported by the assessee in the return and the turnover had escaped assessment.
The contention of the assessee that the transactions did not constitute sales by the said company to the assessee was rejected by the Assessing Officer and it was held that the said turnover was liable to be included in the taxable turnover as escaped turnover.
An appeal by the assessee to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was dismissed.
In second appeal to the Tribunal, the Tribunal held that the transactions in question had taken place directly between the said company and the consumers and the assessee was merely an agent of the company, and allowed the appeal.
The High Court on revision held that the Tribunal was wrong in concluding that the assessee was acting only as an agent in respect of the said transactions between the said company and the consumers, and allowed the Revision Application.
The assessee firm appealed to this Court by special leave against the decision of the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: Both the parties proceeded on the footing that the transactions in question were effected pursuant to the agreement, sub clause (a) of clause 2 whereof provided that the distributor had the right of sale 880 of the product within the stipulated area.
Bulk supplies were effected in waggon load or lorry load by the said company direct to the consumer pursuant to orders booked by the assessee firm.
The distributor arranged the payment as per the agreement and also took the responsibility to bear entirely the resultant effects and risk from the said direct dispatches.
It was true that the price at which the goods were to be sold to the customers was fixed by the company but that did not lead to the conclusion that the assessee acted merely as an agent of the said company.
The mere fact that the manufacturer fixes the sale price by itself cannot lead to the conclusion that the distributor is merely an agent.
Under the agreement, what the distributor got was described as a "rebate" and not "Commission", as is normally expected in an agreement of agency.
This is a factor, by no means conclusive, but to a certain extent indicative of the relationship between the said company and the assessee.
More important, the supplies were made to the distributor against payment immediate or deferred as provided in the agreement, and even when the goods were destined directly to the customer, the distributor had to guarantee to arrange the payment, as per clause 8.
Where there was some time lag between the sending of the goods and the payment, the goods were to be insured at the cost of the assessee.
This circumstance clearly showed that in respect of the goods dispatched under orders placed by the distributors, the distributors really acted as purchasers of the goods which they in turn sold to the customers and did not merely act as agents of the said company.
In respect of the goods in question, despatched through public carriers, although the invoices were prepared in the names of the customers of the goods and the goods were consigned to the destination through public carrier booked to self, the bills were endorsed and delivered to the assessee.
In the light of the agreement, these circumstances clearly showed that in respect of these transactions the property in the goods dispatched passed to the distributors on the bills being endorsed and handed over to the distributors.
[884D H;885A D] Although the Court had referred to the assessee being described in the agreement as "distributor" and not as "agent" and to the fact that what they got was described as "rebate" and not "commission", the Court had not treated these circumstances as decisive.
But these descriptions considered in the light of the general tenor of the agreement and the circumstances surrounding the transactions between the parties showed that the assessee was not an agent but really a purchaser from the company in respect of the goods in question, and the transactions were liable to be included in the turnover of the assessee.
[885G H;886A] 881 The Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd. vs Sales Tax Officer, Bhopal, ; ;and Pollack & Mulla 's Commentary on the Sale of Goods & Partnership Acts, 4th Edition, p. 114, referred to.
