The appellant was the widow of a tonga driver who died in police custody.
It is alleged that on the fateful night of 22/23.8.1986 two sub inspectors accompanied by two constables visited the house of one Sudesh Kumar, and started beating him.
On hearing his shrieks his maternal uncle Gopi Ram, the tonga driver tried to intervene whereupon the policemen are alleged to have beaten him also.
Both of them were arrested taken to the police station, stripped of their clothes and beaten with iron rods.
The tonga driver succumbed to his injuries at the police station.
Thereafter, a post mortem was conducted and the dead body was cremated without handing it over to the appellant.
The aforesaid incident caused consternation in the locality, and a mob surrounded the police station to lodge its protest against the death of the tonga driver in police custody.
Undaunted the police registered a case under Sections 147 149 and 353/332 I.P.C. against the brother of the deceased and others as they were members of the mob.
Sudesh Kumar filed a written complaint naming the two sub inspectors and the constables as responsible for the death of his maternal uncle which was registered under Section 302/342 I.P.C. No action was however taken against those officers.
After some time the case was converted to Section 304 I.P.C. for purpose of investigation.
701 The appellant approached the High Court by a writ petition under Article 226 for transferring the investigation of the case from the Crime Branch of the State Police to the Central Bureau of Investigation.
The Division Bench, however, dismissed the petition.
Disposing of the Appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The police have not acted in a forthright manner in investigating the case registered on the complaint of Sudesh Kumar.
[704C D] 2.
The circumstances available on record prima facie show that effort has been made to protect and shield the guilty officers of the police who are alleged to have perpetrated the barbaric offence of murdering Gopi Ram by beating and torturing.
[704D] 3.
The appellant had been crying hoarse to get the investigation done by an independent authority but none responded to her complaint.
[704D E] 4.
The Additional Sessions Judge while considering the bail application of one of the Constables Jagmal Singh, considered the autopsy report and observed that the Doctor had postponed giving his opinion regarding the cause of death although the injuries were antimortem.
[704D E] 5.
The Sessions Judge referring to a number of circumstances observed that the investigating officer had converted the case from Section 302 IPC to 304 IPC on flimsy grounds within hours of the registration of the case even without waiting for the post mortem report and that it was a prima facie case of deliberate murder of an innocent illiterate poor citizen of Delhi in police custody and investigation was partisan.
[704E F] 6.
In the interest of justice it is necessary to get a fresh investigation made through an independent authority so that the truth may be known.
[704H] 7.
The trial court before whom the charge sheet has been submitted shall exercise its powers under Section 173(8) Cr.
P.C. to direct the Central Bureau of Investigation for proper and thorough investigation of the case.
On issue of such direction the C.B.I. will investigate the case in an independent and objective manner and submit additional charge sheet if any in accordance with law.
[705A B] 702
