By this writ petition, Personal Assistants and Stenographers (Grade I) in the pay scale of Rs. 550 900 attached with officers in the pay scale of Rs.2500 2750 (Level I) i.e. heads of the departments in the Customs and Central Excise Departments of the Finance Ministry, sought parity with the pay scale of the stenographers attached to the Joint Secretaries and the officers above.
The petitioners asserted that they had been and were discriminated vis a vis the personal assistants and stenographers attached to the Joint Secretaries and the officers above in the Ministry, and claimed that they should be placed in the pay scale of Rs.650 1040 with effect from 1st January 1973.
They contended that the basic qualifications, method, manner and source of recruitment and grades of promotion were the same as of their counterparts attached to the Joint Secretaries/Secretaries and other officers in the Secretariat.
According to them, even on the criteria adopted by the Third Pay Commission there was no basis for any differentiation between the petitioners and their counterparts.
While the petitioners got a grade of Rs.550 900, their counterparts were in the pay scale of Rs.650 1040.
The petitioners asserted that this differentiation without any rational basis was discrimination violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution of India.
They contended for equal pay for equal work, and alleged discrimination in the adoption of the recommendation of the Third Pay Commission.
The respondents denied that there was any discrimination, differentiation without basis and referred to the Report of the Third Pay Commission, recommending different and low scales of pay for the 999 stenographers of the non participating attached and subordinate offices in comparison with those in the Central Secretariat.
It was emphasised that the difference in the functional requirements of the work done was a point.
In devising any scales of various posts/categories inter alia the degree of skill, experience involved, training required, responsibility taken, strain, fatigue, risk and confidentiality undertaken, mental and physical requirements were the factors to be borne in mind.
Dismissing the petition with an observation, the Court, ^ HELD: The petition had to be disposed of on the basis of the position prevailing prior to the report of the Fourth Pay Commission and its acceptance/implementation.
[1007B] Equal pay for equal work is a fundamental right.
But equal pay must depend upon the nature of the work done.
It cannot be judged by the mere volume of work; there may be qualitative difference as regards reliability and responsibility.
Functions may be the same but the responsibilities make a difference.
Often the difference is a matter of degree and there is an element of value judgment by those who are charged with the administration in fixing the scales of pay and other conditions of service.
So long as such value judgment is made bonafide, reasonably on an intelligible criteria, having a rational nexus with the object of differentiation, such differentiation will not amount to discrimination.
Equal pay for equal work is a concomitant of Article 14 of the Constitution.
But it follows that equal pay for unequal work will be a negation of that right.
[1009A C] Differentiation in implementing the award or the recommendations of Pay Commission without rational basis may amount to discrimination.
However, in this case, there is an element of faith, reliability and responsibility and the functional responsibilities and the requirements of persons doing the same amount of physical work may be different in some cases, depending upon the officers with whom the stenographers and personal assistants are attached.
The basic principles on which differentiation would not amount to discrimination, violative of Article 14 or Article 16(1) of the Constitution are well settled.
Article 14 strikes at the arbitrariness in State action and ensures fairness and equality of treatment.
It is attracted where equals are treated differently without any reasonable basis.
Equal laws must be applied equally and there should be no discrimination between one person and another if as regards the subject matter of either administrative action or legislation, their position is substantially the same.
Article 14 forbids 1000 class legislation but permits reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation or administrative mandate.
The classification must, however, be founded on an intelligible basis which distinguishes persons or things grouped together from those left out of the group and that differentia must have a rational nexus with the object to be achieved by the differentiation made in the statute or order in question.
There ought to be causal connection between the basis of classification and the object of classification.
The observations of the Constitution Bench of this Court in D.S. Nakara & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; may be seen in this connection.
[1011B G] In this case, differentiation had been sought to be justified in view of the nature and the types of the work done, that is, on intelligible basis.
The same amount of physical work may entail different quality of work, some more sensitive, some requiring more tact, some less it varies with nature and culture of employment.
The problem about equal pay cannot always be translated into a mathematical formula.
If it has a rational nexus with the object to be sought for a certain amount of value judgment of the administrative authorities charged with fixing the pay scale has to be left with them and it cannot be interfered with by the Court unless it is demonstrated that either it is irrational or based on no basis or arrived at mala fide either in law or fact.
In the light of the averments made and in the facts of this case, it was not possible to say that the differentiation was based on no rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
This application must fail and was dismissed.
This, however, would not in any way prevent or prejudice the Government from reviewing the situation in the light of the report of the Fourth Pay Commission or any other appropriate body, if any, with such modification as the Government and the authorities concerned considered fit and proper.
[1013G H;1014A D] Purshottam Lal & Ors.
vs Union of India & Anr.
, ; Laljee Dubey & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; Randhir Singh vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; D.S. Nakara & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; ; P.K. Ramachandra Iyer & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Delhi Vetrinary Association vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; P. Savita vs Union of India & Ors., [1985] Suppl.
1 SCR 101; Surinder Singh and Anr.
vs Engineer in chief, C.P.W.D. & Ors.
, ; Frank Anthony Public School Employees ' Association vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Dhirendra Chamoli & Anr.
vs State of U.P., ; Union of India & Anr.
vs R.G. Kashikar & Anr., AIR 1986 SC 431; M.P. Singh Deputy Superintendent of Police, 1001 C.B.I. and Ors.v.
Union of India & Ors., J.T. and M/s. Mackinnon Mackenzie & Co. Ltd. vs Audrey D 'Costa & Anr., SLP (Civil) No. 1265/87 decided on March 26, 1987, referred to.
