Appellant No. 1, Laxmi Raj Shetty, was convicted and sentenced to death under section 302, Indian Penal Code, by the First Additional Sessions Judge, Madras.
for committing the murder of deceased P.N. Gnanasambandam, Acting Manager of the Karnataka Bank, Madras.
He was further convicted under section 392 for having committed robbery from the strong room of the Bank, and also under section 449 for having committed house trespass with intent to commit the said robbery and murder, and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years on each of these courts, the sentences being directed to merge in the sentence of death.
Appellant No. 2 Shivram Shetty, father of the appellant No. 1, was convicted by the Additional Sessions Judge under section 212 and section 411, I.P.C., and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for three years on both counts.
The Sessions Judge had relied upon the testimony of PW 18, Smt.
Kanaka and other prosecution witnesses and had come to the conclusion that the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt was to be drawn had been fully established against both the accused and all the facts so established were consistent only with the hypothesis of their guilt and excluded every reasonable possibility of their innocence.
According to the prosecution, the accused Laxmi Raj Shetty, a trainee clerk in the Bank, and the deceased Gnanasambandam used to work in the bank after the normal working hours and leave the bank premises together at night around 9 or 9.30 p.m.
On the fateful 707 night, the deceased was working in the Bank after the normal banking hours.
At about 7.30 p.m. the appellant No. 1 (accused) came to the bank premises, as he used to work late in the evenings and help the deceased.
Some time after 7.30 p.m. the deceased went to the toilet where he was struck on the head by the assailant with a stitcher as a result whereof he slumped.
Thereafter he was strangulated with a towel and also stabbed to death by a pair of stitchers.
At about 9 p.m. the accused was seen coming out of the building by PW 18, Smt.
Kanaka.
The accused closed the outer door of the Bank and was seen by PW 18 going.
He returned with a suitcase, re entered the Bank premises, and came out with a bag, suitcase and a brief case, and after placing the suitcase on the steps went inside again and came out with a large coffee coloured skybag.
He then got an autorickshaw from the Burma Bazar and disappeared into the night in the auto rikshaw.
On a reference by the Additional Sessions Judge, the High Court confirmed the convictions and sentences of both the appellants.
The appellants then appealed to this Court for relief by this appeal.
Dismissing the appeal with a modification, directing that the sentence of death passed on appellant No. 1 be converted into one of life imprisonment, the Court, ^ HELD: The prosecution case against the appellants rested purely on circumstantial evidence.
The law relating to the proof of a case based purely on circumstantial evidence has been settled by several authorities of this Court as well as the High Courts.
[724F G] In cases where the evidence is of a circumstantial nature, the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first instance be fully established, and all the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused.
Again, the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency and they should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one proposed to be proved.
There must be a chain of evidence so far complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and it must 708 be such as to show that within all human probability the act must have been done by the accused.
[725D E] The Court did not discover any infirmity in the reasoning or the conclusion arrived at by the Additional Sessions Judge or the High Court.
[725F] The Court enumerated and went through the circumstances arising from the evidence adduced by the prosecution broadly under the heads (1) The accused had occasion to learn the method of operating the safety vault, (2) The fact that the accused was last seen leaving the Bank premises, (3) Purchase by the accused of a suitcase and a skybag from Burma Bazar, (4) Stay of the accused at Hotel Chola Sheraton under the assumed name of Maharaj (5) Stay of the accused at Hotel Moti Mahal at Mangalore, (6) Recovery of coffeecolour skybag from the residence of late Kumari Usha Rani, sister of the accused, and (7) Recovery of the stolen money of the Bank from the accused, and thought that the cumulative effect of all these circumstances was sufficient and conclusive to raise an inference of guilt.
[726D;727F G;731C;732H;733F;734C,E] The accused Laxmi Raj Shetty was entitled to tender the newspaper report from the Indian Express of the 29th May and the regional newspapers of the 30th May, regarding both the appellants being taken into custody at Mangalore and the recovery of the entire stolen amount from the residence of appellant No. 2 at Mangalore, along with his statement under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, but the appellants did not examine the Editors and news reporters of the newspapers.
Judicial notice cannot be taken of the facts stated in a news item being in the nature of hearsay secondary evidence, unless proved by evidence aliunde.
A report in a newspaper is only hearsay evidence.
A newspaper is not one of the documents referred to in section 78(2) of the Evidence Act, by which an allegation of fact can be proved.
The presumption of genuineness attached under section 81 of the Evidence Act to a newspaper report cannot be treated as proof of facts reported therein.
It is now well settled that a statement of fact contained in a newspaper is merely hearsay and, therefore, inadmissible in evidence in the absence of the maker of the statement appearing in Court and deposing to have perceived the fact reported.
The accused should have, therefore, pro 709 duced the persons in whose presence the seizure of the stolen money from the house of appellant No. 2 at Mangalore had been effected, or examined the press correspondents in proof of the truth of the contents of the news items appearing in the newspapers.
There was nothing on record to substantiate the facts reported in the newspapers, showing recovery of the stolen amount from the residence of the appellant No. 2 at Mangalore.
There was, therefore, no reason to discard the testimony of PW 50, Deviarigamani, Inspector of Police (Crimes) and the seizure witnesses which established that the amount in question had been actually recovered at Madras on the 29th and the 30th, as alleged.
[735D H; 736D E] The evidence did not clearly indicate the exact manner in which the murder had been committed.
The appellant No. 1 had not taken any weapon for assaulting the deceased but had used two stitchers lying in the Bank premises, indicating that the murder was not pre planned.
Looking to the nature of the weapon used, it seemed that the accused acted under a momentary impulse.
In the circumstances, the Court directed that the sentence of death passed on appellant No. 1 be converted into one of life imprisonment.
Subject to this modification, the appeal failed and was dismissed and the judgment and sentences passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, affirmed by the High Court in appeal were upheld being appropriate.
[737C E] Earabhadrappa vs State of Karnataka, ; ; Reg vs Hodge, , referred to.
