These Writ Petitions, filed in this Court by Public Limited Companies growing, manufacturing and selling tea in the States of West Bengal and Kerala raised common questions of law.
The Writ Petitions relating to the State of West Bengal challenged the constitutional validity of sections 3 and 5 of the Bengal Agricultural Income tax (Amendment) Act, 1980, whereby sub section (2) and (2A) of section 8 of the Bengal Agricultural Income tax Act, 1944 were omitted and always deemed to be omitted.
The petitioners alleged that as a result of the omission of the said Sub sections (2) and (2A) of section 8, the State Legislature had sought to assume the power, competence and jurisdiction to impose agricultural income tax on the entire income from the sale of tea grown and manufactured by a seller and had thereby transgressed the constitutional limitations contained in Article 246(3) of the Constitution of India.
The petitioners contended that the income derived from the sale of tea grown and manufactured by them was derived partly from agriculture and partly from manufacture by elaborate processes through valuable machinery.
Prior to the said amendment Act, the position was that the income of an assessee who grew, manufactured and sold tea in West Bengal, was computed under the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 (the Act of 1922) read with the Income tax Rules, 1922, and agricultural income tax was levied only in respect of 60 per cent of that income.
After the coming into force of the Income tax Act, 1961 and the Income tax Rules, 1962 also a State Legislature 962 could only legislate in respect of 60 per cent of the income, treated as agricultural income.
The object of the impugned amendment Act, was to subject to the levy of agricultural income tax, the entire income derived by an assessee from the sale of tea grown and manufactured by him.
The writ petition relating to Kerala State challenged the amendment made by the Agricultural Income tax (Amendment) Act, 1980 (Kerala Act No. 17 of 1980) deleting the Explanation after clause (2) of section 2(a) of the Agricultural Income tax Act, 1950, with a view to making the entire income from sale of tea earned by an assessee who grew and manufactured tea in that State subject to the levy of agricultural income tax.
The petitioners urged that these amendments, in so far as they purported to confer power on the respective legislatures of the States of West Bengal and Kerala to legislate regarding taxes on the income from the sale of tea grown and manufactured by the assessees in excess of 60 per cent of such income computed in the manner prescribed under the law relating to income tax were void and beyond the legislative competence of the legislatures of the States of West Bengal and Kerala in view of the provisions of Article 246 of the Constitution of India read with the entry 82 in List I and Entry 46 in the List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and the relevant provisions of the law relating to income tax.
The respondents contended that Article 366(1) of the Constitution merely stated that the term "agricultural income" had the same meaning as given to it in the enactments relating to income tax and the definition of the said term in Act of 1922 and the Act of 1961 did not prescribe that only a particular part of the income derived by an assessee from the sale of tea grown and manufactured by him could be regarded as agricultural income, and it was open to the State Legislatures concerned to levy agricultural income tax on such entire income.
Disposing of the petitions, the Court, ^ HELD: The main question to be considered was whether the impugned provisions in the Bengal Amendment Act of 1980 were in excess of the legislative competence of West Bengal State Legislature, and whether by deletion of the Explanation effected by the Kerala Amendment Act of 1980, the definition of the term "agricultural income" in sub section (a) of Section 2 of the Kerala Agricultural Income tax Act 963 became void as in excess of the legislative competence of the State Legislature.
[978D E] A perusal of Entry 82 of the List I in the Seventh Schedule and Entry 46 in the List II makes it clear that the Legislatures of the States of West Bengal and Kerala can pass laws imposing taxes only in respect of agricultural income, and in respect of income other than the agricultural income, it is only the Parliament which has the power to legislate in respect of taxes on such income.
Sub article (1) of Article 366 of the Constitution states that "agricultural income" means such income as is defined as "agricultural income" for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income tax.
It is significant that the words used are not "as defined by the enactments relating Indian Income tax" but are "as defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian Income tax"(emphasis supplied).[978F G] Although the Explanation has been deleted from clause (2) of Sub section (a) of Section 2 of the Kerala Agricultural Income tax Act, and in spite of the amendments carried out by the Amendment Act of 1979 and the Amendment Act 1980 in the case of the West Bengal Agricultural Income tax Act, an Agricultural Income Tax Officer acting under the Kerala Agricultural Income tax Act or the Bengal Agricultural Income tax Act has no power to levy agricultural income tax except in respect of 60 per cent of the income derived by an assessee from the sale of tea grown and manufactured by him and computed in the manner leid down under the relevant Income tax Act and the rules framed thereunder.
[984B C] The decision of this Court in Commissioner of Sales Tax, Lucknow vs D.S. Bist, [1979] 44 S.T.C. 392, relied upon by the State of Kerala and the State of West Bengal was of no assistance to them as the ratio of that decision had no application to present cases.
[986A] Article 366(1) of the Constitution provides that the term "agricultural income" has the same meaning as attributed to it for the purposes of enactments relating to Indian income tax, and Rule 8 of the Income tax Rules, 1962 as well as Rule 24 of the Income tax Rules 1922, pertain to and are bound up with the definition of the term "agricultural income" for the purposes of laws or enactments pertaining to Indian Income tax and the provisions of those rules have to be taken into account in considering the meaning of the term "agricultural income" under sub article (1) of Article 366 of the Constitution.
[987B D] 964 Clause (b) of sub section (2) of Section 295 of the Income tax Act, 1961 specifically confers power on the rule making authority to make rules relating to the manner in which and the procedure by which income for the purposes of the Act of 1961 would be arrived at in the case of income derived in part from agriculture and in part from business and Rule 8 clearly provides for the manner in which computation of income for the purposes of the Act of 1961 is to be made in the case of income derived from the sale of tea grown and manufactured by a seller and it cannot be said that the said rule goes beyond the scope of the rule making power conferred under section 295, as contended by counsel for the two States.
[987E F] Although the Explanation to Section 2(a) (2) of the Kerala Agricultural Income tax Act has been deleted by the Amendment Act of 1980, the result would still be the same that the Kerala State Legislature can impose tax only in respect of 60 per cent of the income derived by an assessee who sells tea grown and manufactured by him in India and such income has to be computed in the manner laid down in the Act of 1922 and thereafter in the Act of 1961 for computation of the business income.
The same is the position in respect of the powers of the legislature of the State of West Bengal in spite of the amendments made by the legislature by the Amendment Act of 1980 and earlier under the amending Act of 1979 which was in force for one year.
It is not necessary to strike down the said amendments because they do not directly conflict with the definition of the term "agricultural income" under the Constitution, but they do not confer any wider power on the State Legislature to impose taxes on the agricultural income then what is stated earlier.
[987G H;988A B] The validity of the amendments to the Bengal Agricultural Income tax Act made in 1980 and the deletion of the Explanation in Section 2(a)(2) of the Kerala Agricultural Income tax Act were challenged as being ultra vires and invalid in law on several other grounds but the Court did not go into those grounds in view of what it held as set out above.
[988C D] Although none of the prayers in the petitions was granted in terms, the petitioners substantially succeeded in the petitions.[988E] Karimtharuvi Tea Estates Ltd. & Anr.
vs State of Kerala Trading Co. Ltd. etc.
vs Commissioner of Agricultural Income tax, Kerala, ; State of Tamil Nadu vs Kannan Devan Hills Produce Co. Ltd., 965 ; Tea Estate India P. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal II, ; Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs R.M. Chidambaram Pillai etc.
, ; Commissioner of Sales Tax, Lucknow vs D.S. Bist & Ors., [1979] 44 S.T.C. 392; and High Land Produces Co. Ltd. & Anr. etc.
vs Inspecting Asstt.
Commr.
of Agricultural Income tax & Sales Tax (Special), Kottayam and Ors.
, [1984] 148 I.T.R. 746, referred to.
