The Appellant, a company registered under the Companies Act, had its registered office at Eloor in the erstwhile State of Travancore.
On October 21, 1948 the company entered into an agreement (Exhibit P1) with the erstwhile princely State of Travancore for the supply of electrical energy under the terms and conditions particularised in the agreement.
The price was fixed at Rs. 110 per K.W. per annum.
Subsequently, the State of Tranvancore merged in, and became part of, the Kerala State, and the Electricity Board was constituted for the State.
On May 10, 1965 a supplementary agreement was entered into between the appellant and the Electricity Board for supply of additional power for a period of 10 years at the rate of Rs.140 per K.W. per year.
On October 28, 1966 the Electricity Board in exercise of the powers under Section 79(j) of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948 framed and promulgated the Kerala State Electricity Board (General Tariff) Regulations, 1966 by which the Board empowered itself to prescribe higher tariffs for different classes of consumers.
Regulation 11 thereof empowered the Board to amend the terms and conditions of supply from time to time.
926 The Board issued a Notification dated July 16, 1968 (Exhibit P 2) providing that the rates for supply of power at 66 K.V. to the appellant company availed of by them as per the agreement dated October 21, 1948 be revised to Rs.200 per K.W. per year.
The supplemental agreement with the appellant dated May 10, 1965 which pertained to the additional supply of power for a period of ten years at Rs.140 per K.W. per year was, however, left undisturbed.
The appellant in a writ petition before the High Court assailed the enhancement in the electricity tariff, contending that the terms for the supply of electricity to the appellant 's industrial unit were governed by the agreement dated October 21, 1948 entered into by the company with the erstwhile Travancore State; that the agreement, in terms of Section 60 of the Electricity Supply Act, should be deemed to have been entered into by the Electricity Board and that during the subsistence of the said agreement the rates fixed therein were immune from any unilateral upward revision even if the purported enhancement was pursuant to the statutory regulations made under Section 49(2).
It was further contended that the enhancement being selective and discriminatory, was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The writ petition having been dismissed by a Single Judge of the High Court, and the Division Bench having confirmed the order of dismissal in appeal, the appellant appealed to this Court by Special Leave.
In the appeal it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the agreement, Exhibit P I, though one entered into prior to the constitution of the 'Board ' was, by virtue of Section 60 of the Act, one which should be deemed to have been entered into by or with the Board, and must also be held to be referable to Section 49(3) of the Act.
Relying on the decision of this Court in Indian Aluminium Co. vs Kerala Electricity Board, , it was contended that the agreement must be regarded as having been entered into by the Board in exercise of its statutory powers under Section 49(3) of the Act, and therefore, immune from the operation of the Kerala State Electricity Board (General Tariffs) Regulations, 1966.
It was also submitted that power under Section 49(1) would be available to the statutory authority enabling an unilateral upward revision of the tariff only if the agreement itself enabled such revision, that as long as the agreement did subsist and was not terminated a unilateral change was impermissible and that the appellant was subjected to a steep revision in the tariffs while other similarly circumstanced high tension consumers were left unaffected.
927 On behalf of the respondent Board it was urged that Exhibit P 1 could not be held to fall under, and be protected by, Section 49(3) of the Act; that the agreement having been anterior to the commencement of the 'Act ' itself could not be held to have been entered into for "purposes of the Act" within the meaning of Section 60; that the agreement could not be deemed to be one entered into by the Board under Section 60(1), because it did not satisfy the essential requirement of having been entered into by the State Government; that the Board had not done anything with reference to the agreement which could attract Section 60 to it and though the obligations of the State Government became the obligations of the Board, the agreement itself did not qualify for recognition under Section 60 of the Act; that there was not fixity of tenure with reference to and in the context of which alone any immunity from unilateral alteration under Section 49(1) and (2) could be conceived and measured.
It was further contended that the additional agreement dated May 10, 1965 was for an independent purpose and that the action of the Board in entering into this agreement did not constitute any such Act in relation to the original agreement as would constitute a conscious adoption by the Board of the original agreement, so as to attract Section 60(1); that the essential quality of the agreement which qualified for recognition and protection as one made in exercise of the Board 's power under Section 49(3) was its distinctiveness as to the period of operation and that the protection and immunity from unilateral increase of tariff could only be with reference to the period of the agreement.
Two questions arose for consideration: (1) Whether the agreement datecd October 21, 1948 (Exhibit P 1) should be held to be one which was deemed to have been entered into by the Board under Section 60 of the Act and whether it is required to be considered as one entered into by the Board in exercise of its powers under Section 49(3) of the Act, and (2) Whether the enhancement under the Notification dated July 16, 1968 (Exhibit P 2) brings about a hostile discrimination against the appellant, because for similarly situated and circumstanced High Tension Consumers there was no such revision of the tariff.
Dismissing the Appeal, ^ HELD:1(i) The Board 's power to enter into an agreement fixing a special tariff for a 'specified period ' is relatable to Section 49(3).
[938H] (ii)One of the tests whether an agreement is entered into in exercise of the power under Section 49(3) is that such agreement has the effect of excluding the other statutory power under Section 49(1).
[939A] 928 (iii) The main consideration for protection from unilateral increase under Section 49(1) is the 'period factor ' in an agreement.
[939A B] (iv) A contract which does not provide for, an obligation to supply electricity at a specific rate for a specific period and does not, therefore, have the effect of excluding Section 49(1) cannot be said to fall under Section 49(3).
[939G] (v) If by an unilateral, volitional act on the part of the Board the assurance of a fixed rate to the consumer could be denuded that circumstances, in itself, would be such as to detract from the agreement being considered as one entered into in exercise of power under Section 49(3).
[939G H] In the instant case, the agreement was precarious in regard to the period of its operation and was susceptible to termination at the volition of the Board.
It cannot, therefore, be construed as one which was intended to give a statutory protection for the tariff by means of a special agreement by the exercise of the statutory power of the Board under Section 49(3).
[940D] Indian Aluminium Co. vs Kerala Electricity Board, ; and Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd. vs Rajasthan State Electricity Board, , referred to.
(vi) In a long term contract of indefinite duration it is not unusual to find provisions for cancellation with reasonable notice and for payment of compensation in the event of termination.
It is also not unusual to infer, under certain circumstances, terminability by notice even in the absence of an express provision in that behalf, upon a construction of the contract.
A contract which contains no express provision for its termination may well be terminated by reasonable notice by one or the other party depending upon the implication of a term or upon a true construction of the agreement.
This principle has no application in the instant case.
[941C D] Staffordshire Area Health Authority vs South Staffordshire Water Works Co., [1978] 3 AII E.R. p. 769, referred to.
(vii) The agreement dated October 21, 1948 Exhibit P I, therefore, does not qualify to be recognised and protected under Section 49(3) of the Act.
[941E] 929 2(i) The Board while denying that there was any hostile discrimination, averred that no similarly situate consumer had been left out of the tariff revision and only cases that had been left out were those where the Board, owing to the subsistence of the agreements protected under Section 49(3), was under the legal inhibition from making an unilateral enhancement.
[943E F] 2(ii) The charge of discrimination against the respondent Board could not be said to have been established.
Indeed the appellant had not laid a proper foundation for examination of a case of discrimination under Article 14.
[944C] (iii) The allegations of discrimination ought to be specific.
Action of Governmental authorities must be presumed to be reasonable and in public interest.
It is for the person assailing that presumption to plead and prove the contrary.
But in the instant case the allegations are in general terms.
[944D] State of Maharashtra and Anr.
vs Basantilal Mohanlal Khetan and Ors., ; para 12 and Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs State of J & K, ; at 1357, referred to.
In the instant case, the respondent Board while denying that there was any hostile discrimination, averred that no similarly situate consumer had been left out of the tariff revision, and only cases where the consumer had the protection of an agreement under Section 49(3) which prevented the unilateral increase, had been left out.
[944D E] Bisra Stone Lime Co, vs Orissa State Electricity Board, ; , referred to.
