The petitioners were dealers carrying on business in the City of Madras in the sale and purchase of yarn.
The dealers in the State of Andhra used to place orders for the purchase of yarn with the petitioners in Madras, where the contracts were concluded and the goods were delivered ex godown at Madras and thereafter despatched to the purchasers who would take delivery of them within their State.
The present dispute related to sales in which property in the goods sold passed outside the State of 1423 Andhra, but the goods themselves were actually delivered as a result of the sale for consumption within that State.
After the coming into force of the Constitution of India the President in the exercise of the powers conferred by article 372(2) made Adaptation Orders with reference to the Sales Tax Laws of all the States, and as regards the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, he issued an Amendment inserting a new section, section 22 in that Act, which was a verbatim reproduction of the Explanation to article 286 (i)(a) of the Constitution.
Oil July 13, 1954, the Board of Revenue (Commercial Taxes) in the State of Andhra, acting on the decision in The State of Bombay and another vs The United Motors (India) Ltd., and others; , , called upon dealers in the State of Madras to submit returns of their turnover of sales in which goods were delivered in the State of Andhra for consumption.
Thereupon they filed the present petitions under article 32 Of the Constitution challenging the demand on the grounds, inter alia, that the sales proposed to be taxed were inter State sales and that they were immune from taxation under article 286(2) Of the Constitution.
While the petitions were pending the Supreme Court pronounced on September 6, 1955, its judgment in The Be gal Immunity Company Limited vs The State of Bihar and others, [1055] 2 S.C.R. 603, according to which the petitioners were not liable to be taxed.
But before final orders were passed on the petitions Parliament passed Sales Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956, section 2 whereof provided that no law of a State imposing or authorising the imposition of tax on inter State sales during the period between April 1, 1951, and September 6, 1955, shall be deeme to be invalid or ever to have been invalid merely by reason of the fact that the sales took place in the course of the inter State trade.
That section further provided that taxes levied or collected on such sales during the aforesaid period shall be deemed to have been validly levied or collected.
It was the con tention of the State of Andhra that by reason of the aforesaid provision it had the right to impose tax on inter State sales during the aforesaid period.
On the other hand the petitioners contended, inter alia, that (I) section 22 Of the Madras General Sales Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956, which gave validity to laws which imposed a tax, did not authorise the imposition, (2) the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act was ultra vires article 286(2), (3) section 22 of the Madras Act was not a "law of a State" within article 286(2) and section 2 of the impugned Act, (4) the impugned Act only validated levies already made and did not authorise the initiation of fresh proceedings for imposing tax, (5) section 22 having been unconstitutional when it was enacted and therefore void, no proceedings could be taken thereunder on the basis of the Validation Act, as the effect of unconstitutionality of the law was to efface it out of the statute book, and (6) the proposed levy was bad as infringing the Rule which provided that the sale of yarn could be taxed only at one point.
It was also contended that under the Constitution it was only the Parliament that has the competence to impose tax on inter State sales and that the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act 1424 was bad in that it gave validity, to the laws of the State to impose the tax : Held (Sarkar J. dissenting), that section 22 of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, did in fact impose a tax on the class of sales covered by the Explanation to article 286(1)(a) but that it was conditional on the ban enacted on article 286(2) being lifted by law of Parliament as provided therein, and that it was therefore validated by section 2 of the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956.
The construction put upon the Explanation to article 286(1)(a) of the Constitution in The Bengal Immunity Company case that it merely prohibited the outside States from imposing a tax on the class of sales falling within the Explanation and did not confer on the delivery State any power to impose a tax on such sales has no application to a taxing statute of a State the object of which was primarily to confer power on the State to levy and collect tax.
Section 22 and section 2(h) of the Madras General Sales Tax Act must be read together as ' defining the sales which are taxable under the Act.
Mettur Industries Ltd. vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1957 Mad.
362, The Mysore Spinning and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Madras, A.I.R. 1957 Mad. 368 and Dial Das vs P. section Talwalkay, A.I.R. 1957 Bom.
71, approved.
Mathew vs Travancore Cochin Board of Revenue, A.I.R. 1957 T. C. 300, Cochin Coal Co. Ltd. vs The State of Travancore Cochin, (1956) 7 Sales Tax Cases 731 and The Government of Andhra vs Nooney Govin arajulu, (1957) 8 Sales Tax Cases 297, disapproved.
Queen vs Burah, (1878) 5 I.A. 178 and In Ye The , etc.
; , relied on : Held (Per section R. Das, C. J., Venkatarama Aiyar, section K. Das and Vivian Bose, JJ.) that (i) the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956, is in substance one lifting the ban on taxation of interState sales and is within the authority conferred on Parliament tinder article 2 6(2) and further that under that provision it was competent to Parliament to enact a law with retrospective operation.
Punjab Province vs Daulat Singh, (1946) L.R. 73 I.A. 59, distinguished.
The United Province vs Atiqa Bcgum, , (2) the Adaptation Order made by the President under article 372(2) is valid and is not open to attack on the ground that it goes beyond the limits contemplated by that Article.
(3)the expression " law of a State " in article 286(2) and section 2 of the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act means whatever operates as law in the State, and that section 22 of the Madras General Sales Tax Act is a law within those enactments.
1425 (4) section 2 of the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act validates not only the levies already collected but also authorises the imposition of tax on sales falling within the Explanation which had taken place during the period specified in section 2.
The Act is not a temporary Act though its operation is limited to sales taking place within a specified period.
Dial Das vs P. section Talwalkay, A.I.R. 1937 Bom.
71, in so far as it held that it was not competent to the State to start fresh proceedings for assessment, disapproved.
(5) though section 22 of the Madras General Sales Tax Act was unconstitutional when enacted the effect of the unconstitu tionality was not to efface it out of the statute book.
Unconstitutionality might arise either because the law is in respect of a matter not within the competence of the legislature or because the matter itself being within the competence, its provisions offend some constitutional restrictions.
Which a law which is not within the competence of the legislature is a nullity a law on a topic within its competence but repugnant to any constitutional prohibition is only unenforceable.
In the latter class of legislation when once the constitutional prohibition is removed the law becomes enforceable without re enactment.
Where an enactment is unconstitutional in part but valid as to the rest, assuming that the two portions are severable, it cannot be held to have been wiped out of the statute book, as admittedly it must remain there for the purpose of enforcement of the valid portion.
Moreover in the view that the impugned law is conditional legislation it cannot be held to have become non est.
Behram Khurshed Pesikaka vs The State of Bombay, [1955] I S.C.R. 6I3 and A. V. Fernandez vs State of Kerala, ; , distinguished.
Bhikaji Narayan Dhakras and others vs The State of Madhya Pradesh and a other; , , relied on.
(6) under Entry 42 in List 1, Sch.
VII of the Constitution, legislation with respect to inter State trade and commerce is exclusively within the competence of Parliament.
Under Entry 54, List 11, taxes on sale of goods is within the exclusive competence of the State Legislature, and reading the two Entries together Entry 42 must be construed as excluding the power to tax sale of goods.
The scheme of the Entries in the Lists is that taxation is regarded as a distinct matter and is separately set out.
Entry 42, List 1, must therefore be construed as not including the power to impose tax on inter State sales.
(7) the proposed imposition does not infringe the rule that the sales of yarns should be subject to taxation at a single point because the proposed levy is by the State of Andhra and the rule in question prohibits only multiple taxation in the same State.
Per Sarkar J.
The Sales Tax Act does not authorise the taxation of a sale under which goods are delivered in the State of 1426 Andhra but the property in them passes outside that State.
The Explanation in section 22 of the Act only contemplates a State other than Andhra as the State inside which a sale shall be deemed to have taken place.
The words " for the purposes of clause (a)(i) " have the same meaning in the Explanation in article 286(1) as in the Explanation in section 22 of the Act, and the present case is not distinguishable from the decision in The Bengal Immunity Company Limited vs The State of Bihar and others,
