The respondent "dealer" registered under the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 was carrying on the business of manufacture of oils from groundnuts and other oil seeds, and was under section 3 D of the Act, liable to purchase tax on oil seeds at 3% ad valorem on the turnover of its purchases from the cultivators or other unregistered dealers.
Section 4 B of the Act contemplated special reliefs in purchase tax to certain manufacturers of 'notified goods ', if the "dealer holds a recognitioncertificate issued under sub section (2) in respect thereof".
Sub rule (5) of Rule 25 A of the U.P. Sales Tax Rules, 1948, however, stipulated that a 'recognition certificate ' issued for purposes of Section 4 B of the Act "shall take effect from the date of its issue.
" On 10.2.1969 the State Government notified oils of all kinds to be "notified goods" for purposes of section 4 B entitling the dealer to a concessional rate of purchase tax at 2% on the raw material required for the manufacture of the "notified goods".
On 21.3.1969, respondent applied under section 4 B(2) for the grant of a recognition certificate, which was granted only on 5.12.1969.
The relief to the respondent in the form of concessional rate of purchase tax was accordingly confined and limited to the turnover of such first purchases made only after 5.12.1969, the date of issue of the recognition certificate.
In the writ petition filed by the respondent, the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court, by majority, accepted its contention that the clause in sub rule (5) of Rule 25 A regarding the effective date of the recognition certificate was at cross purposes with and did not carry out the objects of Section 4 B and was therefore, ultra vires section 4 B.
The High Court held that the requirements of section 4 B were substantially complied with if the dealer, at the time of assessment, held a recognition certificate, subject to the requirement that the turnover was after the date of the application.
262 Before this Court the Revenue contended that the interpretation placed by the High Court runs in the teeth of the express statutory language and the clear intendment of the provision that the dealer should hold the 'recognition certificate ' at the time of the purchases.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, ^ HELD: (1) There is nothing basically wrong in the approach of the High Court that the statutory language does not insist upon the contemporaneity of the holding of the certificate with the purchases and that it was suffcient if the dealer, subsequently, came to hold a certificate "in respect thereof".
[267D E] (2) To insist upon a contemporaneity would amount to qualifying the word 'holds ' in section 4 B by adding the words "at the time of the purchases".
[267E] (3) The words "in respect thereof" are "colourless words", but in section 4 B they are, in their reference to the certificate, suffciently, though non specifically, wide enough to include a certificate obtained later but pertaining to the turnover in question.
[267F G] (4) The rule which compels only its prospective operation might, not unreasonably, be held to be inconsistent with the ultra vires of section 4 B. There is nothing unreasonable in this construction of section 4 B. Indeed, by the 1978 Amendment, this position has been made clear in the rule itself, which after the amendment, expressly provides that the certificate will take effect from the date of the application made by the dealer and not merely from the date of the issue.
[267G H; 268A] Trustees vs IRC.
, , referred to.
