The first respondent was a tenant of two adjacent shops, under a single lease, obtained from two co owners.
The co owners transferred their respective shares separately.
Pursuant to partition between the transferees, the appellant became the exclusive owner of one of the shops.
The appellant instituted proceedings and obtained an order for the eviction of the first respondent from his shop on the ground of own bonafide need.
The District Judge upheld that order.
The High Court, however, in a writ petition accepted the contention of the first respondent that in claiming possession of a part of the subject matter of the original lease the appellant as seeking to split the integrity and unity of the tenancy, which was impermissible in law.
The High Court accordingly set aside the concurrent orders of the courts below.
Allowing the appeal, it was ^ HELD: (1) A landlord could not split the unity and integrity of the tenancy and recover possession of a part of the demised premises from the tenant.
But section 109 of the provided a statutory exception of this rule.
By virtue of this exception, the limitation on the right of the landlord against splitting up of the integrity of the tenancy, inhering in the inhibitions of his own contract, did not visit the assignee of the part of the reversion.
There was no need for the consent of the tenant for the severance of the reversion and the 256 assignment of the part so severed.
[258C E] (2) Though there was difference of opinion among the various High Courts on the point, the learned Judge in this case should have considered himself bound by an earlier decision of the same High Court in Ram Chandra Singh case which had taken the view that section 109 of the T.P. Act was attracted to the case of partition also.
[259G H] (3) Without pronouncing on the correctness of the decision in Ram Chandra Singh 's case, this Court applied the same rule; and reversed the High Court on the point and restored the order of eviction.
[260B] Kannyan vs Alikutty, AIR 1920 Mad 838 (FB): Badri Narain Jha and Ors.
vs Rameshwar Dayal & Ors., ; and Ram Chandra Singh vs Ram Saran & Ors., AIR 1978 All. 173, referred to.
