This appeal by special leave against the judgment of the High Court in writ petition, and the writ petition filed in this Court were directed against an order of detention passed by the District Magistrate against the appellant under sub section
(2) of section 3 of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activities Act, 1985 with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
The appellant was a comission agent or broker engaged in illicit business of liquor traffic at Godhara in the State of Gujarat where there is total prohibition by importing liquor from Vanswada in Rajasthan.
On prior information that the appellant was about to import liquor in a truck on the night between 29th/30th December, 1986, the Gujarat police intercepted the truck and found it laden with cases containing bottles of whisky and beer, etc.
It was evident from the statements of the driver and the cleaner that the appellant had purchased the liquor from Vanswada.
The appellant could not be traced till 2nd February, 1987, when he was arrested but later released on bail.
On 28th May, 1987, the District Magistrate, Godhara, passed an order of detention and served it alongwith the grounds of detention on the appellant on the 30th when he was taken into custody.
The immediate and proximate cause for the detention was that on 29th/30th December, 1986, he had transported in bulk foreign liquor from Vanswada in Rajasthan for delivery in the State of Gujarat and indulged in anti social activities by doing illicit business of foreign liquor.
The grounds furnished particulars of two other criminal cases, namely (i) Criminal Case No. 303/82 on account of recovery of 142 bottles of foreign liquor seized from his residence on 21st July, 1982, which had ended in acquittal as the prosecution witnesses turned hostile, and (ii) Criminal Case No. 150/86 relating to seizure of 24 bottles of foreign liquor from his house on 30th May, 1986, which was still pending.
288 The appellant filed the writ petition in the High Court assailing the order of detention.
The High Court declined to interfere.
The appellant then filed in this Court the appeal by special leave against the decision of the High Court and the writ petition, against the order of detention.
Dismissing the appeal and the writ petition, the Court ^ HELD: When any person is detained in pursuance of an order made under any law of preventive detention, the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such person the grounds of detention and afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order.
The power of preventive detention underany law for preventive detention is necessarily subject to the limitations enjoined on the exercise of such power by article 22(5) as construed by this Court.
The Court must be circumspect in striking down an order of detention where it meets with the requirements of article 22(5) of the Constitution.
[294C E; 295D E] Since preventive detention is a serious inroad on individual liberty and its justification is the prevention of inherent danger of activity prejudicial to the community, the detaining authority must be satisfied as to the sufficiency of the grounds which justify the taking of the drastic measure of preventive detention.
The requirements of article 22(5) are satisfied once 'basic facts and materials ' which weighed with the detaining authority in reaching his subjective satisfaction are communicated to the detenu.
There is apt to be some delay between the prejudicial activity complained of in section 3(1) of the Act and the making of an order of detention.
When a person is detected in the act of smuggling or foreign exchange racketeering, the Directorate of Enforcement has to make a thorough investigation into all the facts with a view to determining the identity of the persons engaged in these operations.
Their statements have to be recorded; their books of accounts and other related documents have to be examined.
Sometimes such investigation has to be carried on for months together.
The Directorate has to consider whether there is necessity in the public interest to direct the detention of a person under section 3(1) of the Act with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the conservation and augmentation of foreign exchange or from engaging in smuggling of goods, etc.
The proposal has to be cleared at the highest quarter and then placed before a Screening Committee.
If the Screening Committee approves, the proposal is placed before the detaining authority.
The detaining authority would necessarily insist upon sufficiency of grounds which 289 would justify the preventively detaining of the person.
Viewed from this prospective, the Court emphasised for the guidance of the High Courts that a distinction must be drawn between delay in making an order of detention under a law relating to preventive detention and the delay in complying with the procedural safeguards of article 22(5) of the Constitution.
The rule as to unexplained delay in taking action is not inflexible.
The Courts should not merely on account of delay in making an order of detention assume that the delay, if not satisfactorily explained, must necessarily give rise to an inference that there was no sufficient material for the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority or that such subjective satisfaction was not genuinely reached.
Taking of such a view would not be warranted unless the Court finds that the grounds are 'stale ' or illusory or that there is no real nexus between the grounds and the order of detention.
The decisions to the contrary by the Delhi High Court in Anil Kumar Bhasin vs Union of India & Ors., Crl.
W. No. 410/86 dated 2.2.1987; Bhupinder Singh vs Union of India & Ors., ; Anwar Esmail Aibani vs Union of India & Ors., Crl.
W. No. 375/86 dated 11.12.1986; Surinder Pal Singh vs M.L. Wadhawan Delhi Administration, Crl.
W. No. 43/84 dated 16.4.1984 and Cases taking the same view did not lay down good law and were overruled.
In this case, the appellant was arrested on 2nd February, 1987.
The order of detention of the appellant was passed on 28th May, 1987.
Though there was no explanation for the delay between 2nd February and 28th May, 1987, it could not give rise to a legitimate inference that the subjective satisfaction arrived at by the District Magistrate was not genuine or that the grounds were stale or illusory or that there was no rational connection between the grounds and the impugned order of detention.
[295F G; 296B H; 297A G; 298C D] It could not be said that there was lack of awareness on the part of the District Magistrate on 28th May, 1987 in passing the order of detention as he did.
There was a mention in the grounds of the two criminal cases against the detenu Criminal Case No. 303/82 and Criminal Case No. 150/86 and also a recital of the fact that he was continuing his business surreptitiously and he could not be caught easily and, therefore, there was compelling necessity to detain him.
[300D] The contention regarding lack of certainty and precision on the part of the detaining authority as to the real purpose of detention and that they were 'all rolled up into one ' was of little or no consequence.
The purpose of detention is to prevent the appellant from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
It was disputed 290 that the prejudicial activities of the appellant answered the description of a 'bootlegger ' as defined in section 2(b) and, therefore, he came within the purview of sub section
(1) of section 3 of the Act by reason of sub section
(4) thereof.
Sub section
(4) of section 3 with the explanation thereto gives an enlarged meaning to the words 'acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order '.
The district magistrate in passing the impugned order recorded his subjective satisfaction that with a view to preventing the appellant from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, it was necessary to make an order that he be detained.
In the accompanying grounds of detention this was the basis for the formation of his subjective satisfaction, and it was stated therein that unless the order of detention was made he would not stop his illicit liquor traffic on brokerage and, therefore, it was necessary to detain him under section 3(2) of the Act.
[300E G; 301C D] The contention that there was unexpected delay in the disposal of the representation made by the appellant to the State Government was wholly misconceived.
The representations were made by the appellant on 8th June, 1987.
The State Government acted with promptitude and rejected them on 12th June, 1987.
There was no delay.
[301F G] The appeal and the writ petition failed.
Khudiram Das vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Narendra Purshottam Umrao vs B.B. Gujral, ; ; Olia Mallick vs State of West Bengal, ; Golam Hussain @ Gama vs Commissioner of Police, Calcutta & Ors., ; ; Odut Ali Miah vs State of West Bengal, ; Vijay Narain Singh vs State of Bihar, [1954] 3 SCC 14; Gora vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Raj Kumar Singh vs State of Bihar & Ors., ; ; Hemlata Kantilal Shah vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Bal Chand Bansal vs Union of India & Ors., J.T. ; Ramesh Yadav vs District magistrate, Etah, and Suraj Pal Sahu vs State of Maharashtra, ; , referred to.
Anil Kumar Bhasin vs Union of India & Ors., Crl.
W. No. 410/86 dated 2.2.1987; Bhupinder Singh vs Union of India & Ors., ; Anwar Esmail Alibani vs Union of India & Ors., Crl.
W. No. 375/86 dated 11.12.1986; Surinder Pal Singh vs M.L. Wadhawan & Ors., Crl.
W. No. 444/86 dated 9.3.1987 and Ramesh Lal vs Delhi Administration, Crl.
W. No. 43/84 dated 16.4.1984, overruled.
