The respondent landlord had filed a petition against the appellant tenant under section 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for eviction from a residential cum commercial premises, inter alia, on the ground that the appellant had sublet, assigned or otherwise parted with possession of the premises to his sons who were running their partnership business in the name of Bindra Tent House with which the tenant had no concern.
The tenant contested the petition on the ground that he was in exclusive possession of the premises and was carrying on his business therein with the help of his sons who were members of his Joint Hindu Family.
In support of his plea that the tenant had parted with possession, the landlord had produced documentary evidence which included copy of a statement made by the tenant before the Income Tax officer, which indicated that the tenant had sold his proprietary business to his sons.
The Additional Rent Controller held that there was no subletting by the tenant, but he had unlawfully parted with the possession of the premises in favour of his sons and as such was liable to be evicted.
During the pendency of the appeal the tenant sought permission under order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure to amend his written statement to state that the property was taken on rent by M/s Bindra Tent House.
The Tribunal did not permit this belated amendment as this would have introduced an entirely new case.
On merits, the Tribunal dismissed the appeal of the tenant.
The High Court did not find any substantial question of law in the tenant 's second appeal and dismissed the same.
Allowing the appeal, it was, 326 ^ HELD: (1) The only ground perhaps upon which the landlord A was seeking eviction was parting with possession.
It is well settled that parting with possession meant giving possession to persons other than those to whom possession had been given by the lease and the parting with possession must have been by the tenant.
User by other person is not parting with possession so long as the tenant retains the legal possession himself, or in other words, there must be vesting of possession by the tenant in another person by divesting himself not only of physical possession but also of the right of possession.
So long as the tenant retains the right to possession there is no parting with possession in terms of clause (b) of section 14(1) of the Act.
[329G H; 330A] (2) Even though the father had retired from business and the sons had been looking after the business in the facts of this case, it cannot be said that the father had divested himself of the legal right to be in possession.
[330B] (3) In the instant case, if the father was carrying on the business with his sons and the family was a joint family, it is difficult to presume that the father had parted with possession legally to attract the mischief of section 14(1)(b) of the Act.
[330D E] (4) In these days of acute shortage of accommodation both for living and for vocation, one has to take the reality with a pinch of salt and the manner in which the original tenant has conducted himself in shifting his defence would not disentitle him to the benefit of the law.
[330Gl Subashini Mojumdar vs Krishna Prasad Mahatoo, A.I.R. ; M/s Modi Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs M/s Ladha Ram and Co., ; and Smt.
Krishnawati vs Shri Hans Rai, , referred to.
