The assessee respondent had advanced a sum of Rs.4,00,000 to his partner Faizullabhai Mandlawala which sum was employed as a part of Mandlawala 's capital in their partnership firm.
The assessee sought to have the value of that loan excluded from his wealth on the claim that this loan was what was known to Muslim Law as 'Quaraza e Hasana ' a debt of good faith and goodwill carrying with it no legal obligation on the part of the debtor to repay and correspondingly, no right on the part of assessee to expect, much less enforce a repayment.
This claim was supported by debtor 's declaration that the sum was received by him 'without any obligation and without any rate of interest and without any consideration. ' The Wealth Tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner found it difficult to accept this claim.
The Appellate Tribunal, however, accepting the assessee 's claim held that the loan partook of the character of 'Quaraza e Hasana ' with its special incidents as known to Muslim Law; that the transaction was one of good faith and goodwill and lacked the concomitants of a legally enforceable claim for repayment and that, therefore, the amount was not a debt due to the assessee.
The High Court upheld this view.
It was contended on behalf of the Revenue (1) that the Tribunal as well as the High Court erroneously accepted the hypothetical incidents of a supposedly peculiar institution of the personal law of the Muslims, any rule or tenet of Muslim Law respecting which had not having been established; (2) that both the Tribunal and the High Court, while rightly noticing that the special incidents of what was called 'Quaraza e Hasana ' had not been established, gave the benefit of doubt as to the 228 very existence of this institution of 'Quaraza e Hasana ' to the assessee, and (3) that the reliance by the High Court on the incidents of 'Hiba ba shart ul iwaz ', a form of Mussalman gift, was misplaced as this kind of gift expressly stipulated contemporaneous liability for a return.
Counsel for the assessee, sought to support the conclusions of the High Court on an alternative and independent ground that, at all events, by entering into this transaction the parties must be held not to have intended to create a legal obligation between them and that, therefore, the debt remained a debt of honour.
It was contended that an agreement would not, by itself, yield legal obligations unless it was one which could reasonably be regarded as having been made in contemplation of creating legal consequences, and that in this case the parties must be held to have excluded the contemplation of legal consequences flowing from the transaction.
Allowing the appeal it was, ^ HELD: (1) As no authoritative text nor any principle or precedent recognised in Muslim Law was cited before the High Court or this Court, establishing the nature, content and incidents of the institution of 'Quaraza e Hasana ', it was not possible to say, one way or the other, whether Courts could recognise and act upon such a rule of Muslim Law much less afford relief to the proponent of that rule.
[232G H; 233A B] (2) If the concept of 'Qard Hasan ' was the same as that of 'Quaraza e Hasana ', the obligation on the part of the debtor of the loan to repay nor the right of the creditor to repayment were excluded.
The only incident appeared to be that it was 'interest free '.
[234C] (3) The reliance by the High Court on the concept of mussalman gift 'Hiba ba shart ul Iwaz ' did not help the assessee because this kind of gift stipulated liability for return.
[232E F] (4) The debt, though a 'passive debt ' would require to be treated as due and payable to the assessee.
It was not the assessee 's case that the debt was bad and irrecoverable.
The debtor 's declaration itself established its existence.
[235B] (5) Where, as in the instant case, the tax implications of large financial obligations were sought to be put an end to, the burden as heavy on the assessee to establish that what would otherwise be the usual incidents of the transaction were excluded from contemplation by 229 the parties.
Here, one partner had lent a large sum to the other to be utilized as capital in the partnership venture.
The transaction was in the context of a commercial venture.
The presumption therefore, was that legal obligations were intended.
The onus was on the parties asserting the absence of legal obligations.
The test was not subjective to the parties, but an objective one.
[236E F] (6) The non enforceability of debt was pleaded not as a part of what was permissible in law of contracts, but specifically as some inexorable incident of a particular tenet peculiar to and characteristic of the personal law of the Muslims.
That not having been established, no appeal could be made to the principle of permissibility of exclusion of legal obligations in the law of contracts.
In the instant case, the admitted existence of a debt implied an obligation to repay.
No legal bar of the remedy was pleaded.
What was set up, and was unsubstantiated, was the non existence of the remedy itself.
The loan would therefore become includible in the wealth of the assessee.
[238C E] Rose and Franc Co. vs J.R. Crompton and Bros. Ltd., [1923] 2 K.B. 261; Edwards vs Skyways, ; Bahamas Oil Refining Co. vs Kristiansands Tankraderie A/s and others and Shell International Marine Ltd., [1978] Lloyds Law Reports 211, referred to.
