Burmah Shell oil Storage and Distributing Company of India Limited had a non contributory pension fund.
Consequent upon nationalisation of the petroleum industry, this fund was taken over by the Government company, respondent No. 1, under section 10(1) of the Burmah Shell Acquisition of Undertakings in India) Act 2 of 1976.
In this writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution the erstwhile Burmah Shell Management Staff Pensioners claimed adequate escalation in their pension keeping in view the loss of purchasing power of the rupee and the general rise in the cost of living.
In support of their claim they relied upon the steep escalation in the pension granted by the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation, a sister concern, to its employees.
The latter has no such fund.
It was contended for the respondent Company that if the escalation admitted by the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation is accepted as the basis for escalation in the respondent company there would be injustice or a burden would arise which they cannot discharge.
Allowing the writ petition, ^ HELD: 1.
The petitioners being the management staff of the Burmah Shell are entitled to a hike in the pension.
[316E F] 2.
Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that the rupee has lost its value to a considerable extent.
Pension is no longer considered as a bounty and it has been held to be property.
In a welfare state, as ours, 313 rise in the pension of the retired personnel, who are otherwise entitled to it, is accepted by the State and the State has taken the liability.
In the instant case, if the similarly situated sister concern like Hindustan Petroleum Corporation can admit appropriate rise in the pension, there is no justification as to why the respondent company should not do so.
[316D E] 3.
The respondent company has an obligation to pay from its earnings into the fund and merely because the existing fund is not adequate to bear the additional liability the claim which is otherwise justified cannot be rejected.
The company 's current funds are available to supplement the pension fund.
[316C] 4.
Respondent No. 1 to give to the petitioners hike in the pension effective from 1st May, 1988 at the same rate as is being given by Hindustan Petroleum Corporation.
If the amount available from the pension fund is not adequate the Government company would allocate appropriate funds to meet the demand.
The additional pension to be disbursed latest by 31st of July, 1988.
[316F G]
