The Rajasthan Public Service Commission conducted an examination in 1985 for appointments to State Services.
The recruitment rules contained a provision that candidates should secure a minimum of 33% marks in the viva voce test.
Some of the candidates who failed to secure the minimum marks in viva voce challenged before the High Court the constitutionality of the provision in the Rules stipulating such minimum cut off marks.
The High Court declared the provision unconstitutional.
Before this Court, it was urged on behalf of the selected candidates and the State of Rajasthan, that (I) the High Court fell into a serious error in importing into the present case principles . which pertained to the proposition whether the setting apart of an excessive and disproportionately high percentage of marks for viva voce in comparison with the marks of the written examination would be arbitrary; and (2) the prescription of minimum qualifying marks for the viva voce test would not violate any constitutional principle or limitation, but was on the contrary a salutary and desirable provision.
On the other hand, it was urged that (1) the principles laid down by this Court, which the High Court had accepted, were sound and had acquired an added dimension in the context of the increasingly denuded standards of probity and rectitude in the discharge of public offices, and (2) the real thrust of the principles was that any marking procedure that made the oral test determinative of the fate of a candidate was, in itself, arbitrary, and if this test was applied to this case, the decision reached by the High Court would be unexceptionable.
380 Allowing the appeals, it was, ^ HELD:(1) A sensitive, devoted and professionally competent administrative set up could alone undertake the ever expanding social and economic roles of a welfare state.
[387A B] (2) The 'interview ' was now an accepted aid to selection and was designed to give the selectors some evidence of the personality and character of the candidates, which qualities were necessary and useful to public servants.
[388G H] (3) Academic excellence was one thing.
Ability to deal with the public with tact and imagination was another.
Both were necessary for an officer.
The dose that was demanded may vary according to the nature of the service.
Administrative and Police Services constituted the cutting edge of the administrative machinery and the requirement of higher traits of personality was not an unreasonable expectation.
[391D] Lila Dhar vs State of Rajasthan, [1982] 1 SCR 320 referred to.
(4) The observations made by this Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav were in the context where the spread of marks for the viva voce was so enormous, compared with the spread of marks for the written examination, that the viva voce test 'tended to become the determining factor '.
The reference was to the possibility of a candidate undeservedly being allotted high marks at the interview.
That was a very different thing from the question whether a candidate should acquire at least a certain minimum percentage of marks at the viva voce.
[394B C] Ashok Kumar Yadav vs State of Haryana, [1985] Supp.
1 SCR 657 explained.
State of U.P. vs Rafiquddin & Ors., (Judgment Today referred to.
(5) The prescription of minimum qualifying marks of 60 (33%) out of the maximum of 180 set apart for the viva voce examination did not, by itself, incur any constitutional infirmity.
The principles laid down by this Court in the case of Ajay Hasia Lila Dhar and Ashok Kumar Yadav did not militate against or render impermissible such a prescription.
[391B] Ajay Hasia vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors., ; ; Lila Dhar vs State of Rajasthan & Ors., and Ashok Kumar Yadav vs State of Haryana, distinguished.
(6) A mere possibility of abuse of a provision, did not, by itself, justify its invalidation.
The validity of a provision must be tested with reference to its operation and efficiency in the generality of cases and not 381 by the freaks or exceptions that its application might in some rare cases possibly produce.
[394F G]
