Respondent Ashok Deshmukh, was a Panchayat and Social Education Organiser in the Social Welfare Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, when he was temporarily posted as an officiating Block Development Officer in the Panchayat and Rural Development Department of the Government of Madhya Pradesh on 11th March, 1983.
His services were returned back to his parent department on 29th June, 1984.
Aggrieved by the order of repatriation, the respondent filed a suit in the Court of Civil Judge, Udaipura, and obtained a temporary injunction.
The temporary injunction having been vacated, he filed a writ petition in the High Court.
After the writ petition was admitted and stay order issued, the respondent withdrew the civil suit.
Two principal contentions were urged before the High Court were; (1) that the order of repatriation was contrary to Rule 14 of the M.P. Civil Services Rules, and (2) that the order of repatriation was the result of bias and mala fide attitude on the part of the Secretary, Panchayat and Rural Development Department.
The High Court held (1) that the order of repatriation had been passed in violation of Rule 14 of the Rules, and (2) that although there was no material on record to support the allegation of any bias and mala fide on the part of the Secretary, the order of repatriation was the result of certain `wrong complaints ' made against him.
The High Court quashed the order of repatriation and directed the State Government to retain the respondent as officiating Block Development Officer so long as persons junior to him were retained.
303 Allowing the appeal, it was, ^ HELD:(1) Rule 14 dealt with the question of reversion of a permanent Government servant from the officiating higher grade to the lower grade, and did not apply to a case of deputation from one department to another.
The High Court was, therefore, in error in holding that the impugned order of repatriation had been passed in violation of rule 14 of the Rules.
[307D F] (2) The allegations of bias and mala fides made against the Secretary have remained unsubstantiated.
Unless the Court is sure that the impugned order is really based upon allegations of bias and mala fides it should not proceed to quash administrative orders which are made in exigencies of the administration.
[310F G; C D] (3) If mere existence of some allegations against an officer, which on enquiry had been found to be untrue, were to be treated as the basis for quashing any order of transfer or repatriation made in respect of any officer then almost every such order of transfer or repatriation would have to be quashed because there would always be some complaint by some party or other against every officer.
[310C D] (4) The impugned order of repatriation did not on the face of it show that there was any stigma attached to the respondent by reason of the said order.
[310F] (5) On the material placed before it, the Court did not find that the order of repatriation was arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[310G] C. Thiraviam Pillai vs State of Kerala, [1976] 2 S.L.R. 395, referred to.
