The appellant was driving a jeep which met with an accident and one of the occupants died and another sustained grievous injuries.
According to the Police, the accident was attributable to rash and negligent driving of the appellant.
He was charge sheeted under section 279 IPC read with sections 304 A/338 IPC and a report was submitted to the Deputy Commissioner on 22nd November 1976.
The Magistrate held that cognizance was taken on 22nd November, 1976 itself.
The appellant moved the High Court under section 482 Cr.
P.C. read with article 227 of the Constitution.
The High Court held that the investigations started on 22nd November, 1976 on the registration of the case and were completed on 8th September, 1977, and cognizance was taken on 31st March, 1986 when the Deputy Commissioner passed an order for issuing summons to the appellant.
The High Court quashed the charges against the appellant and remitted the case to the Magistrate for considering it afresh.
This appeal by special leave is against the High Court Judgment.
It was contended before this Court that since cognizance was taken in 1986, it was barred by section 468 Cr.
On behalf of the Respondent it was contended that the provisions of Cr.
P.C. do not apply to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
478 Allowing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 Section 473 Cr.
P.C. provides that any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period of limitation, if it is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of the case that the delay has been properly explained or that it is necessary to do so in the interest of justice.
Taking cognizance means judicial application of mind of the Magistrate to the facts mentioned in the complaint with a view to taking further action.
[484E H] Tula Ram and others vs Kishore Singh, ; , referred to.
1.2 As regards the contention that Cr.
P.C. is not applicable to the State of Arunachal Pradesh, the High Court rightly held that section 32 of the Assam Frontier (Administration of Justice) Regulations, 1945, on which reliance was placed, should be guided by the spirit of the Code and it will be proper to throw out a complaint if there was inordinate or undue delay, which was not explained.
[483D E] State of Punjab vs Sarwan Singh, [1981] 3 SCR 349, referred to.
1.3 Statutes of limitation have legislative policy behind them.
They shut out belated and dormant claims in order to save the accused from unnecessary harassment.
They also save the accused from the risk of having to face trial at a time when his evidence might have been lost because of the delay on the part of the prosecution.
A bar has been prescribed under section 468 Cr.
P.C. and there is no reason why the appellant should not be entitled to it in the facts and circumstances of this case.
[484A C] Surinder Mohan Vikal vs Ascharaj Lal Chopra, ; , relied on.
Kathamuthu vs Balammal, ; Ghansham Dass vs Sham Sunder Lal, and Vijay Kumar Agarwalla vs State of Assam, , referred to.
In the instant case, the broad facts that emerge are that the alleged offence took place in November, 1976, and until the High Court 's order in August, 1987 no investigation had taken place.
The offence is of rash and negligent driving.
It is, as such, neither a grave and heinous offence nor an offence against the community as such, 479 though all criminal offences are crimes against society.
It is not necessary in the facts and circumstances of the case to decide, whether cognizance was properly taken, whether the extension of period of limitation under section 473 must precede taking of the cognizance of the offence, and whether cognizance in this case was taken on 8th September, 1977 as held by the learned Magistrate or on 31st March, 1986 as held by the High Court.
Having regard to the nature of offence there is enormous delay in proceeding with the criminal prosecution by the respondent 91/2 years for a trial for rash and negligent driving is too long a time.
Quick justice is a sine qua non of Article 21 of the Constitution.
Keeping a person in suspended animation for 91/2 years without any case at all cannot be with the spirit of the procedure established by law.
[484D G] C [This Court set aside the order of the High Court and quashed the proceedings against the appellant.] [485A B]
