The T.V. Serial 'Honi Anhoni ' was being telecast by Doordarshan on every Thursday between 9.00 P.M. and 9.30 P.M.
A writ petition was filed by the Respondents stating that the telecast was not in public interest as it had the effect of confirming blind faiths, superstitious beliefs in stories of ghosts, rebirth, precognition etc.
and of spreading the unscientific way of thinking and blind beliefs.
The High Court issued an interim order of injunction not to telecast and show episodes 12 and 13 of the serial.
Aggrieved by the interim order, the appellant, producer of the said serial, had come on appeal by special leave.
This Court, while granting special leave stayed the operation of the interim order passed by the High Court.
The appellant contended that the said serial and in particular episodes 12 and 13 did not emphasise superstitious beliefs but on the contrary criticised and condemned superstition and blind faith, and at the end of both the episodes a doctor and a professor gave a scientific explanation for the unusual occurrences portrayed therein and considered by people as supernatural phenomenon.
It was also submitted that the viewers were told that they should search for scientific reason whenever any unusual occurrence takes place.
Allowing the appeal, 487 ^ HELD:1.
Freedom of expression is a preferred right which is always very zealously guarded by this Court.
It can no longer be disputed that the right of a citizen to exhibit films on the Doordarshan subject to the terms and conditions to be imposed by the Doordarshan is a part of the fundamental right of freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India which can be curtailed only under circumstances which are set out in clause (2) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India.
The right is similar to the right of a citizen to publish his views through any other media such as newspaper, magazines, advertisement hoardings etc.
subject to the terms and conditions of the owners of the media.
[491B; 490C E] 2.
The High Court was in error in the present case in issuing the interim order of injunction which is set aside.
[492B] 3.1 The objection to the exhibition of the film was that it was likely to spread false or blind beliefs amongst the members of the public.
The Respondents had not asserted any right conferred on them by any statute or acquired by them under a contract which entitled them to secure an order of temporary injunction.
[491C D] 3.2 As alleged by the Respondents, if all the episodes in the serial were offensive they could have approached the High Court as early as possible within the first two or three weeks after the commencement of the exhibition of the serial.
But they waited till the exhibition of the 11th episode of the serial was over and then filed the petition.
They had not produced any material apart from their own statements to show that the exhibition of the serial was prima facie prejudicial to the community.
[491E G] 3.3 The High Court overlooked that the issue of an order of interim injunction in this case could infringe a fundamental right of the producer of the serial.
In the absence of any prima facie evidence of grave prejudice that was likely to be caused to the public generally by the exhibition of the serial it was not just and proper to issue an order of temporary injunction.
The exhibition of the serial in question was not likely to endanger public morality.
In the circumstances of the case the balance of convenience lay in favour of the rejection of the prayer for interim injunction.
[491G H; 492A] [This Court reserved its opinion on the question whether a citizen has a fundamental right to establish a private broadcasting station, or television centre, to be decided in an appropriate case.] [490E] 488
