The appellants have been appointed in the U.P. Civil Service as direct recruits on the basis of competitive examination held by the U.P. Service Commission.
They are governed by the U.P. Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1941.
The respondents were recruited under the U.P. Non Technical (Class II) Services (Reservation of Vacancies for Demobilised officers) Rules, 1973 and/or U.P.
Non Technical (Class II/Group 'B ') Services (Appointment of Demobilised officers) Rules, 1980.
They were either Emergency Commissioned officers or Short Service Commissioned Officers of the armed forces.
They were demobilised from the armed forces in or about 1968.
In order to rehabilitate such persons who rendered services to the country during the operation of the emergency when the nation 's security was in peril due to aggression, the 1973 Rules were framed under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution of India.
In 1976, a seniority list was prepared showing the respondents as seniors to the appellants on the basis of their service in the armed forces and the gaps between their discharge and recruitment in civil service.
Similar list was prepared in 1980 as well.
Aggrieved by this, the appellants moved two writ petitions before the High Court challenging the validity of the 1973 Rules as also the 1980 Rules.
The High Court held that these Rules were legal and valid and upheld the validity of the impugned seniority list.
These two appeals by special leave are against the High Court judgment.
On behalf of the appellants, it was contended that the High 575 Court 's interpretation of Rule 6 of the 1973 Rules relating to seniority and pay was in excess of the relief intended to be granted by the rule.
It was also urged that when a candidate who was in the armed forces joined civil service, the assumption should be that he had entered the civil service at the second opportunity of competing for the recruitment, but no other period including that between the discharge and recruitment would be taken into account for the purpose of computing his seniority.
The contention of the Respondents was that since only ten per cent of the vacancies were reserved for war service candidates, it was difficult for them to get a chance within a reasonable time after their discharge from war service and it would be quite consistent with rules of natural justice to take into account the interregnum between the date of discharge and the date of recruitment in civil service.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1.
The High Court was right in holding that the 1973 Rules as also the 1980 Rules are quite legal and valid.
However, under Rule 6 of the 1973 Rules or Rule 5 of the 1980 Rules, only a reasonable period of three years for taking the examination and the time taken for recruitment or posting would be taken into consideration for the purpose of computing seniority and pay.
[582D E] 1.2.
Under Rule 6 of the 1973 Rules, the recruitment of a war service candidate will be assumed to have been made in the year in which he had the second opportunity of competing for such recruitment, the first being on attaining the minimum age to compete.
It does not provide for the period between demobilisation and recruitment of a war service candidate in the civil service.
Nor does it forbid consideration of such period.
It cannot, however, he denied that after the discharge from war service, there will be some lapse of time for the recruitment of a candidate in the Provincial Civil Service.
There is a question of competing in the examination.
Though Rule 6 does not provide for any gap to be taken into consideration, it is apparent that some reasonable period has to be allowed to a candidate to enable him to avail himself of the opportunity of appearing at the competitive examination for recruitment in the Provincial Civil Service.
Competitive examinations are generally difficult and at least two years ' time should be allowed to a candidate, after his discharge, for his preparation for the competitive examination and that will be his first opportunity.
The second opportunity will arise in the next year, that is, in the third year 576 of his discharge from the armed forces.
In other words, he should be allowed three years for competing in the relevant examination for recruitment in the civil service.
Apart from the three years, the period of time taken for recruitment or posting will also be taken into consideration for the purpose of computing the seniority of a war service candidate.
[580H; 581C H] 1.3.
If, however, a candidate does not avail himself of the opportunity within three years of his discharge from war service or takes the examination but becomes unsuccessful, the period between his discharge and subsequent recruitment will not be taken into account for the purpose of computing the seniority.
[582C] [This Court set aside the judgment of the High Court relating to the interpretation of Rule 6 of the 1973 Rules, quashed the seniority lists of 1976 and 1980, and directed the State of U.P. to prepare the seniority list within six months in the light of this judgment.] [582F G]
