This was a reference under article 143(1) of the Constitution made by the President of India for obtaining the opinion of the 996 Court upon certain questions relating to the constitutional validity of some of the provisions of the Kerala Education Bill, 1957, which had been passed by the Kerala Legislative Assembly but was reserved by the Governor for the consideration of the President.
The Bill, as its title and preamble indicated, had for its object the better Organisation and development of the educational service throughout the State, presumably, in implementation of the provisions of article 45 of the Constitution and conferred wide powers of control on the State Government in respect of both aided and recognised institutions.
Of the four questions referred to this Court, the first and third impugned cl.
3(5) read with cl. 36 and cl. 15 of the Bill as being discriminatory under article 14, the second impugned cls.
3(5), 8(3) and cls.
9 to 13 Of the Bill as being violative of minority rights guaranteed by article 30(1) and the fourth, cl. 33 of the Bill, as offending article 226 of the Constitution.
Clause 3(5) of the Bill made the recognition of new schools subject to the other provisions of the Bill and the rules framed by the Government under cl.
(36), Cl.
(15) authorised the Government to acquire any category of 'Schools, cl.
8(3) made it obligatory on all aided schools to hand over the fees to the Government, cls.
9 to 13 made provisions for the regulation and management of the schools, payment of salary to the teachers and the terms and conditions of their appointment and cl.
(33) forbade the granting of temporary injunctions and interim orders in restraint of proceedings under the Act.
This Court took the view that since cl.
3(5) attracted the other provisions of the Bill, in case anyone of them was found to be unconstitutional, cl.
3(5) itself could not escape censure.
Held (per Das C. J., Bhagwati, B. P. Sinha, Jafer Imam, section K. Das and J. L. Kapur JJ.), that although article 143(1) Of the Constitution, which virtually reproduced the provisions of section 213(1) of the Government of India Act, 1935, gave this Court the discretion, where it thought fit, to decline to express any opinion on the questions referred to it, the objection that such questions related, not to a statute brought into force but, to the validity of a Bill that was yet to be enacted, could be no ground for declining to entertain the reference.
Article 143(1) of the Constitution had for its object the removal of the doubts at the President and was in no way concerned with any doubts that a party might entertain and no reference could be incomplete or incompetent on the ground that it did not include other questions that could have been included in it and it was not for this Court to go beyond the reference and discuss them.
The Advisory jurisdiction conferred by article 143(1) was different from that conferred by article 143(2) of the Constitution in that the latter made it obligatory on this Court to answer the reference.
In re Levy of Estate Duty, , relied on.
997 Attorney General for Ontario vs Hamilton Street Railway, , Attorney General for British Columbia vs Attorney General for Canada, , ln re The Regulation and Control of Aeronautics In Canada, [1932] A. C. 54, In re Allocation of Lands and Buildings, [1943] F. C. R. 20 and In Ye ; , , considered.
A directive principle of State policy could not override a fundamental right and must subserve it, but no Court should in determining the ambit of a fundamental right, entirely ignore a directive principle but should try to give as much effect to both as possible by adopting the principle of harmonious construction.
State of Madras vs Smt.
Champakam Doraiyajan, [1951] S.C.R. 525 and Mohd. Hanif Quayeshi vs The State of Bihar, ; , referred to.
In answering the questions under reference, the merits or otherwise of the policy of the Government sponsoring the Bill could be no concern of this Court and its sole duty was to pronounce its opinion on the constitutional validity of such provisions of the Bill as were covered by the questions.
judged in the light of the principles laid down by a series of decisions of this Court explaining article 14 Of the Constitution, the clauses of the Bill that came within questions 1 and 3 could not be said to be violative of that Article.
The restriction imposed by cl.
3(5) read with cl. 26 of the Bill, which made it obligatory on the guardians to send their wards to a Government or a private school in an area of compulsion and thus made it impossible for a new school in such area, seeking neither aid nor recognition, to function, could not be said to be discriminatory since the State knew best the needs of its people, and such discrimination was quite permissible, based, as it was, on geographical classification.
Mohd. Hanif Ouareshi vs The State of Bihar, [1959] section C. R. 629, Chiyanjit Lal Chowdhury vs The Union of India, , Ramkrishna Dalmia vs Sri justice section R. Tendolkar; , , referred to.
No statute could be discriminatory unless its provisions discriminated, and since the provisions of the Bill did not do so, it could not be said to have violated equal protection of law by its uniform application to all educational institutions although not similarly situate.
Cumberland Coal Co. vs Board of Revision, (1931) 284 U. section 23; ; , held inapplicable.
The policy and purpose of a statute could be deduced from its long title and the preamble.
The impugned Bill laid down its policy in the long title and the preamble and reinforced it by 998 more definite statements in the different clauses and, consequently, such discretion as it left to the Government had to be exercised in implementing that policy.
The use of the word may in cl.
3(3) could make no difference, for once the purpose was established and the conditions of the exercise of the discretion were fulfilled, it was incumbent on the Government to exercise it in furtherance of that purpose.
If it failed to do so, the failure, and not the Bill, must be censured.
Biswambar Singh vs The State of Orissa, ; and Julius vs Lord Bishop of Oxford, (1880) 5 App.
CaS. 214, referred to.
Discretionary power was not necessarily discriminatory, and abuse of power by the Government could not be lightly assumed.
Apart from laying down the policy, the State Legislature provided for effective control by itself by cl. 37 and the proviso to cl. 15 of the Bill.
It could not, therefore, be said that the Bill conferred unguided or uncontrolled powers on the Government.
Article 30(1) Of the Constitution, which was a necessary concomitant to article 29(1) and gave the minorities the right to establish and administer their institutions, did not define the word 'minority ', nor was it defined anywhere else by the Constitution, but it was absurd to suggest that a minority or section envisaged by article 30(1) and article 29(1) could mean only such persons as constituted a numerical minority in the particular region where the educational institution was situated or resided under a local authority.
Article 350 A of the Constitution, properly construed, could lend no support to such a proposition.
As the impugned Bill extended to the entire State, minorities in the State must be determined on the basis of its entire population, and thus the Christians, the Muslims and the Anglo Indians would be its minority communities.
Article 30(1) of the Constitution made no distinction between minority institutions existing from before the Constitution or established thereafter and protected both.
It did not require that a minority institution should be confined to the members of the community to which it belonged and a minority institution could not cease to be so by admitting a non member to it.
Nor did article 30(1) in any way limit the subjects to be taught in a minority institution, and its crucial words " of their own choice ", clearly indicated that the ambit of the rights it conferred was determinable by the nature of the institutions that the minority communities chose to establish and the three categories into which such institutions could thus be classified were (1) those that sought neither aid nor recognition from the State, (2) those that sought aid, and (3) those that sought recognition but not aid.
The impugned Bill was concerned only with institutions of the second and third categories.
999 The word 'aid ' used by articles 29(2) and 30(2) included grant ' under article 337 of the Constitution and that word occurring in the Bill must have the same meaning.
Consequently, such clauses of the Bill mentioned in question No. 2 as imposed fresh and stringent conditions precedent to such grant over and above those to which it was subject under articles 337 and 29(2), violated not only article 337 but also, in substance and effect, article 30(1) of the Constitution and were to that extent void.
Rashid Ahmad vs Municipal Board, Kaiyana, ; , Mohd. Yasin vs The Town Area Committee, jalalabad; , and The State of Bombay vs Bombay Education Society, ; , referred to.
Although there was no constitutional right to the grant of aid except for Anglo Indian educational institutions under article 337 Of the Constitution, State aid was indispensable to educational institutions and Arts:, 28(2), 29(2) and 30(2) clearly contemplated the grant of such aid and articles 41 and 46 charged the State with the duty of aiding educational institutions and promoting such interests of the minorities.
But the right of the minorities to administer their educa tional institutions under article 30(1), was not inconsistent with the right of the State to insist on proper safeguards against maladministration by imposing reasonable regulations as conditions precedent to the grant of aid.
That did not, however, mean that the State Legislature could, in the exercise of its powers of legislation under articles 245 and 246 of the Constitution, override the fundamental rights by employing indirect methods, for what it had no power to do directly, it could not do indirectly.
So judged, cl.
3(5) of the Bill by bringing into operation and imposing cls.
14 and 15 as conditions precedent to the grant of aid, violated article 30(1) of the Constitution.
Similar considerations applied to the grant of State recognition as well.
No minority institution could fulfill its real object or effectively exercise its rights under article 30(1) without State recognition, as otherwise it would not be open to its scholars under the Education Code to avail of the opportunities for higher education in the University or enter the public services.
While it was undoubtedly true that there could be no fundamental right to State recognition, denial of recognition except on such terms as virtually amounted to a surrender of the right to administer the institution, must, in substance and effect infringe article 30(1) of the Constitution.
Clause 3(5), read with Cl. 20 of the Bill, in forbidding the charging of tuition fees in the primary classes, deprived the minority institutions of a fruitful source of income without compensation, as was provided by cl.
(9) for aided schools, and thus imposed a condition precedent to State recognition which was in 127 1000 effect violative of article 30(1) and was, therefore, void to that extent.
No rules, when framed under the Act, could cure such invalidity.
Article 45 of the Constitution did not require the State Government to provide free and compulsory education to the detriment of minority rights guaranteed by the Constitution,if the Government so chose it could do so through the Government and aided schools, and this Court was in duty bound to uphold such fundamental rights as the Constitution had thought fit to confer on the minority communities.
The wide powers and jurisdiction conferred on the High Courts by article 226 of the Constitution could not be affected by a provision such as cl.
(33) of the Bill, which forbade Courts to issue temporary injunctions or interim orders in restraint of any proceedings thereunder, and it must be read as subject to the overriding provisions of article 226 of the Constitution.
Venkatarama Aiyar J.
It was obvious that article 30(1) Of the Constitution did not in terms confer a right on the minority institutions to State recognition, nor, properly construed, could it do so by implication, for such an implication, if raised, would be contrary to the express provisions of article 45 Of the Constitution.
Article 30(1) was primarily intended to protect such minority institutions as imparted purely religious education and to hold that the State was bound thereunder to recognise them would be not only to render article 45 wholly infructuous but also to nullify the basic concept of the Constitution itself, namely, its secular character.
There was no conflict here between a fundamental right and a directive principle of State policy that must yield, and the principle of article 45 must have full play.
Clause (20) of the Bill was designed to enforce that principle and cl.
3(5) Of the Bill in making it a condition precedent to State recognition could not violate article 30(1) Of the Constitution.
Nor could a consideration of the policy behind article 30(1) lead to a different conclusion, assuming that the question of policy could be gone into apart from the language, since that policy was no other than that the majority community of the State should not have the power to destroy or impair the religious or linguistic rights of the minority communities.
The only two obligations, one a positive and the other a negative, that article 30(1) read with articles 25, 26, 29 and 30(2) of the Constitution imposed on the State were (1) to extend equal treatment as regards aid or recognition to all educational institutions, including those of the minorities, religious or linguistic, and (2) not to prohibit the establishment of minority institutions or to interfere with their administration.
To hold that the State Government was further bound under article 30(1) to accord recognition to minority institutions would be 1001 to put the minorities in a more favoured position than the majority community, which the Constitution never contemplated.
City Winnipeg vs Barrett : City of Winnipeg vs Logan, , referred to.
