The land in question was granted to one A by the Government of Kashmir and as per the practice prevailing there, he was shown as Wasidar in respect of the said land.
On his death, his son inherited the leasehold rights.
On the death of the son, his widow inherited the same.
The appellants are the heirs and legal representatives of the widow.
A 's son, during his lifetime, had granted a sub lease of the said land to the Respondent 's father.
The widow of A 's son instituted a suit for recovery of possession of the said land on the grounds that there was unlawful sub letting by the sub lessee, the land was required for occupation by her and her family, and that the period of sub lease had expired.
The Respondent contended that the sub lease was void ab initio.
The Sub Judge held that the sub lease was valid and the grounds of bona fide requirement of the appellants ' mother as well as unlawful sub letting by the sub lessee had been established.
On these findings the suit was decreed.
on appeal, the Additional District Judge upheld the decision.
In the second appeal before the High Court, it was contended that the transfer made was of a mere interest in the lease hold and did not amount to a transfer of the land leased, as contemplated under Rule 35 of the Wasidar Rules.
Rejecting the contention, but without considering as to what would be the effect of the sub lease being void, the High Court came to the conclusion that in view of the sub lease being void, the suit filed by the appellant must be dismissed.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the aforesaid decision.
on behalf of the appellants, the contentions urged in the Courts below, were reiterated before this Court.
The Respondent relied on Section 12 A of the Jammu Kashmir Land Grants Act, 1960 as amended in 1969 and contended that the sub lease was admittedly 557 granted without the permission of the Government and so the lease granted by the Government had come to an end: the title of the appellants to the said land had extinguished and they were not entitled to sue for recovery of possession of the said land.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Even assuming that the sub lease granted was void, the result would be that the Respondent his father would be persons without any legal interest in the said land.
The appellants being the lessees of the said land were suing on their own title and not relying on the sub lease hence they were entitled to evict the Respondent who had no title or interest in the said l .
If a view is taken that the sub lease was valid, in that event, as held by both the Courts below, as grounds for eviction set out in Section 11 of the Jammu & Kashmir Houses and Shops Rent Control Act have been made out, the Respondent ceased to be entitled to the protection of the said Act and was liable to be evicted as the term of his sub lease had expired.
[559E G] 2.
It was not contended by the Respondent in any of the Courts below that the title of the Appellants and his predecessors in title to the said land under the lease granted by the Govermnent had come to an end.
Had the plea been taken earlier, it is possible that the Appellants might have pleaded facts to show that their lease had not come to an end or that it had been renewed after the sub lease was granted.
Hence, allowing such a plea at this stage might cause prejudice to the Appellants.
[560D E] 3.
As regards the sub letting by the Respondent and his father and the bona fide requirement of appellants ' mother, these are both essentially issues of fact and have been decided in favour of the Appellants ' mother and their predecessors in title.
Those findings do not appear to have been seriously challenged before the High Court at all and hence there is no reason to go into the question as to whether those findings are correct, in this appeal.
[561B]
