The short point which arose for consideration in this case was whether without a prior agreement between two or more Regional Transport Authorities of the regions through which an inter regional route passes, it was open to any one of the said Regional Transport Authorities to grant a permit to ply a stage carriage on the said inter regional route under the provisions of the ( 'the ').
The North Bihar Regional Transport Authority invited applications for granting stage carriage permits in respect of inter regional routes connecting certain places within its jurisdiction and certain other places within the jurisdiction of the South Bihar Regional Transport Authority.
The petitioner filed a writ petition in the High Court, questioning the power of the North Bihar Regional Transport Authority to grant permits above said without a prior agreement between it and the South Bihar Regional Transport Authority.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, the petitioner moved this Court for relief by this petition for special leave.
Dismissing the petition, the Court, ^ HELD: Under section 45(1) of the , an application for a permit for a vehicle proposed to be used in two or more regions within the same State, has to be made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which the major portion of the proposed route or area lies, and in case the portion of the proposed route or area in each of the regions is approximately equal, to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which it is proposed to keep the vehicle.
[596F G] 594 Under section 63 of the , in the absence of any rules to the contrary under the , a permit granted by the Regional Transport Authority of one region is not valid in any other region unless the permit has been counter signed by the Regional Transport Authority of the other region, while counter signing a permit, it is open to the Regional Transport Authority of the other region to impose its own conditions which it might have imposed if it had granted the permit.
If there are any rules framed by the State Government under the , they supersede the provisions of section 63.
If there is an agreement between the States concerned with regard to the grant and the counter signature of the permits, then it is not necessary to comply with the procedure prescribed by section 63, for counter signature of permits.
In this case, the provisions of section 63 of the applied to all the inter regional permits in the State of Bihar.
as no rule framed under the by the State of Bihar regarding the procedure to be followed in the case of counter signature of permits was brought to the notice of the Court.
[598R H;599A] Section 47(3) being inapplicable to the inter State or inter regional permits, it is open to the Regional Transport Authority concerned to decide whether there is any necessity to issue the permit applied for.
The does not contain any procedure for two or more Regional Transport Authorities entering into an agreement before an application for an inter regional permit is granted.
The only provision which provides for an agreement to be arrived at for purposes of counter signature is the agreement between two or more States referred to in the first proviso to sub section (3) of section 63 of the .
An inter State agreement of that nature can be arrived at only after following the procedure prescribed under sub section (3A) of section 63 when it is open to the parties affected by the proposal to make representations.
In one sense, the procedure prescribed in sub section (3A) of section 63 takes the place of procedure to be followed by a Regional Transport Authority while granting or counter signing permits.
In this case, since there is no provision in the or in the Rules made by the State Government, requiring the existence of such a prior agreement, it is difficult to hold that in the absence of such a prior agreement between the Regional Transport Authorities concerned, an application for the grant of an inter regional permit should not be taken up for consideration by a Regional Transport Authority which had the jurisdiction to grant it under section 45 of the .
If a permit is issued by a Regional Transport Authority and it is not counter signed by the other Regional Transport Authority, the permit will not be effective in the other region.
What has been observed above is in accord with the deci 595 sion of a Constitution Bench of this Court in M/s. Bundelkhand Motor Transport Co., Nowgaon vs Behari Lal Chaurasia and Anr., [599B; 601F G; 602E G] The North Bihar Regional Transport Authority had jurisdiction to consider the applications for the grant of the inter regional permits in question.
After they were granted, it was open to the South Bihar Regional Transport Authority to consider whether they should be counter signed or not after following the prescribed procedure.
The High Court was right in dismissing the Writ Petition.
[603C D] Mohd. lbrahim etc.
vs State Transport Appellate Tribunal, Madras, etc., ; M/s. Bundelkhand Motor Transport Company, Nowgaon vs Behari Lal Chaurasia and Another, ; , referred to.
