By an unregistered document the husband of the petitioner granted her the right to take and appropriate all kinds of wood from certain forests in his Zamindary.
With the passing of the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1950, all proprietary rights in land vested in the State under section 3 Of that Act and the petitioner could no longer cut any wood.
She applied to the Deputy Commissioner and obtained from him an order under section 6(2) of the Act permitting her to work the forest and started cutting the trees.
The Divisional Forest Officer took action against her and passed an order directing that her name might be cancelled and the cut materials forfeited.
She moved the State Government against this order but to no effect.
Thereafter she applied to this Court under article 32 of the Constitution and contended that the order of Forest Officer infringed her fundamental rights under articles 19(i)(f) and 19(1)(g) : Held (per curiam), that the order in question did not infringe the fundamental rights of the petitioner under articles 19(1)(f) and 19(i)(g) and the petition must be dismissed.
34 266 Ananda Behera vs The State of Orissa, [1955] 2 S.C.R. gig, followed.
Chhotabai jethabai Patel and Co. vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , not followed.
Held (per Das C. J., Venkatarama Aiyar, section K. Das and A. K. Sarkar, jj.), that it was not necessary to examine the docu ment minutely and finally determine its real character for the purpose of deciding the matter in controversy, for whatever construction might be put on it, the petition must fail.
If the document purported to transfer any proprietary interest in land, it would be ineffective both for non registration under the Registration Act and under section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act which vested such interest in the State.
If it was a profits a prendre that was sought to be transferred by it, then again the document would be compulsorily registrable as a profits a prendre was by its nature immoveable property.
If it was a contract that gave rise to a purely personal right, assum ing that a contract was property within the meaning of article 19(i)(f) and 31(1) Of the Constitution, the petitioner could not complain as the State had not acquired or taken possession of the contract which remained her property and she was free to dispose of it in any way she liked.
The State not being a party to that contract would not be bound by it, and even if for some reason or other it could be, the remedy of the petitioner lay by way of a suit for enforcement of the contract and compensation for any possible breach of it and no question of infringement of any fundamental right could arise.
Per Bose, J. The document conferred a right on the peti tioner to enter on the lands in order to cut down and carry away, not merely the standing timber, but also other trees that were not in a fit state to be felled at once.
The grant was, therefore, not merely in respect of moveable property but immoveable property as well.
Being valued at Rs. 26,ooo, the document was compulsorily registrable under the Registration Act otherwise no title or interest could pass ; and in absence of such registration the petitioner had no fundamental rights that could be enforced, as held by this court in Ananda Behera 's case.
Although standing timber is not immoveable property under the Transfer of Property Actor the Registration Act, trees attacked to the earth which are immoveable property under section 3(26) of the General Clauses Act, as also section 2(6) of the Registration Act, must be so under the Transfer of Property Act as well.
