Disallowing request for exemption from levy of electricity duty under sub section (4) of section 3 of the U.P. Electricity Duty Act, 1952 ( 'the Act '), as amended, the appellants issued notice of demand asking respondent No. 1, Renusagar Power Co., to pay electricity duty on the energy supplied by it to respondent No. 2, Hindalco, for industrial purposes.
Being aggrieved by the decision of the State Government, the respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the writ petition, holding that the impugned order of the State Government was not maintainable in law, and quashing the order as well as the notice of demand abovesaid.
The State Government was also directed to consider the request of the respondents for exemption in accordance with the directions issued by the High Court in the earlier Writ Petition No. 4521 of 1972 filed by the respondents.
Being aggrieved by the decision of the High Court the appellants moved this Court for relief.
Disposing of the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. There were two different aspects of the case to be considered.
One was whether the respondent No. 1, the Renusagar Power Co. Ltd., was 'own ' source of generation of electricity for respondent No. 2, the Hindalco, under section 3(1)(c) of the Act.
The second aspect was whether the order passed by the State Government was in accordance with the principles of natural justice in so far as the same were applicable to the case.
[646C] 628 From 1952 to 1970, no duty was payable if electricity was generated from own source of energy.
From 1970 to 1973, duty of one paisa was payable in respect of electricity supplied from own source of generation.
After 1973, no duty was payable in respect of electricity supplied from own source of generation.
[646D] Renusagar, a 100% subsidiary of Hindalco, wholly owned and controlled by Hindalco, was incorporated in March, 1964.
Hindalco had established the power plant through the agency of Renusagar to avoid complications in the case of a possible take over of the power plant by the State Electricity Board as power generation is generally not permitted in normal conditions in the private sector.
The respondents highlighted that the sanction under section 28 of the , given to Renusagar and its amendment established that Renusagar was not a normal type of sanction under Section 23 of the 1910 Act as the holder could supply power only to Hindalco.
All these steps for the expansion of the power in Renusagar so as to match the power requirement of Hindalco 's expansion were taken by Hindalco even though Renusagar had been incorporated.
Applications for all the necessary sanctions and permissions were made by Hindalco.
Permissions and sanctions were first intimated to Hindalco even though Renusagar was in existence.
Changes in the sanctions and/or permissions were obtained by Hindalco and not Renusagar.
The expansion of the power plant in Renusagar was to exactly match the requirements of Hindalco for the production of Aluminium.
The expansion of the power plant in Renusagar was part and parcel of the expansion of the aluminium plant of Hindalco.
All the steps to set up the power plant in Renusagar and its expansion were taken by Hindalco.
Hindalco consumed about 255 MW power out of which 250 M W came from Renusagar.
There was only one transmission line going out of Renusagar and that went to Hindalco, which had complete control over Renusagar.
The agreement between Renusagar and Hindalco indicated this was not a normal sale purchase agreement between two independent persons at arms length.
The price of electricity was determined according to the cash needs of Renusagar.
This covenant also showed complete control of Hindalco over Renusagar.
All persons and authorities dealing and conversant with this matter had consistently treated Renusagar as own source of generation of Hindalco.
In the power cuts matter under section 22B of cut was imposed on Hindalco on the footing that it had its own source of generation.
All the authorities including the State and Board had all along treated Renusagar as own source of generation of Hindalco.
It was thus contended that Renusagar must he treated as alter ego of Hindalco, i.e., 629 Own source of generation of Hindalco within the meaning of section 3(1)(c) of the Duty Act, and that consumption clearly fell within that section.
[653C H; 655C F] 'Own source of generation ' is an expression connected with the question of lifting or piercing the corporate veil.
The appellants contended that in this case there was no ground for lifting the corporate veil, urging that there was no warrant either in law or in fact to lift the corporate veil and treat Renusagar 's plant as Hindalco 's own source of generation.
[657B C] In the expanding horizon of modern jurisprudence, lifting of corporate veil is permissible.
Its frontiers are unlimited.
It must, however, depend primarily on the realities of the situation.
The aim of legislation is to do justice to all the parties.
The horizon of the doctrine of lifting corporate veil is expanding.
In this case, indubitably, it is correct that Renusagar was brought into existence by Hindalco in order to fulfil the condition of industrial licence of Hindalco through production of aluminium.
It was also manifest from the facts that the model of the setting up of power station through the agency of Renusagar was adopted by Hindalco to avoid complications in case of takeover of the power station by the State or the Electricity Board.
All the steps for establishing and expanding the power station were taken by Hindalco and Renusagar was wholly owned subsidiary of and completely controlled by Hindalco.
Even the today affairs were controlled by Hindalco.
Renusagar had never indicated independent volition.
Whenever felt necessary, the State or the Board themselves had lifted the corporate veil and treated Renusagar and Hindalco as one concern and the generation in Renusagar as the own source of generation of Hindalco.
Indubitably, the manner of treatment of the power plant of Renusagar as the power plant of Hindalco and the Government taking full advantage of the same in the case of power cuts and denial of supply of 100% power to Hindalco underlined the facts and implied acceptance and waiver of the position that Renusagar was a power plant owned by Hindalco.
In this view of the matter, the corporate veil should be lifted and Hindalco and Renusagar be treated as one concern and Renusagar 's power plant must be treated as the own source of generation of Hindalco and should be liable to duty on that basis.
In the premises the consumption of such energy by Hindalco will fall under section 3(1)(c) of the Act.
[667E H; 688A B] The veil of corporate personality even though not lifted sometimes is becoming more and more transparent in modern company juris 630 prudence.
The ghost of the case of Aron Salomon vs A. Salomon & Co. Ltd., ; at 27, 30, 31, still visits frequently the hounds of Company Law but the veil has been pierced in many cases.
However, the concept of lifting the corporate veil is a changing concept and is of expanding horizon.
[668C D] The appellant was in error in not treating Renusagar 's power plant as the power plant of Hindalco and not treating it as the own source of energy.
The respondent was liable to duty on the same and on that footing alone; this was evident in view of the principles enunciated and the doctrine now established by way of decision of this Court in Life Insurance Corpn.
Of India vs Escorts Ltd. & ors., [1985] Suppl.
3 S.C.R. 909, that in the facts of this case sections 3(1)(c) and 4(1)(c) of the Act are to be interpreted accordingly.
The person generating and consuming energy were the same and the corporate veil should be lifted.
Hindalco and Renusagar were in extricably linked up together.
Renusagar had in reality no separate and independent existence apart from and independent of Hindalco.
Consumption of energy of Hindalco is consumption of Hindalco from its own source of generation.
Rates of duty applicable to own source of generation had to be applied to such consumption 1 paisa per unit for the first two generating sets and nil rate in respect of 3rd and 4th generating sets.
In the facts of this case, the corporate veil must be lifted and Hindalco and Renusagar should be treated as one concern and the consumption of energy by Hindalco must be regarded as consumption by Hindalco from own source of generation.
The appeal directed against this finding of the High Court was rejected.
[668D H;669A B] Coming to the challenge to the order quashed by the High Court, the dominance of public interest is significant according to the provisions of sub section (4) of Section 3.
In view of the ceilings prescribed, the power conferred upon the State under Section 3(1) of the Act by itself is valid and does not amount to excessive delegation.
The primary purpose of the Act was to raise the revenue for development projects.
Whether, in a particular situation, rural electrification and development of agriculture should be given priority or electricity or development of aluminium industry should be given priority or which is in public interest, are value judgments and the legislature is the best judge.
What was paramount before introduction of the development programme and how the funds should be allocated and how far the government considers a negligible increase and rise in the cost of aluminium for the purpose of raising monies for other development activities are matters of policy to be decided by the Government.
It is 631 true that the question regarding public interest and need to promote indigenous industrial production was related with the question of exemption of duty, but a matter of policy should be left to the Government.
In its order, the Government had adverted itself to all the aspects of sub section (4) of section 3 of the Act.
Certain amount of encouragement was given to Hindalco to start the industry in a backward area.
After considerable period, a very low rate of duty was charged.
If other sectors of growth and development are needed, for example, food, shelter, water, rural electrification, the need for encouragement to aluminium industry had to be subordinated by a little high cost because it is a matter on which the Government as representing the will of the people is the deciding factor.
Price fixation, which is ultimately the basis of rise in cost because of the rise of the electricity duty is not a matter for investigation of Court, Sub section (4) of section 3 of the Act in the set up is quasi legislative and quasi administrative in so far as it has power to fix different rates having regard to certain factors and in so far as it has power to grant exemption in some cases, is quasi legislative in character.
Such a decision must be arrived at objectively and in consonance with the principles of natural justice.
With regard to the nature of the power under section 3(4) of the Act when power is exercised with reference to any class it would be in the nature of subordinate legislation but when the power is exercised with reference to individual it would be administrative.
If the exercise of power is in the nature of subordinate legislation the exercise must conform to the provisions of the statute.
The High Court was right only to the limited extent that all the relevant considerations must be taken into account and the power should not be exercised on irrelevant considerations, but singular consideration which the High Court had missed in this case is the factors, namely, the prevailing charges for the supply of energy in any area, the generating capacity of any plant, the need to promote industrial production generally or any specified class thereof and other relevant factors cannot be judged disjointly.
These must be judged in adjunct to the public interest and that public interest is as mentioned in the preamble to raise revenue.
All that the section requires is that these factors should be borne in mind but these must be subordinate to the executive decision of the need for public interest.
The power conferred on the State Government of administrative nature must be in accordance with the principles of natural justice to a limited extent.
[671F G; 672D E; 673D H] The exercise of power whether legislative or administrative will be set aside if there is manifest error in the exercise of such power or the exercise of the power is manifestly arbitrary.
Similarly,if the power has 632 been exercised on a non consideration or non application of mind to relevant factors, the exercise will be regarded as manifestly erroneous.
If a power, legislative or administrative, is exercised on the basis of facts which do not exist and which are patently erroneous, such exercise of power will stand vitiated.
This case related to the particular facts and circumstances of an individual Hindalco.
The facts and circumstances of the case had been examined in consonance with the principles of natural justice and considered subject to public interest.
Hindalco had made profits much more than it had before the imposition of the duty.
The adequacy of the profits or whether it made much more profits is not a consideration which must prevail over public interest and the Government having taken into consideration this factor, did not commit any error and the High Court was in error in setting aside the order of the Government.
The cost of power to a similar industry in other States was a relevant factor and the State was under a mandatory duty to consider the same.
The State had taken note of all these factors, and considering the prevailing practice of levy of electricity duty in other States as well as the provisions of section 3(4), the Government came to the conclusion that there was no justification for allowing exemption from electricity duty to Hindalco, and did not commit any error.
The factor of assurance of cheap power by the Government did not fore close the public interest of raising public revenue.
The impugned order did not suffer from the vice of non application of mind or non consideration of the relevant factors.
The High Court was in error in interfering with the order of the Government in the manner it did.
[676G H; 677A H; 678A] Natural justice in the sense that a party must be heard before hand need not be directly followed in fixing the price.
l here is scope for trial and error in the sphere of price fixation which is more in the nature of a legislative measure.
Judged by that standard, the impugned order in this case was not bad.
The Government did not act in violation either of the principles of natural justice or arbitrarily or in violation of the previous directions of the High Court.
[678F; 679D; 680C] The High Court should have, allowed the claim of Hindalco for the reduced rate of bill on the basis that Renusagar Power plant was its own source of generation under section 3(1)(c) and the bills should have been made by the Board on that basis.
The High Court was in error in upholding the respondents ' contention that the State Government acted improperly and not in terms of section 3(4) of the Act and in violation of the principles of natural justice.
The Judgment of the High Court was set aside to the extent indicated above and State Government 's impugned order was restored subject to the modification of the bills on 633 the basis of own source of generation; Hindalco must be given the benefit of the rate applicable to its own source of generation from Renusagar plant.
[680D F] Per section Ranganathan, J (Concurring): Agreeing, his Lordship held that on the second issue it was difficult to define the precise nature of the power conferred on the State under Section 3(4) of the Electricity Duty Act, and expressed doubts whether the sub section could at all be interpreted as conferring a right on individual consumers to require that, in the light of the material adduced by them, the rates applicable to them should have been fixed differently or that they should have been exempted from duty altogether.
However, his Lordship observed that it was unnecessary to pursue this aspect further as his Lordship agreed with the conclusion of Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. that in this case the respondent 's representations had been fully considered and the requirements of natural justice had been fulfilled and that there was no warrant to interfere with the order of the State Government.
[680H; 681A B] Chiranjit Lal Anand vs State of Assam & Anr., [1985] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 385; State of U.P. vs Hindustan Aluminium Corpn.
Ltd., ; ; J. K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of V.P. & Ors., ; ;M/s. Girdharilal & Sons vs
BalbirNath Mathur & Ors., ; at 241, 246; State of Tamil Nadu vs Kodaikanal Motor Union (P) Ltd., at 100; D. Sanjeevayya vs Election Tribunal, A.P. & Ors., ; , 492; Western Coalfields Ltd. vs Special Area Development Authority, Korba & Anr., ; at 17; Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corpn.
vs The l.T.O. & Anr.; , ; Tamlin vs Hannaford, ; Aron Salomon vs A. Salomon & Co. Ltd., ; at 27, 30, 31; Western Coalfields Ltd. in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper vs Union of India; , at 555; Bank Voordel En Scheepvaart N. V. vs Stalford, ; Kodak Ltd. vs Clark, ; DHN Food Distributors Ltd. & Ors.
vs London Borough of Tomer Hamlets, ; Harold Holdsworth & Co. (Wakefield) vs Caddies, ; Scottish Co operative Wholesale Society Ltd. vs Meyer and Anr., ; Charterbridge Corpn.
Ltd. vs Lloyds Bank Ltd. & Anr.
, ; Mrs. hall Richards Machine Co. Ltd., vs Jewitt (H.M.) Inspector of Taxes, , 52, 525, M/s. Spencer & Co. Ltd., Madras vs The Commissioner of Wealth Tax, ; Turner Morrisson & Co. Ltd. vs Hungerford Investment Trust Ltd., ; Life Insurance Corpn.
Of India vs Escorts Ltd. & Ors., [1985] 634 Suppl.
3 SCR 909; Devi Das Gopal Krishnan & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
, ; ; Ram Bachan Lal vs The State of Bihar, ; ; Panama Canal Company vs Grace Line, ; 2 Lawyers ' Edn. 788; Vincent Panikurlangara vs Union of India & others, [1987] 2 S.C.C. 165; Union of India & Anr.
vs Cynamide India Ltd. & Anr.
, ; P.J. Irani vs State of Madras, ; at 179 180, 181, 182; Ryote of Garabandho and Ors.
vs Zamindar of Parlakimedi & Anr., AIR 1943 P.C. 164; Saraswati Industrial Syndicate Ltd. etc.
vs Union of India; , ; A. K. Kraipok vs Union of India, AIR 1970 S.C. 150; M/s. Travancore Rayons Ltd. vs Union of India, AIR 1971 S.C. 862; Amal Kumar Ghatak vs State of Assam & Ors., AIR 1971 Assam 32; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. & Ors., ; at 786, 787; Prag Ice 293; Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, ; Laxmi Khandsari, etc.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
, ; ; State of Orissa vs (Miss) Binapani Devi, ; ; Mohd. Rashid vs State of U.P., ; ; section L. Kapoor vs Jagmohan & Ors., AIR 1979 S.C. 592; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, AIR 1978 S.C. 597; India Sugars & Refineries Ltd. vs Amrawathi Service Co operative Society Limited & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
