Election to the State Legislative Assembly of Rajasthan for Jodhpur City Constituency, was held in the year I985.
Nomination papers were filed on 8.2.1985 and the date of scrutiny was Y.2.
In all 45 candidates filed their nominations, after scrutiny and withdrawal, 21 candidates contested the election.
After polling and the counting of votes, the appellant was declared elected having obtained majority of votes.
The respondent who was an elector in the Jodhpur city Constituency filed an election petition before the High Court challenging the appellant 's election on the ground that the result of election was materially affected on account of improper rejection of nomination papers of 3 candidates, namely, Smt.
Umrao Ben, Hukmi Chand and Suraj Prakash Joshi.
It was pleaded that Smt.
Ben was an elector in the Sardarpura Assembly Constituency the Returning Officer wrongly rejected her nomination paper without affording an opportunity to her to produce a copy of the electoral roll, that Hukmi Chand and Suraj Prakash Joshi both were more than 25 years of age on the date of the nomination, yet the returning officer rejected their nomination papers on the ground that they were not qualified to be a candidate as they were below 25 years of age.
PG NO 1 PG NO 2 The appellant contested the election petition.
It was asserted that Smt.
Ben had failed to file a certified copy of the relevant entry in the electoral roll of Sardarpura Constituency along with her nomination, that she further failed to produce a copy of the electoral roll at the time of scrutiny and the returning officer therefore rightly rejected her nomination paper.
In respect of Hukmi Chand and Suraj Prakash Joshi, it was pleaded that none of the two candidates were present before the returning officer at the time of scrutiny and since the entries contained in the electoral roll indicated that they were below 25 years of age the returning officer rightly rejected their nomination papers.
and that the rejection of the 3 nomination papers was proper and the result of the election was not materially affected on account of the rejection of the name.
The High Court allowed the election petition and set aside the appellant 's election.
It held that the nomination paper of Smt.
Umrao Ben was validly rejected as she had failed to comply with section 33(5) of the Representation of Peoples Act inasmuch as she failed to produce the copy of the electoral roll or a certified copy of the extract relating to entry of her name in the electoral roll.
It further held that the nomination papers of Hukmi Chand and Suraj Prakash Joshi had been rejected improperly by the Returning officer as both the candidates had attained the qualifying age of 25 years on the date of nomination.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment.
the appellant preferred an appeal to this Court under section 116 A of the Representation of People Act, 1951.
On the questions whether: (1) the returning officer had validly rejected the nomination papers of Smt.
Umrao Ben, Hukmi Chand and Suraj Prakash Joshi, and (2) the respondent had proved in accordance with law that Hukmi Chand and Suraj Prakash Joshi whose nomination papers were rejected by the Returning Officer had attained the age of 25 years on January 1, 1984.
PG NO 3 Allowing the appeal, setting aside the order of the High Court and dismissing the election petition, the Court.
HELD: l(a).
Section 33 of the Act provides for presentation of nomination paper and it further lays down the requirements of a valid nomination.
Section 33(5) requires a candidate who is an elector of a different constituency, to file a copy of the electoral roll of the constituency as a certified copy of the relevant entries along with his nomination paper.
If a candidate is unable to comply with these requirements at the time of filing the nomination paper he is afforded another opportunity to prove his eligibility by producing a copy of the electoral roll of the constituency of the relevant part thereof or a certified copy of the relevant entries of the roll before the returning officer at the time of scrutiny.
[9A E] (b) The Legislature thus provides two opportunities to such a candidate for proving his eligibility to contest the election, one at the time of filing the nomination paper and the other at the stage of scrutiny.
If the candidates fail to avail of either of the two opportunities his nomination paper is liable to be rejected.
[9E F] (c) Non compliance with section 33(5) is fatal to the nomination and no other mode is prescribed by the Act for proving the eligibility of the candidate.
Section 33(5) prescribes a particular mode to prove eligibility of a candidate to contest election and section 36(Z)(h) provides penal consequences.[10A] (d) Section 33(5) of the R.P. Act lays down a mandatory requirement for a valid nomination.
The purpose is to satisfy the returning officer that the candidate is eligible to contest the election and if he fails to satisfy the returning officer in the manner prescribed, the penalty and the consequences which are specified in section 36(2)(b) must follow.
Section 33(5) is not directory instead it ia mandatory in nature.
[l0F] (e) An elector of a different constituency is under a mandatory duty to prove his eligibility in the manner prescribed by section 33(5) of the Act and if he fails to do that, he must suffer the consequences contemplated by section 36(2)(b) of the Act.
It is not open to a candidate who fails to comply with section 33(5) to put the blame on the returning officer for the rejection of his nomination paper.
The returning officer is under no legal obligation to make amends for the omission of a candidate, especially when the omission relates to a mandatory requirement.
[10G 11A] PG NO 4 (F) The law does not enjoin the returning officer to send for the electoral roll from his office to verify the eligibility of a candidate.
The law casts a duty on the candidate to satisfy the returning officer by following one of the three modes prescribed in section 33(5) of the Act and if he fails to do that the returning officer is bound to reject the nomination paper, he has no option in the matter.
[11B ] (g) The law does not require the returning officer to send for the electoral roll of a different constituency for the purpose of verifying the eligibility of a candidate.
[11C] In the instant case, there is no dispute that Smt.
Umrao Ben failed to comply with the requirement of section 33(5) of the Act as she had neither filed a copy of the electoral roll of the constituency or the relevant part thereof, or the certified copy of the relevant entries along with her nomination paper.
Nor she had produced any of the three documents before the returning officer at the time of scrutiny.
In such circumstances the returning officer rightly rejected Umrao Ben 's nomination paper.
[10B] Sri Babu Ram vs Shrimati Prasanni & Ors., [l959] SCR ; Narbada Prasad vs Chhagan Lal & Ors.
, ; ; Parmar Himat singh Jugatsingh vs Patel Harmanbhai Narsibhai, ; ; Avadh Raj Singh vs Jugal Kishore Gupta,[l979] 1 SCR: 228 and Ranjit Singh vs Pritam Singh & Ors., [1966]3 SCR 543, referred to.
2(a) During the scrutiny the Returning Officer is under a statutory duty to satisfy himself that the candidate who may have filed nomination paper possesses the necessary constitutional qualification for contesting the election.
[l4F] (b) Enquiry during scrutiny is summary in nature as there is no scope for any elaborate enquiry at that stage.
Therefore it is open to a party to place fresh or additional material before the High Court to show that the Returning Officer 's order rejecting the nomination paper was improper.
It should be borne in mind that the proceedings in an election petition are not in the nature of appeal against the order of the returning officer.
It is an original proceeding.
[15C] (c) In the instant case, on the basis of the entries contained in the electoral roll the Returning Officer held that the two candidates did not possess the requisite qualification of age as required by Article 173 of the Constitution to contest the election.
Accordingly he rejected both the nomination papers.
In the absence of any material before the returning officer, the returning officer was not wrong in taking the entries in the electoral roll into consideration and acting on them.
But his decision is not final.
In an election petition it is open to an election petitioner to place cogent evidence before the High Court to show that the candidate whose nomination paper was rejected had in fact attained the age of 25 years on the relevant date.
If on the basis of the material placed before the High Court it is proved that the candidate whose nomination paper had been rejected was qualified to contest the election it is open to the High Court to set aside the election.
[14G l5B] PG NO 5 3(a) To render a document admissible under section 35 of the Evidence Act three conditions must be satisfied, firstly, entry that is relied on must be one in a public or other official book, register or record, secondly, it must be an entry stating a fact in issue or relevant fact; and thirdly, it must be made by a public servant in discharge of his official duty, or any other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by law.
[21B] (b) An entry relating to date of birth made in the school register is relevant and admissible under section 35 of the Act, but the entry regarding the age of 3 person in a school register is of not much evidentiary value to prove the age of the person in the absence of the material on which the age was recorded.
[21C] (c) Parents or near relations having special knowledge are the best persons to depose about the date of birth of a person.
If entry regarding date of birth in the school 's register is made on the information given by parents ar someone having special knowledge of the fact, the same would have probative value.
[20A] (d) The date of birth mentioned in the scholar 's register has no evidentiary value unless the person who made the entry or who gave the date of birth is examined.
[2OB] (e) The entry contained in the admission form or in the scholar register must be shown to be made on the basis of information given by the parents or a person having special knowledge about the date of birth of the person concerned.
If the entry in the scholar 's register regarding date of birth is made on the basis of information given by parents, the entry would have evidentiary value but if it is given by a stranger or by Someone else who had no special means of knowledge of the date of birth, such an entry will have no evidentiary value.
[20C] PG NO 6 In the instant case, nomination papers of two candidates Hukmi Chand and Suraj Prakash Joshi were rejected by the Returning Officer on the ground that they had not attained the age of 25 years at the time of filing nomination papers.
In the election petition copies of extract of school register, certificate and mark list of Secondary Education Board were produced.
The High Court committed serious error in accepting the dates of birth as mentioned in the documents.
The High Court 's entire approach in considering the question of dates of birth was misconceived.
The burden to prove this fact in issue was on the respondent who was the election petitioner.
In fact the burden was on him to prove his case by producing Hukmi Chand and Suraj Prakash Joshi or their parents to prove or corroborate the dates of birth as mentioned in the school register and the certificate.
No adverse inference could be drawn against the appellant for not examining them.
[22C G; 23C D] Raja Janaki Nath Roy & Ors.
vs Jyotish Chandra Acharya Chowdhury, ; Jagan Nath vs Moti Ram & Ors., [1951] Punjab 377; Sakhi Ram & Ors.
vs Presiding Officer, Labour Court, North Bihar, Muzzafarpur & Ors.
, [1966] Patna 459; Ghunchi Vora Samsuddish Isabhai vs State of Gujarat, [1970] Gujarat 178; Radha Kishan Tickoo) & Anr.
vs Bhushan Lal Tickoo Anr., [1970]J & K 62; Jagdmba Prasad vs Shri Jagannath Prasad & Ors., ; k. Paramalali vs L.M. Alangam & Anr.
, ; krishna Rao Maharu Patil vs Onkar Narayan ; Brij Mohan Singh vs Priya Brat Narain Sinha & Ors.,[1965]3 SCR 861.,Ram murti vs State of U.P. Haryana, AIR 1625,referred to.
