The respondent firm are manufacturers of dissolved acetylene gas and compressed oxygen gas.
They were supplying these gases in cylinders at their factory gate.
For taking delivery some consumers/ customers used to bring their own cylinders and take the delivery.
Others, used to have the delivery in the cylinders supplied by the respondent firm.
For the purpose of such supply of cylinders certain rentals were charged by the firm, and also to ensure that these cylinders are returned, a certain amount as deposit used to be taken from the customers.
On these deposits notional interest at 18 percent per annum was calculated.
The Central Excise Authorities issued show cause notices to the respondent on the ground that the notional income on the deposit of cylinders and the rental are part of the assessable value, and hence should be included in computing the assessable value.
In their reply the respondent stated that the deposits from the buyers were only to ensure return of the gas cylinders from the customers.
The Assistant Collector by his order dated 3rd June, 1965 held that the respondent had to pay excise duty on the interest earned at 18% during the relevant period, and that as the respondent had suppressed this fact from the revenue during the past 5 years, the amount was includible and recoverable under Rule 8 read with Section 11A of the .
He also included the rentals of the cylinders in the value.
In appeal the Collector upheld the order of the Assistant Collector but with certain modifications.
762 The respondent appealed to the Central Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal, which allowed the appeal, and held that the charge on account of rentals for the cylinders and the interest which accrued on the deposit for the cylinder are not relatable to the cost of manufacture of the goods, and therefore under Section 4 deleted from the value, rentals for the cylinders and the interest on the deposit.
In the appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the Revenue that there are two different classes of buyers, one class who brings their own cylinders, and the others who get their supply through the cylinders of the suppliers, and that different rates for these two classes of buyers constitute two different markets and are contemplated and permissible, under the first proviso to Section 4(1)(a) of the Act.
Dismissing the Appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
Section 4(1)(a) proviso can be of no avail to the Revenue.
There may be different classes of buyers for different classes of goods.
In the instant case, if the respondent company sold the gases to different classes of buyers then different prices may be charged.
If the gases had been sold to different classes of buyers at different rates, it is possible that there might be different markets for the same.
The charges like rental for the cylinders and the notional interest income are for ancillary or allied services and that is not an activity of manufacture.
[766A B] Union of India & Ors.
vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd., ; and Asstt.
Collector of Central Excise vs Madras Rubber Factory Ltd., [1986] Supp SCC 751, referred to. 2.
It is well settled that levy under the Central Excises Salt Act is on manufacture.
In the instant case, the sale is of gases.
The levy is on the manufacture of gases and the excisable goods are these gases.
[764G,H] 3.
Gas being a commodity of peculiar nature, has to be delivered by cylinders, but these cylinders might be supplied either by the supplier as an ancillary activity or brought by the consumers or purchasers at their own risk and cost.
For purchasers taking it in their own cylinders supplied by them, there was no charge for them.
This is not an activity for the manufacture of gases.
This is ancillary to it but not incidental.
[765C] In the instant case, there are two different supplies.
One is supply 763 of gases and the other is an incidental supply of cylinders on rent.
The interest notional or real accruing on deposits for the safe return of cylinders as well as the rental would not constitute part of the assessable value.
The Tribunal was right in the view it took.
[766C D]
