Sub para (ii) of para 620 of the Railway Pension Manual empowers the competent authority to remove a railway servant from service any time after he has completed 30 years of qualifying service.
Clause (h) of Rule 2046 (F.R. 56) of the Indian Railway Establishment Code empowers the appointing authority to retire in Public interest (i) Class I and Class II railway servant, who had entered Government Service before the age of 35 years, after he has attained the age of fifty years, and (ii) in any other case after he has attained the age of 55 years.
Clause (k) of the said rule confers absolute right on the appointing authority to retire a railway servant in Class III service, who is not governed by the Pension Rules, after he has completed thirty years of service.
The respondent, Class III servant, who had joined service in 1950 was compulsorily retired from service by the competent authority in the Railway Administration in exercise of powers under para 620 of the Manual on 14th May, 1982.
He was born on 23.9.1929 and was to continue in service till he completed 58 years of service.
The writ petition filed by him questioning the validity of the said order and also of para 620 of the Manual was dismissed by the Single Judge.
In appeal before the Division Bench it was contended for him that (i) Rule 2406 of the Rules having been framed under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution and being a compendious code with regard to compulsory retirement that provision alone could be invoked and not para 620 of the Manual which is in the nature of an executive 742 order, (ii) since rule 2046(h) opens with a non obstante clause and para 620 of the Manual does not state that the said rule shall prevail notwithsanding any other provision to the contrary, rule 2046(h) of the Rules cannot be made subject to para 620 of the Manual, and (iii) there being two separate provisions with regard to compulsory retirement, namely clause (h) of rule 2046 of the Rules and para 620 of the Manual, in the absence of any guidance as to when and which rule could be invoked in a given case, both the provisions would be inapplicable and he could not be compulsorily retired.
The High Court held that para 620 of the Railway Pension Manual was void and ineffective.
It took the view that since rule 2046(h) of the Rules was not applicable, as the respondent had not attained the age of 55 years on the date he was compulsorily retired, he could not have been compulsorily retired.
Allowing the appeal by special leave and remanding the case to the High Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 Para 620 of the Railway Pension Manual is valid.
The High Court was not right in taking the view it did.
[749A] 1.2 There is no inconsistency between rule 2046 of the Rules and para 620 of the Railway Pension Manual.
Clause (h) of rule 2046 of the Rules empowers the competent authority to retire compulsorily a railway servant on his attaining the age specified therein.
That clause has no reference to the length of service put in by a railway servant concerned.
Clause (k) of the said rule under which the appointing authority can retire a person in the public interest after a railway servant has completed 30 years of service applies to a railway servant holding a Class III post and who is not governed by pension rules.
Para 620 of the Manual applies to all railway servants governed by the pension rules.
Railway servants holding Class I or Class II posts who cannot be retired under clause (k) of rule 2046 of the Rules can be retired on their completing 30 years of qualifying service if they are governed by the pension rules.
Similarly, railway servants holding Class III posts and who are governed by the pension rules to whom clause (k) of rule 2046 of the Rules is not applicable can also be retired on their completing 30 years of qualifying service.
Thus, the area of operation of para 620 of the Railway Pension Manual is different from that of clauses (h) and (k) of rule 2046 of the Rules.
[748D G] 1.3 Para 620 of the Railway Pension Manual which has been framed by the Union Government in exercise of its executive power under Article 73 of the Constitution should, therefore, be treated as supple 743 mentary to rule 2046 of the Rules, and given due effect since there is no statutory provision or a rule framed under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution which is inconsistent with it.
[748G H] 2.
Since the respondent had raised some other contentions with regard to the validity of the impugned order of retirement in the petition and the High Court has not expressed its opinion on those contentions, the case is remanded to the Division Bench of the High Court to dispose of the appeal afresh in the light of the submissions to be made by the respondent on the other contentions raised by him.
[749C]
