This writ petition arose upon a letter received from a voluntary organisation alleging that the female inmates of a `Care Home ' in Bihar were compelled to live in inhuman conditions.
Pursuant to a direction made by the court, the District Judge, Patna visited the `Care Home ' and submitted a report on the conditions actually prevailing there.
Disposing of the writ petition, ^ HELD: Every person is entitled to a quality of life consistent with his human personality.
The right to live with human dignity is the fundamental right of every Indian citizen under article 21 of the Constitution.
And, so, in the discharge of its responsibilities to the people, the State recognises the need for maintaining establishments for the care of those unfortunates, both women and children, who are the castaways of an imperfect social order and for whom, therefore, of necessity provision must be made for their protection and welfare.
Both common humanity and considerations of law and order require the State to do so.
To abide by the constitutional standards recognised by well accepted principle, it is incumbent upon the State when assigning women and children to these establishments, to provide at least the minimum conditions ensuring human dignity.
[758D F] India is a welfare State governed by a Constitution which lays special emphasis on the protection and well being of the weaker sections of society and seeks to improve their economic and social status.
It shows a particular ragard for women and children, and notwithstanding the pervasive ethos of the doctrine of equality it contemplates special provision being made for them by law.
[758B C] What we see before us in the instant case is a crowded hovel, in which a large number of human beings have been thrown together, compelled to subsist in conditions of animal survival, conditions which 756 blatanly deny their basic humanity.
It is clear that the Welfare Department of the State Government of Bihar views its responsibilities in regard to these women with a lightness which ill befits its existence and the public funds appropriated to it.
The name of "Care Home" given to these establishments is an ironic misnomer.
The primitive conditions in which the inmates are compelled to live shock the conscience.
[758G; 759A B] The State Government should provide suitable alternative accommodation expeditiously for housing the inmates of the present "Care Home".
It is necessary meanwhile to put the existing building, in which the inmates are presently housed, into proper order immediately, and for that purpose to renovate the building and provide sufficient amenities by way of living room, bathrooms and toilets within the building, and also to provide adequate water and electricity.
A suitable range of furniture, including Cots must be provided at once, and an adequate number of blankets and sheets, besides clothing, must be supplied to the inmates.
The Welfare Department of the State Government will take immediate steps to comply with these directions.
[759D, F H] The inmates have been committed to the care of this Home under orders issued by various Courts in Bihar or by different Executive authorities.
The Welfare Department will submit a report within one month from today detailing the particulars of these cases and mentioning the judicial or executive authority concerned to the High Court, and the High Court will thereupon issue necessary instructions to the pertinent District autority for taking appropriate steps in the different cases for their early disposal.
[760B C]
