In the writ petition filed before this Court regarding alleged handcuffing of a practising advocate, contrary to law, while he was being taken to the court after he had been arrested on the charge of a criminal offence, it was alleged that the Union Government and the Delhi Administration had not issued necessary instructions to the police authorities with regard to the circumstances in which an accused, arrested in a criminal case, could be handcuffed or fettered in accordance with the judgment of this Court in Prem Kumar Shukla vs Delhi Administration, The question whether this Court can issue a writ for bringing into force section 30 of the , providing the right to every advocate, whose name was entered in the State roll to practice throughout the territories to which the Act extended before the Courts, Tribunals and other authorities or persons referred to in the Scction, in view of section 3(1) of the Act empowering Central Government to decide the dates on which various provisions of the Act, including section 3. should be brought into force, also came up for consideration.
On behalf of the respondents, it was submitted that it was for the Union of India to issue necessary instructions regarding handcuffing of an accused to all the State Governments and the Governments of Union Territories in accordance with the judgment in P.K. Shukla 's case, and that this Court had jurisdiction to issue a writ directing the Central Government to consider the question of bringing into force section 30 of the .
PG NO 223 PG NO 224 Disposing of the writ petition, HELD: 1.1 It is not open to this Court to issue a writ in the nature of mandamus to the Central Government to bring a statute or a statutory provision into force when according to the said statute the date on which it should be brought into force is left to the discretion of the Central Government.
[229D] A. K. Roy, etc.
vs Union of India and Another, ; , followed.
However, this Court is of the view that this cannot come in the way of this Court issuing a writ in the nature of mandamus to the Central Government to consider whether the time for bringing section 30 of the into force has arrived or not.
[229E] 1.2 Every discretionary power vested in the Executive should be exercised in a just, reasonable and fair way.
That is the essence of the rule of law.
[229F] In the instant case, the Act was passed in 1961 and nearly 27 years have elapsed since it received the assent of the President of India.
In several conferences and meetings of lawyers resolutions have been passed in the past requesting the Central Government to bring into force section 30 of the Act.
It is not clear whether Central Government has applied its mind at all to the question whether section 30 of the Act should be brought into force.
[229F G] Even today there are laws in force in the country which impose restrictions on the fight of an advocate to appear before certain courts, tribunals and authorities.
ln many of the cases which come up before the Courts or Tribunals before which advocates cannot appear, as of right, questions of law affecting the rights of individuals arise for consideration and they need the assistance of advocates.
We have travelled a long distance from the days when it was considered that the appearance of a lawyer on one side would adversely affect the interests of the parties on the other side.
The legal Aid and Advice Boards, which are functioning in different States, can now be approached by people belonging to weaker sections, such as, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, women, labourers etc.
for legal assistance and for providing the services of competent lawyers to PG NO 225 appear on their behalf before the Courts and Tribunals in which they have cases.
In these circumstances prima facie there is no justification for not bringing into force section 30 of the Act.
[227D, G H, 228A B] 1.3 Even though the power under section 30 of the is discretionary, this Court is of view that the Central Government should be called upon to consider within a reasonable time the question whether it should exercise the discretion one way or the other having regard to the fact that more than a quarter of century has elapsed from the date on which the Act received the assent of the President of India.
[230A] A writ in the nature of mandamus will issue to the Central Government to consider within a period of six months whether section 30 of the Act should be brought into force or not.
The Union of India is directed to frame rules or guidelines as regards the circumstances in which handcuffing of the accused should be resorted to in conformity with the judgment of this Court in Prem Shankar Shukla vs Delhi Administration, and to circulate them amongst all the State Governments and the Government of Union Territories within three months.[226E] Prem Shankar Shukla vs Delhi Administration, ; , referred to.
