Section 12(2) of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 bars suits for recovery of possession against the tenant on the ground of non payment of the standard rent until the expiration of one month next after notice in writing.
Section 12(3)(a) provides for passing of a decree for eviction of the tenant who is in arrears for a period of six months and neglects to make payment until the expiration of the notice period provided there is no dispute regarding the standard rent.
Section 12(3)(b) interdicts passing of the decree if the tenant pays or renders in the court the standard rent and permitted increases then due.
The appellants were served with a notice under section 12(2) of the Act terminating the tenancy and calling upon them to pay arrears of rent from 1st September, 1971 to 31st December, 1972.
They did not pay the amount claimed.
No dispute was raised regarding the standard rent.
The trial court and the appellate court came to the conclusion that there was neglect on the part of the appellants within the meaning of section 12(3)(a) of the Act meriting, a decree for eviction.
The High Court dismissed the appeal.
In the appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellants that the landlord was not granting receipts, that he was not demanding rent but compensation for use and occupation, that the landlord was acting mala fide and preventing the tenant from performing his obligation, that this was not a case of bona_fide need and that the landlord was affluent and the tenant was poor.
Dismissing the appeal, PG NO 296 PG NO 297 HELD: 1.1 In view of the provisions of section 12(3)(a) and (b) of the Act and in the background of the facts and circumstances of the case, the courts below were right.
The eviction order had to follow by operation of law.
[301H D] 1.2 Sub section 3(a) of section 12 categorically provided that where the rent was payable by the month and there was no dispute regarding the amount of standard rent or permitted increases, if such rent or increases were in arrears for a period of six months or more and the tenant neglected to make payment thereof until the expiration of the period of one month after notice referred to in sub section
(2), the court shall pass a decree for eviction in any such suit for recovery of possession.
[301B] 1.3 In the instant case, the rent was payable month by month.
There was no dispute regarding the amount of standard rent or permitted increases.
Such rent or increases were in arrears for a period of six months or more.
The tenant had neglected to make payment until the expiration of the period of one month after notice referred to in sub section
The court was bound to pass a decree for eviction in, any such suit for recovery of possession.
[301C] Harbanslal Jagmohandas & Anr.
vs Prabhudas Shivlal, ; referred to.
Mohan Laxman Hede vs Noormohamed Adam Shaikh, AIR 1988 SC.
IIII distinguished.
The expression "court shall pass a decree" in sub section 3(a), of section 12 was substituted for the words "court may pass a decree" by an amendment passed in 1963, making it mandatory to pass the decree.
When the legislature has made its intention clear in specific terms, there was no scope for appeal to the "spirit of the law" and not to the strict letter of the law.
[302C D]
