The appellants had granted a lease of commercial premises in favour of the respondent company, who carried on the business in clothing and textiles in the demised premises.
Later, the appellants moved an application under section 13 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, I94Y seeking eviction of the respondent inter alia on the ground that it had unauthoirsdly and without the consent of the appel lant inducted two sub tenants a tailor and an ice cream vendor in two portions of the premises.
The defence of the respondent in the written statement was that the maintenance of such booths had become a necessary adjunct of all big shops in modern shopping centres, and that the respondent remained in the exclusive possession of the demised premises.
The appellants relied particularly on the Report and evidence of the Court Commissioner who in his report substantially corroborated appellants ' charge of sub letting.
On the other hand, the respondent relied upon the agreements entered into by it with the alleged sub tenants which, according to it, clearly excluded any possibility of sub letting.
The respondent also examined M.L. Sharma, (R.W. 3) a senior architect in Chandigarh Administration who PG NO 310 PG NO 311 produced the Plans (Ext.
R. 4) relating to certain alterations in the demised premises.
The Rent Controller, on an appreciation of the evidence, was persuaded to the view that while the allegations of sub letting in favour of the tailor had not been established, the case of sub letting so far as the Ice cream parlour was concerned had clearly been established.
The Rent Controller held that the evidence on record indicated the exclusive possession of M S Kwality Ice Cream.
The Rent Controller further held that in the circumstances of the case it was also legitimate to draw an inference, and raise a presumption that monetary consideration alone had prompted the respondent into the transactions.
The respondent filed an appeal before the District Judge, and the Appellate Authority affirmed the finding of the Rent Controller on the question of sub letting in so far as the Ice Cream Parlour was con cerned.
The Appellate Authority also found that even in the case of the tailor there was sub letting.
In Civil Revision, the High Court upon a re appreciation of the evidence set aside the concurrent finding of the Courts below in regard to the element of exclusive possession and set aside the order of eviction passed by the Courts below.
The High Court relied on the agreements between the respondent and the sub tenants and held that the conditions prescribed in these documents did prima facie indicate that it was a case of licensees and not of sub letting.
The High Court took note of the procedural objection in regard to the appointment of the local Commis sioner without notice to the respondent, and was of the view that there were circumstances to show that his report was not factually correct.
On behalf of the appellants it was contended that (i) the High Court was in error in interfering, in exercise of its revisional jurisdic tion, with the concurrent finding of fact recorded by the courts below; ; (ii) the reliance on the High Court on the evidence of R.W. 3 and Plans (Exhibit R.4) on the point of exclusive possession was wholly misplaced (iii) a finding of fact which was the result purely of appreciation of oral evidence by the trial court could not be interfered with by an Appellate Court and a fortiorari in Revision; and (iv) the view of the High Court as to the alleged infirmity of the Court Commissioner 's report was erroneous.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that (i] where a finding of fact was shown to have been rendered infirm and vitiated by a misreading of evidence, the PG NO 312 Revisional jurisdiction under the Act, which was wider than that under section 115 C.P.C. could be invoked to correct errors even in findings of facts; [ii] the finding of a question of sub tenancy being a mixed question of fact and law, this Court even on an independent consideration of the whole matter, should not interfere as one of the essential ingredients in the concept of a sub lease, viz., the existence of monetary consideration, in the form of Rent ', as dis tinct from consideration by way of services, was wholly lacking; and (iii) the appear should fail on the correctness of the finding of the High Court on the lack of exclusive possession alone; and (iv) the two transactions lacked the normal and the usual indicia of tenancy and were no more than mere personal privileges or personal licence to occupy, and that no interest in the property was transferred.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
One of the twin principal tests by which a lease was distinguishable from the relationship created under a licence is the element of the right to exclusive possession involving the transfer of an interest in the property; the other being the 'Rent ' stipulated for the grant.
The grant only of the right to use the premises without being entitled to the exclusive possession thereof operates merely as a licence.
[323B C] Wood vs Leadbitter, 153E.R. 351 354; Glenwood Lumber Co. vs Phillips.
[l9O4] A.C. 405 408; Associated Hotel of India vs R.N. kapoor, ; B.M. Lall vs Dunlop Rubber Co., ; , 27; Qudrat ullah vs Municipal Board Bareilly, [l974] SCC 202, 204; Board of Revenue vs A.N. Ansari, [l976] 3 SCR 661, 665 and Khulil ahmad Bashir Ahmed vs Tufelhussain Samasbhai Sarangpurwala., JT ,346, referred to. 2.
It is essential to the creation of a tenancy that the tenant be granted the right to the enjoyment of the property and that, further, the grant be for consideration.
[323F] Dipak Banerjee vs Smt.
Lilabati Chakkroborty, 3 454, 456, referred to.
Exclusive possession itself is not decisive in favour of a lease and against a mere licence, for, even the grant of exclusive possession might turn out to be only a licence and not a lease where the grantor himself has no power to grant the lease.
In the last analysis, the question whether PG NO 313 a transaction is a lease or a licence "turns on the operative intention of the parties" and there is no single litmus test to distinguish one from the other.
[324C D] Cobb vs Lane, [l952] 1 All E.R. 1198; Merchant vs Charter, [19773 3 All E.R. 918, 922 and M.N. Clubwala vs Fida Hussain Sahel, [l9d4l 6 SCR 642, referred to. 4.
In deciding whether a grant amounts to a lease or only a licence, regard must be had more to the substance than the form of the transaction.
It is determined by the law and not by the label the parties choose to put on it.
To give exclusive possession, there need not be express words to that effect; it is Sufficient if the nature of the acts done by tie grantee show that he had and was intended to have the right of exclusive possession.
The fact that the agreement contained a clause that no tenancy was to be created will not, of itself, preclude the instru ment from creating a lease.
[l327G H; 328A] B.M. Lall vs Dun(op Rubber Co., [l968j 1 SCR 23, Z7, referred to 5.
The scope of revisional jurisdiction depends on the language of the statute conferring the revisional jurisdiction.
Revisional jurisdiction is only a part of the appellate jurisdiction and cannot be equated with that of a full fledged appear.
Though the revisional power depending upon the language of the provision might be wider than revisional power under section ~51 of the Code of Civil Procedure, yet a revisional court is not second or first appeal.
[330H; 331A] 6.
When the findings of fact recorded by the Courts below are supportable on the evidence on record, the revisional Court must, indeed, be reluctant to embark upon an independent re assessment of the evidence and to supplant a conclusion of its own, so long as the evidence on record admitted of and supported the one reached by the Courts below.
In the circumstances, the concurrent finding as to exclusive possession of M/s Kwality Ice Cream,was not amenable to reversal In revision.
[331B D] 7.
The question whether the statement of the witnesses in regard to what was amenable to perception by sensual experience as to what they saw and heard is acceptable or not is the area in which well known limitation on the powers of the appellate Court to reappreciate the evidence falls.
The appellate Court, if it seeks to reverse those findings PG NO 314 of fact, must give cogent reasons to demonstrate how the trial Court fell into an obvious error.
[33H; 335A] Watt vs Thomas, , 487, 488; Benmax vs Austin Motor Co. Ltd., 119551 2 W.L.R. 418, 422 and Sarju Pershad vs Jwaleshwari 4Pratap Narain Singh; , , 783; referred to.
It is no doubt true that in the present case the order of the trial court appointing a Commissioner did not in terms direct the parties to appear before the Commissioner.
There is this infirmity in the proceedlngs of the Commissioner.
But It is possible to construe the power to appoint a Commissioner to inspect the extant state and natur of structures as not confined to Rule 9 of Order 26 but referable to Rule 7 of Order 39 CPC where the court can dispense with prior notice, should it appear to the court that the very object of making of appointment of a Commissioner would be defeated and frustrated by the issue of prior.
[335E G ] Latchan Naidu and Anr.
vs Rama Krishan Ranga Rao Bahadur Bobbili Samasthanam, 9.
A more careful examination of the context in which M.L. Sharma, the senior architect, who produced Ext.
R. 4 was examined shows that Ext.
R. 4 was relied upon in rebuttal of and in answer to an Altogether different ground, i.e,, the ground of unauthorised structural 'alterations and the alleged damage caused to the building thereby and to show that the structural alterations had been authorised by the first appellant.
It is quite plain that Respondent itself did not seek to rely on this evidence on the point of exclusive possession or lack of it.
Reliance on the plans to take away the effect of the positive evidence on record was not, therefore, justified.
[330D E, G] 10.
In the present case, the appellants specifically pleaded "sub letting".
Respondent understood that pleading as to imply all the incidents of sub letting including the element of `Rent ' and specifically traversed that plea by denying the existence of consideration.
Parties went to the trial with full knowledge of the ambit of the case of each Other.
In the circumstances the pleadings would require to be construed liberally.
[336F] Ram Sarup Gupta vs Bishun Narain Inter College, ; ; referred to.
PG NO 315 11.
The burden of establishing facts and contentions which support the party 's case Is on the party who takes the risk of non persuasion.
If at the conclusion of the trial, a party has failed to establish these to the appropriate standard, he will lose.
although the burden of proof as a matter of law remains constant through out a trial, the evidential burden which rests initially upon a party bearing the legal burden, shifts according to the weight of the evidence adduced by the party during the trial.
In the circumstances of the case, the appellants having been forced by the Courts below to have established exclusive possession of the Ice Cream Vendor of a part of the demised premises and the explanation of the transaction offered by the respondent having been found by the Courts below to be unsatisfactory and unacceptable, it was not impermissible for the Courts to draw an inference, having regard to the ordinary course of human conduct, that the transaction must have been entered into for monetary considerations.
[337F.H; 338A B]
