% The writ petitioners herein challenge the order regularising the temporary service of promotees in the years 1972 73, 1973 74 and 1974 75 to the cadre of Assistant Engineers (Deputy Executive Engineers).
They contend that the retrospective regularisation made by the Chief Engineer is without authority and in gross violation of the prescription of the Rules.
Two sets of rules are operating side by side in the State of Andhra Pradesh, the Andhra Pradesh State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1962, the other, Andhra Pradesh (Roads and Buildings) Engineering Service Rules, 1967 promulgated with retrospective effect from April l, 1965.
Rule 3(1) of the latter rules provide for the method of recruitment of Assistant Engineers by direct recruitment or by promotion or by transfer from Supervisor or Draughtsman Special Grade or Draughts man Special Grade I of the Andhra Pradesh (R&B) Engineering Subordinate Service.
Sub rule (3)(a) of Rule 3 thereof prescribes that of the substantive vacancies of Assistant Engineers, 37 1/2% shall be filled up by direct recruitment, and the remaining 62 1/2% by transfer of Supervisors and Draughtsman and by promotion of Junior Engineers.
Notwithstanding this, there had been under recruitment of Assistant Engineers by direct recruitment and the recruits through the other modes have come into the cadre far in excess of the limit provided by the rule and had been regularised.
It has been contended that though five year qualifying service was 19 necessary in the lower service for entitlement to consideration for promotion as Assistant Engineer, the period had been reduced to three years to enable larger recruitment from the alternate sources to the prejudice of direct recruits.
Disposing of the writ petitions, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
There is no justification at all for the State Government not to work out the provision viz. filling up by direct recruitment 371/2% of the substantive vacancies.
The direct recruits have been agitating from 1982 over their rights arising out of this rule and the Tribunal has called upon the State to work out the said Rule properly.
Reopening the question of inter se seniority on the basis of the rules from the beginning may create hardship, but the benefit of the scheme under the Rules should be made available to direct recruits at least from 1982.
[22D F] 1.2 The State Government must ascertain the exact substantive vacancies in the category of Assistant Engineers in service.
On the basis that 371/2% of such vacancies were to be filled up by direct recruitment, the position should be worked out.
Promotees should be confined to 62 1/2% of the substantive vacancies and in regard to 37 1/2% of the vacancies the shortfall should be filled up by direct recruitment.
Even if promotees are placed in those posts reserved for direct recruits, no seniority shall be counted.
[22F H] 1.3 Regularisation made in respect of the promotees of the years 1972 to 1975 should not be disturbed as the regularisation has been subsequent to the actual commencement of continuous service in the post of Assistant Engineer.
[23C] [The State Government has been directed to ascertain the number of vacancies upto 31.12.87 to be filled up by direct recruitment and to take steps to make direct recruitment to fill such posts, within four months and also to draw the seniority list by the end of September, 1988.] [22H; 23A B]
