Respondent No. 1 imported consignments of wool material and claimed that the imported goods were wool waste and hence not liable to customs duty.
The goods were examined by an Expert Committee, who appalled that the goods were other than wool waste.
Based on the Committee 's opinion, the Additional Collector or Customs, after notice, examined the whole case, charged the respondent with the violation of the Import Control Regulations and held that the goods were not wool waste but processed woollen products other than wool tops/raw wool.
The Appellate Tribunal allowed the respondent 's appeal.
Dismissing the appeal it was, HELD: (1) When no statutory definition is provided in respect of an item in the or the Central Excises Act.
the trade understanding, meaning thereby the understanding in the opinion of those who deal with the goods in question, is the safest guide.
[374B] Union of India vs Delhi Cloth & General Mills, [I963] Supp 1 SCR 586; South Bihar Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, ; ; Dunlop India Ltd. vs Union of India, ; ; In re, Colgate Palmolive (India) Pvt. Ltd., [l979] ELT 567; Commissioner of sales tax, U.P. vs S.N. Bros, Kanpur; , and His Majesty The King vs Planters Nut and Chocolate Co. Ltd. [1951] CLR (Ex) 122, referred to.
PG NO 370 PG NO 371 [2] The expression "wool waste" is not defined in the relevant Act or in the notification.
This expression is not an expression of article It may be understood, as in not of financial measures where the expressions are not defined, not in a technical or on any preconceived basis but on the basis of trade understanding of those who deal with those goods.
[376D E] [3] Whether a particular item and the particular goods in this case are wool wastes or not is primarily and essentially a question of fact The decision on such a question of fact must be arrived at without ignoring the material and relevant facts and bearing in mind the correct legal principles.
Judge by these yardsticks, the finding of the Tribunal in this case is unassailable.
[376F] {4) If a fact finding authority comes to a conclusion within the parameters, honestly and bona fide, the fact that another authority be it the Supreme Court or the High Court may have a different perspective of that question is no ground to interfere with that finding in an appeal from such a finding under Section l30E of the Act though in relation to the rate of duty of customs or to the value of goods for purposes of assessment, the amplitude of appeal is unlimited.
But because the jurisdiction is unlimited, there is inherent limitation imposed in such appeals.
[376G H; 377B]
