A seat in the P.G. course in M.D. in the G.N. Medical College, Gwalior, fell vacant due to the death of a student.
The appellant, Dr. Sanjay Pradhan, staked a claim to this seat under rule 10 of the Madhya Pradesh Selection for Post Graduation Courses (Clinical, Para clinical and Non clinical Courses) in Medical Colleges of Madhya Pradesh Rules, 1984.
Inasmuch as the vacancy arose towards the end of the academic year, the authorities took no steps to fill it up.
The appellant 's writ petition was dismissed By the M.P. High Court.
The High Court construed the words 'filled up in that year ' in r. 10 as meaning that a vacancy in any particular academic year must be filed up in that year.
One seat in the P.G. Course in M.S., which was occupied by Dr. Smt.
Dhurupkar, was transferred from Medical College, Jabalpur, to Medical College, Bhopal, with a view to accommodate her.
The appellant, Dr. Sanjay Kumar, moved the authorities seeking admission against that seat contending that the seat had become available in terms of r. 10.
The authorities disallowed his claim.
His writ petition was dismissed by the High Court in limine holding that the seat occupied by Dr. Smt.
Dhurupkar had been transferred with her and hence the seat, in fact, was not available.
It was submitted before this Court that the High Court has consistently been taking a view that it has the power as well as the duty to issue an appropriate writ, direction or order for the 'backlog ' of seats to be filled up whenever it finds that the authorities have acted in violation of the norms prescribed by the relevant rules and a deserving candidate has been wrongly denied admission to such a professional course of studies.
PG NO 281 PG NO 282 Dismissing the appeals, it was, HELD: (1) Rule 10 must be interpreted by the written text.
If the precise words used are plain and un ambiguous, the Court is bound to construe them in their ordinary sense and give them full effect.
The argument of inconvenience and hardship is a dangerous one and is only admissible in construction where the meaning of the statute is obscure and there are alternative methods of construction.
Where the language is explicit its consequences are for parliament, and not for the Courts, to consider.
[287C D] (2) On a plain construction, rule 10 stipulates that if a seat falls vacant for any reason, and due to inaction on the part of the authorities the seat is not filled up in the academic year to which it pertains, there is no question of the vacancy being carried forward to the next academic year.
[288A B] (3) Normally, the question of a seat being filled up must arise at the commencement of the academic year or soon thereafter.
When a seat falls vacant in any particular academic year there is a corresponding duty cast on the authorities to take immediate steps to fill up the same.
There is no question of a right of admission to a seat falling vacant in the midst of or towards the end of, the academic year.
[288C] (4) it is conceded by learned counsel appearing for the State Government that there is no provision which empowered the State Government to transfer a seat in the M.S. course in MD/MS reserved for a medical college to another medical college.
It must therefore follow that the High Court was obviously wrong in holding that the seat occupied by Dr. Smt.
Dhurupkar had been transferred with her when the seat was, in fact, available.
[285C D] (5) On the construction placed on r. 10 of the Rules, the appellants are not entitled to any relief.
Obviously, the seat that became vacant in the academic year 1986 87 cannot now be filed in terms of section 10.
[295B] (6) It is impressed upon the State Government the desirability of taking immediate steps under rule 10 of the Rules to fill up the vacancy in the P.G. Course in MD/MS or the Diploma course of studies in a particular discipline, the moment the seat in that discipline is available in any particular academic year.
[295C D] PG NO 283 (7) The State Government should ensure that the authorities charged with the duty of granting admission to students under rule 10 of the Rules act with due promptitude, and should not by their lethargy or inaction deprive or otherwise meritorious candidate admission to such a higher course of studies to which he was otherwise entitled.
Perhaps, the solution lies in making a suitable provision in the Rules providing for a reasonable period, say fifteen days, within which the authorities ought to exercise their power under rule 10 of the Rules, failing which the seat available would be deemed to have been filled by the candidate placed first in the waiting list strictly according to merit.
[295D E] King Emperor vs Bensari Lal Sarma, LR (1945) 72 IA 57; Dr. Mrs. Urmilla Shukla vs State of M.P., Misc.
Petition No. 297/83 decided by M.P. High Court on 17.4.84; Rekha Saxena vs State of M.P., [l985] MPLJ 142; Dr. Sunil Gajendragadkar vs State of M.P. (Misc.
Petition No. 57/85 decided by M.P. High Court on 11.3.85.
