The Bihar Government imposed sale tax at 5 ad valorem on all hosiery goods sold within the State irrespective of the place of manufacture of such goods, effective from October 1.
However, by virtue of a notification dated August 1,1984 , it exempted from such levy, the hosiery goods manufactured by hosiery industries in Bihar.
This exemption was sought to be given as an incentive to hosiery industries in Bihar.
The petitioners have approached his Court by way of a writ petition, contending that there has been discrimination between hosiery goods imported into the State of Bihar and hosiery goods manufactured in that State in the levy of sales tax.
They prayed for the issue of a writ of mandamus to the Respondents to rescind the notification dated August 1, 1984, and for a direction to the Respondents to forebear from levying or collecting sales tax on sale of hosiery goods imported into the State of Bihar from other States, and for refund of the sales tax already levied and collected.
The petitioners contended that such discrimination violated article 301 of the Constitution of India, and that such discrimination could never be made by a notification.
Allowing the writ petition and quashing the notification in question, this Court HELD: 1.1.
A perusal of the Notifications would show that prima facie a clear discrimination is made against hosiery goods manufactured outside the State of Bihar and sold in the State of Bihar PG NO 378 PG NO 379 as the sales of such goods are subjected to the levy of sales tax at the rate of 5 per cent whereas the sales of similar goods manufactured by hosiery industries in the State of Bihar are exempted from sales tax.
From a commercial or normal point of view, such a discriminatory levy of sales tax is bound to affect the free flow of hosiery goods from outside States into the State of Bihar and would, therefore, amount to hampering the free flow of trade and commerce.
The State of Bihar did not file any counter to the petition to justify this discriminatory levy as a regulatory measure or as a compensatory tax.
The result is that the discrimination made must be regarded as violating the provisions of Article 301 read with Article 304(b) of the Constitution.
[382H; 383A C] 1.2.
The general rate of sales tax on hosiery goods was 5 per cent and it was the exemption for locally manufactured hosiery goods, granted by the said Notification dated August 1, 1984 which constituted the departure.
It is, therefore, really this Notification which is discriminatory and which must be struck down.
[384A,B] H. Anraj etc.
vs Government of Tamil Nadu etc.
[1985] Suppl.
3 SCR 342; Firm A.T.B. Mehtab & Co. vs State of Madras & Anr., [1963] Suppl.
2 SCR 435; The Indian Cement & Ors.
vs The State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors., ; ; Weston Electroniks and Anr.
vs State of Gujarat & Ors., , referred to.
[This Court directed that since there might be undue hardship to the dealers in the State of Bihar who might have sold locally manufactured goods without taking into consideration the liability to sales tax in view of the exemption granted by the notification dated August 1, 1984, the arrears of sales tax payable by them should not be collected.]
