The terms and conditions of service including the rates of wages and other allied matters were decided and settled through mutual negotiations between the trade union represented by respondent No. 3, its General Secretary and respondent No. 4, President of the Employers Association.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were workers and were members of the trade union.
Under an agreement entered into in October, 1973 an amount equivalent to 10 paise out of every rupee earned by the workers was deducted by the management towards the gratuity fund and transferred to the trade union for and on behalf of the workers.
Under another agreement a sum equivalent to 10 paise per rupee in the wages of the workers was paid by the management to the trade union towards accident benefit fund of which the workers were the beneficiaries.
The amounts so collected were entrusted to the petitioner, who was also the treasurer and custodian of these funds of the trade union.
The petitioner deposited the amounts received by him in his personal name in his bank account, and no account of these amounts was rendered by him to the members of the trade union.
He did not call any general body meeting and the members of the trade union could not ventilate their grievance regarding mismanagement of the funds.
In view of the aforesaid difficulty, 85 workers including Respon PG NO 258 PG NO 259 dent Nos. 1 and 2 and three others resigned from this trade union on January 13, 1976, and formed a separate trade union of their own and A registered the same under the .
Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 and three other persons instituted five suits in the Munsiff Court against the petitioner and respondent No. 3 for a decree directing the petitioner and respondent No. 3 to render an account of the amounts collected on their behalf from December, 1969 towards the accident benefit fund and from October, 1973 'towards the gratuity fund.
The petitioner who was the President and the Treasurer of the trade union resisted the suits and contended that since the plaintiffs had resigned and ceased to be members of the trade union they had no right to claim the refund of the sums due to them from out of the funds of the trade union and that the suits were not maintainable in the Civil Courts in view of the provisions of the and the .
All these suits were tried together and the Munsiff passed a preliminary decree against the petitioner and respondent No. 3 directing them to render an account of the amounts received by them, and further directed that each of the plaintiffs was entitled to get his proportionate share of the amount due to him from out of the total amount received by the petitioner and respondent No. 3.
The petitioner filed an appeal and the Additional Sub Judge found that the petitioner and respondent No. 3 had received from the management amounts on behalf of the workmen, but held that the plaintiffs were not entitled to any decree at the hands of the Civil Court since the suits were not maintainable in view of the provisions of the , l972 and the .
Second Appeals were filed in the High Court by respondent Nos. 1 & 2 and the High Court by a common judgment set aside the judgment and decree passed by the First Appellate Court and restored the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court.
In the appeal by Special Leave to this Court it was contended that the provisions of the and the have debarred the filing of the suit, that respondent Nos. 1 & 2 could not claim the amount after resigning from the PG NO 260 membership of the trade union as the said amounts formed part of the general fund of the trade union, and that only on the dissolution of the trade union its funds could be distributed as per the rules of the trade union, and where the rules did not provide for the same, then the fund was liable to be distributed as per Rule 11(1) of the Central Trade Union Regulations, l938.
On the question: whether a member of the trade union is entitled to ask for an account and to claim refund of sums received by the trade union from the management for and on his behalf on his ceasing to be a member.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, HELD: 1.
The civil suits filed by the workers Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 were not barred under the provisions of the and the .
[264C] 2.
The amounts were received by the trade union from the employer concerned towards the gratuity and accident benefit to which the workers were entitled.
There was no scheme drawn up by the trade union regarding the payment of the gratuity amount and the accident benefit fund received on behalf of the workmen to the workmen concerned.
There was no agreement between the trade union and its members that the amount received towards gratuity and accident benefit should form part of funds of the trade union.
Any amount received for and on behalf of the members is liable to be refunded to the workmen concerned.
[264D] In the instant Case, the amount which had been received on behalf of Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 by the petitioner and Respondent No. 3 had, therefore, to be refunded to them on their resignation from the membership of the trade union.
[264E] 3.
There is no warrant for the view that only on the dissolution of the trade union its funds could be distributed as per the rules of the trade union and that where the rules did not provide for the same, the fund was liable to be distributed as per Rule 11(1) of the Central Trade Union Regulations 1938.
[264B] Balmer Lawrie Workers Union.
Bombay and Anr.
vs Balmer Lawrie and Co. Ltd. and Ors., [l985] 2 S.C.R. 492 distinguished.
PG NO 261
