Section 129A of the confers right of appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
Where, however, the order appealed against relates to duty demanded in respect of goods which are not under the control of the customs authorities or any penalty levied under the Act, section 129E requires the aggrieved person to deposit with the proper officer the duty demanded or the penalty levied, pending the appeal.
The proviso thereto, however, empowers the Appellate Authority to dispense with such deposit in case of under hardship.
The appellants, Indian citizens based in Hong Kong and Singapore respectively, were caught red handed, while on a visit to India, with huge amounts of foreign exchange.
They admitted their part in systematic illegal export of foreign exchange from the country over the past several years.
In proceedings under sections 111 to 114 and 118 of the Act the Addl.
Collector of Customs imposed a penalty of Ks.3 lacs on each of them.
They preferred appeals to the Appellate Tribunal under section 129A. In an application made under section 129E the Tribunal reduced the amount of penalty to be deposited to Rs. 1 lac for each of them.
The appellants sought further reduction.
Their case was that they had not gone out of the country and had no assets in India.
Their passports were impounded at the time of arrest.
Their visas had lapsed and could not be renewed.
They had no money and that in a situation of this type the condition for deposit of penalty was bad as it whittled down the appellants ' right of appeal.
The Tribunal after considering the relevant factors declined to reduce the penalty further and dismissed the appeal for non compliance with the provisions of section 129E. Dismissing the appeals under section 130E(b) of the .
HELD: Right to appeal is neither an absolute right nor an ingredient of natural justice the principles of which PG NO 434 PG NO 435 must be followed in all judicial and quasi judicial adjudications.
The right to appeal is a statutory right and it can be circumscribed by the conditions in the grant.
[439A B] 2.
It is not the law that adjudication by itself following the rules of natural justice would be violative of any right, constitutional or statutory, without any right of appeal, as such.
If a statute gives a right to appeal upon certain conditions, it is upon fulfilment of those conditions that the right becomes vested and exercisable to the appellant.
[440C] 3.
The purpose of section 129E of the is to act in terrorem to make the people comply with the provisions of law.
The right of appeal provided therein is a conditional one.
The petitioner could obtain stay of realisation of tax levied or penalty imposed in an appeal subject to the limitations contemplated therein.
Although the section does not expressly provide for rejection of the appeal for non deposit of duty or penalty yet it makes it obligatory on the appellant to deposit the same pending the appeal? failing which the Appellate Tribunal is fully competent to reject the appeal.
The proviso thereto gives a discretion to the authority in cases of undue hardships to condone the obligation to deposit or reduce.
It is a discretion vested in an obligation to act judicially and properly.
[440E, 439F, 437G, 440C] In the instant case, the order of the Tribunal was passed honestly, bona fide and having regafd to the plea of `undue hardship ' as canvassed by the appellants.
All the relevant factors, namely, the probability of the prima facie case of the appellants and the conduct of the parties were taken into consideration.
The Tribunal noted the several abortive and defective attempts made to get extension of time to deposit the security.
Firstly, the prayer was to accept Rs.35,000 and secondly to accept Rs. 60,000 in two months .
It also noted the fact that the appeals were filed two years ago.
It could not therefore, be said that there was any improper exercise of jurisdiction or misdirection by the Appellate Authority.
[439H,440A,D,438C] Navin Chandra Chhotelal vs Central Board of Excise & Customs & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
Hoosein Kasam Dada (India) Ltd. vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors., ; and Collector of Customs & Excise, Cochin & Ors.
vs A.S. Bava, , distinguished.
PG NO 436
