In compliance with the decision of the Supreme Court in Dr. Pradeep Jain etc.
vs Union of India B Ors.
; , and on the basis of the scheme approved by the Court, respondent No. 2 held an All India Entrance Examination for filling up 25 per cent seats in different Post Graduate Medical Colleges in the States and Union Territories and those run by public authorities.
The scheme provided that cut off base should be 50 per cent marks.
Out of about 2100 seats, only 500 could be filled.
In the Writ Petition filed before this Court, the petitioner, an unsuccessful candidate at the aforesaid examination sought (1) a direction that clauses 11 and 15(g) of the Bulletin of Information, published by respondent No. 2 in this regard were illegal, unconstitutional and incompetent, (2) a writ of certiorari to quash the list of successful candidates for admission within 25% reserved quota, and (3) a writ of mandamus to the respondents to admit the petitioner and similarly placed other candidates against the 1500 odd seats left out due to the arbitrary decision/action of the respondents, contending that no seat should go unfilled.
Disposing of the Writ Petition and a pending CMP in other disposed of Writ Petitions, HELD: 1.1 It is well settled that judicial determination is not to be tested by the touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[388B] In the instant case since the bulletin is in accordance with the scheme approved by this Court, and the examination PG NO 385 PG NO 386 has been held following the terms thereof, the petitioner is not entitled to ask for quashing a part of the bulletin and the list of selected candidates.
There is no tenable challenge against the examination.
[387H, 388A] 1.2 Since in the very first year of implementing the scheme, a stalemate has arisen, it is appropriate to give certain directions, which may in the facts and circumstances, be appropriate and adequate to meet the situation to the extent possible.
Sufficient number of qualified doctors are not available.
Every step should, therefore, be taken to turn out as many doctors with Post Graduate qualification as possible.
Since about 1600 seats have reverted to the States and medical colleges located within them, and have to be filled up, it is in the interest of the parties that this should be done as quickly as possible so that the academic time schedule may be stuck to.
[388B C, F, 389D] 1.3 Respondent No. 2 is directed to supply to each State and/or Union Territory from where candidates had appeared at the entrance test, candidate wise particulars confined to such State.
Once these particulars are available, the Selection Committee operating in the State and/or Union Territory or in the respective medical colleges covered by the scheme, as the case may be, shall draw up a list of the remaining candidates seeking admission as against the 75 per cent of the seats and the candidates who had taken the All India Entrance examination, but have not been found fit on the basis of the marks secured in their respective selection tests or at the MBBS examination, in States where there is no such selection test relating 75 per cent seats.
This shall be on the footing that marks in the respective selection tests or the test and the examination are at par and admission would be on the basis of merit.
No doubt, the All India Selection test had been a stricter one, but it would not be possible for this Court now to direct what weightage is to be added on that score.
Once the common list is drawn up on the basis of performance, admission to remaining seats can be taken up.
[389F G] [The admissions already effected inclusive of seats in the reserved quota shall continue.
But further admissions in respect of unfilled seats as against the 25 per cent quota shall be deferred now and again taken up after the list of eligible candidates is drawn up as per the time schedule now indicated.] [389H, 390B] Dr. Pradeep Jain etc.
vs Union of India & Ors. etc.
; , , referred to.
PG NO 387
