A dispute over the completion of construction work under a contract led to the litigation between the appellant and the respondent company.
However, during the pendency of the proceedings in the High Court, the parties agreed to settle the dispute through arbitration.
The Arbitrators gave their award in favour of the respondent company on the ground that the appellant had committed breach of contract and was also guilty of wrongful revocation of the agreement.
The award did not contain any reason as to why and how the Arbitrators had arrived at the sum awarded.
The appellant filed objection to the respondent 's application for making the award Rule of the Court on the ground inter alia that (i) no reasons had been given for the award, (ii) the award being ambiguous showed non application of mind, and (iii) the amount of interest awarded was unjustified.
The learned District Judge allowed the objection and set aside the award on the ground of ambiguity and non statement of reasons.
The High Court, however, allowed the respondent 's appeal and also directed payment of interest for the period during which the arbitration proceedings were pending.
Before this Court it was urged that, because the question whether on the ground of absence of reasons the award is bad per se is pending consideration by a Constitution Bench of this Court, the present case should await adjudication on this point by the Constitution Bench.
Disposing of the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) One of the cardinal principles of the administration of justice is to ensure quick disposal of PG NO 441 PG NO 442 disputes in accordance with law, justice and equity.
Justice between the parties in a particular case should not be in suspended animation.
[445B C, G] (2) Interests of justice and administration of justice would not be served by keeping at bay final adjudication of the controversy in this case on the plea that the question whether an unreasoned award is bad or not, is pending adjudication by a larger Bench.
[445E F] (3) It is not known whether the decision of this Court would have prospective application only in view of the long settled position of law on this aspect in this country or not.
[445G] (4) The law as it stands today is clear that unless there is an error of law apparent on the face of the award, the award cannot be challenged merely on the ground of absence of reasons.
This is settled law by a long series of decisions.
[445E] (5) An award is not invalid merely because by a process of inference and argument it may be demonstrated that the arbitrator had committed some mistake in arriving at some conclusion.
[446B] (6) It is not open to the Court to speculate, where no reasons are given by the arbitrator, as to what impelled the arbitrator to arrive at his conclusions.
[446C] Jivarajbhai Ujamshi Sheth vs Chintamanrao Balaji & Ors., ; , referred to.
(7) It is an error of law apparent on the face of it and not a mistake of fact which could be the ground for challenging the award.
[446F] Union of India vs Bungo Steel Furniture P. Ltd., ; and Allen Berry & Co. P. Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
In the present case the arbitrator gave no reasons for the award.
There is no legal proposition which is the basis of the award, far less any legal proposition which is erroneous.
And there is no allegation of any misconduct in the proceedings.
[446E F] (9) The award of interest pendente lite in this case was in violation of the principles enunciated by this Court.
[447B] PG NO 443 Executive Engineer (Irrigation) Balimela vs Abhaduta Jena, [1988] 1 SCC 418, followed.
Food Corporation of India vs M/s. Surendra Devendra & Mohendra Transport Co., [1988] 1 SCC 57, explained.
