A Committee consisting of Goswamy and Wadhwa, JJ.
was constituted on 23rd February, 1988 to inquire into certain incidents involving lawyers and police officers, which took place in January, 1988.
Pursuant to this Court 's order dated 2.6.88 to reconsider the whole question relating to the order in which the witnesses had to be examined, the Committee issued an order on 29.6.88 on the basis of which notices under Sec.
8B were issued to three other officers, but not to the petitioners.
It was directed by the Committee that the petitioners be cross examined at the beginning of the inquiry.
On their refusal, the Committee directed the filing of a complaint against them for an offence punishable under Section 178 IPC.
Pursuant to the complaints filed on behalf of the Committee, criminal proceedings were initiated against the petitioners before the Metropolitan Magistrate.
Against the above directions and complaints by the Committee, the petitioners have approached this Court by way of the present Writ Petitions/Special Leave Petitions.
The petitioners submitted that they did not either wish to delay the proceedings or to show disrespect to the Committee, but only wanted to protect their own interest in making the submission before the Committee as per the legal advice given to them.
Quashing the orders of the Committee directing the filing of the PG NO 518 PG NO 519 complaints and the criminal proceedings initiated against the petitioners before the Metropolitan Magistrate pursuant to the complaints, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Delhi Administration has to examine first all its witnesses as_required by Rule 5(5)(a) of the Commissions of Inquiry (Central) Rules, 1972 framed under the .
Even those witnesses who may have filed affidavits already may first be examined in chief before they are cross examined.
The question whether a party hair the right of cross examination or not shall be decided by the Committee in accordance with Sec.
8C of the Act.
This direction does not apply to those witnesses falling under Sec.
8B of the Act, who have to be examined at the end of the inquiry as opined by the Committee itself.
[520F H] 2.1.
The petitioners are persons who fall under Sec.
8B of the Act and have to be dealt with accordingly.
[522A B] 2.2 If the three persons to whom notices under Sec.
8B have been issued are to be examined even according to the Committee at the end or the inquiry there is no justifiable reason to deny the same treatment to the petitioners who are in the same posit~on as those three persons.
The action of the Committee in asking them to be cross examined at the beginning of the inquiry appears to be discriminatory.
Mere non issue of notices to them under Sec.8B ought not to make any difference if they otherwise satisfy the conditions mentioned in Sec.
The issue of such a notice is not contemplated under Sec.
8B of the Act.
It is enough if at any stage the Commission considers it necessary to inquire into the conduct of any person.
Such person would thereafter he governed by Sec.
8B of the Act.
[522E G] 3.
The Committee should not have, in the circumstances of the case, directed the filing of a complaint against either of the petitioners for an offense punishable under Sec.
178 IPC.
[523C, D] [For Judgment containing the reasons for this order, please Sec (1989) 1 SCR p. 20.]
