These Civil appeals and special leave petitions centred round one point, namely, the validity of the Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1958 as amended by Section 3 of the Maharashtra Act XIV of 1987 and Section 6 of the said Act as amended by Maharashtra Act XXXIII of 1987 and the Maharashtra Act IX of 1988.
Section 3 of the said Act XIV of 1987 added sub section (IC) to provide for the levy of one time tax at 15 times the annual rate on all motor cycles in the State.
The said provisions further provided that in the case of motor cycles owned by a company or other commercial organisation, the one time tax was to be levied at thrice the rate.
Section 6 of the said Act XIV of 1987 added sub section (6) to section 9, enabling a registered owner of a motor cycle or tricycle to obtain refund of `Lone_time tax" under certain conditions.
Petitions were filed in the High Court by the respondents in the appeals and petitioners in the special leave petitions, challenging the amended provisions of the principal Act.
The High Court held that (i) the levy of the one time tax was beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature and also beyond Entry 57 of List II of the Seventh Schedule, and (ii) the provision for imposition of levy at thrice the rates on the vehicles owned by a firm or company, were neither discriminatory nor arbitrary.
The High Court struck down Act XIV of 1987.
The appeals by leave were filed by the State and the special leave petitions were fixed by the petitioners in this Court against the decision of the High Court.
In the meanwhile, the Maharashtra Legislature enacted Maharashtra Act XXXIII of 1987, which deleted Section 3(4) of the principal Act as amended by the PG NO 482 PG NO 483 Maharashtra Act XIV of 1987, whereby the existing provisions of refund for temporary non user were made inapplicable in cases of motor cycles and tricycles, restricting the right of refund to Section 9(6) in the contingencies mentioned therein.
It also introduced sub section (7) to section 9 conferring the right of refund in respect of motor cycles and tricycles in accordance with the rates specified in the Fifth Schedule.
But the said schedule did not prescribe a separate rate of refund for the company owned vehicles.
Therefore, the refund in respect of the company owned vehicles was the same as that payable to individual owned vehicles even though the tax paid on former class of vehicles was three times.
Soon thereafter, the Maharashtra Legislature enacted Act IX of 1988, whereby the only relevant change for the present purpose was that the rate of refund was enhanced to three times in respect of the company owned vehicles.
Before this Court, the appellant State submitted that the amendments enacted by the Maharashtra Acts XXXllI of 1987 and IX of 1988 had brought the principal Act as amended by the Maharashtra Act XIV of 1987 within the constitutional requirements of making one time tax 's regulatory and compensatory tax and that it was not necessary to decide if the Act as it stood when it was challenged before the High Court? was beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature.
The respondents in the appeals and the petitioners in the special leave petitions urged that as even after the amendment no refund was available in respect of a vehicle which had been registered for more than 13 years? the effect of that was that no refund al all was available in respect.
of the tax paid for a vehicle for the 14th and 15th years.
The impugned levy of tax ceased to be compensatory or regulatory and was void under Entry 57 of List II and was violative of Article 301 of the Constitution.
Disposing of the appeals and dismissing the special leave petitions the Court.
HELD: The tax imposed on the motor vehicles or a class of motor cycles would not be valid unless it is compensatory or regulatory or does not have any nexus with the vehicles using the roads.
In such a case.
the levy would be Section of the said Act XIV of 1987 added sub section (IC) to provide for the levy of one time tax at 15 times the annual rate on all motor cycles in the State.
The said provisions further provided that in the case of motor cycles owned by a company or other commercial organisation, the one time tax was to be levied at thrice the rate.
The fact that the act, as at present, did not provide for refund in the 14th and 15th years, did no make the law outside the competence of the State Legislature.
he concept PG NO 484 of "regulatory and compensatory" tax does no imply mathematical precision of quid pro quo.
[489E] After the amendment, the Act came with in the constitutional requirements of making he one time tax a regulatory and compensatory tax.
It was true that the Act has no provided for refund in the 14h and 15h years but that does no make he law out sides the competence of the State Legislature.
It is no mathematical precision that is necessary nor can it be.
there is in the provisions as amended, as amended, a discernible and an identifiable object behind the levy and a nexus between the subject and the object of the levy, [491E F] Two principles have to be emphasised, firstly, that the tax must be regulatory and compenstaory and secondly, there must be no discrimination.
A taxation law cannot claim immunity from the equality clause in Article 14 of the Constitution, but in view of the intrinsic complexity of fiscal adjustments of diverse elements, a considerable wide discretion and latitude in the matter of classification for taxation purpose is permissible.
The life of Motor cycles and tricycles normally exceeds 25 years.
Non refund for certain period is no conclusive of the matter.
Even if mathematical provision is no possible, it cannot be said that it is wholly unmathematical.
The collection of ax for a period of 15 ears at one point of time is a convenient method enabling the owner o use he vehicle for more than 25 years without having to pay the tax periodically and pay the enhanced tax at may be levied during the 25 years of life of the vehicle.
Regulatory and compensatory tax can be levied to the extent e State is required to pay for rendering the services.
[491G;492A C] The Act, as at present, is not violative of Article 145 of the Constitution.
The fact that the company owned vehicles are taxed that three times the rate payable by individuals, does not make the legislation violatvie of Article 14.
Histrocially, the company owned vehicles are always been taxed at a rate higher that the individually owned vehicles.
he legislature has he power to distribute tax burden in a flexible manner and the Court would no interfere with the same.
It could not be said that there was differentiation without any basis and as such there was discrimination.
[492E H] In view of the principles applicable to the taxation laws and various other factors, the Maharashtra Act as amended from time to time does not suffer from any vice of being not regulatory or compensatory taxation nor from the vice of being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, and the challenge to the provisions of the Act as amended PG NO 485 after the judgment of the High Court could not be maintained.
[494G ;495A] After the amendments afore mentioned the Act does no suffer from the vice mentioned in the judgment of the High Court .
The appeals were allowed thus, and the challenge made in the special leave petitions was dismissed.
[495] The taxes would be realised in accordance with the Act and the necessary adjustments would be made accordingly.
[495C] Bolani Ors.
Ltd. vs State of Orissa.
; ; G.K. Krishnan vs The State of Tamil Nadu & Anr., [1975] 2 S.C.R. 715; Malwa Bus Service (P) Ld.
vs State of Punjab and Ors.
, ; ' International ouris Corporation vs State of Haryana & Ors., ; ; Income tax Officer, shillong & Anr.
vs N. Takim Roy Rymbai, etc., ; Mrs. Meenakshi & Ors.
vs, State of Karnataka & Ors., AIR 1983 SC 1283; Anant Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of Gujarat and Ors., [1975] 3 S>.C.R. 220; Khandige Sham Bhat & Ors.
vs The Agricultural Income tax Officer; , and State of Karnataka vs K. Gopalakrishna Shenoy and Another, ; , refered to.
