The appellant landlord filed a civil suit against the respondent tenant for possession of a shop which had been rented out by him in 1978.
The suit was filed on the basis that the respondent was in arrears of rent from lst December, 1981 to 31st May,1982, that the tenancy had been terminated by giving a suit notice, and that section 1(3) of the Haryana Urban (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1973_exempted the building from the purview of the Act.
On or about 15th February, 1983, the respondent tenant filed his written statement, and in November, 1984, moved an application for dismissal of the suit stating that the shop in question was constructed in June 1974 and as such, the period of 10 year had elapsed by June 1984 in terms of section 1 [3] of the Act and as such, the immunity from the application of the Act having expired, the suit under the Act is not maintainable, and that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court was barred.
The Sub Judge held that the decree was not necessary, to be passed within the exemption period of 10 years under section 1 (3) of the Act, and accordingly dismissed the respondent 's application.
The respondent preferred a revision petition to the High Court , which held that as the suit had not been decreed within the period of 10 years, the building in question came within the operation of the Act and as such, PG NO 528 PG NO 529 the rent Act was applicable and the Civil Court had no jurisdiction.
The High Court allowed the petition and consequently dismissed the suit pending before the Sub Judge.
The landlord appealed to this Court by Special Leave.
Allowing the appeal and remanding the case, HELD: l.(a) The rights of the parties will have to be determined on the basis of the rights available to them on the date of the suit.
The Judgment and Order of the High Court set aside, and order of the Sub Judge restored.
The suit to proceed in accordance with law.
{533G 535F] (b) Section 13 of the Act provides that the tenant in possession of a building or a rented land shall not be evicted therefrom except in accordance with the provisions of the said Section.
Those provisions world not be applicable under Section 1(3) to a suit instituted within 10 years from the date of the completion of the building in question.
{534B} (c) It is well settled that no man should suffer because of the fault of the Court or delay in the procedure.
"Actus curiam neminem gravabit ' ' an act of Court shall prejudice no man.
[534E] (d) Having regard to the time normally consumed for adjudication, the 10 years exemption or holiday from the application of the Rent Act would become illusory, if the suit has to he filed within that time and be disposed of finally.
[534F] (e) It is common knowledge that unless a suit is instituted soon after the date of letting, it world never be disposed of within 10 years and even then within that time it may not be disposed of.
That will make the 10 years holiday from the Rent Act illusory and provide no incentive to the landlords to build new holiday to solve problem of shortages of houses.
The purpose of the legislation would thus be defeated.
[534G] (f) Bearing in mind the well settled principle, that the rights of parties crystallise on the date of the institution of the suit, the meaningful construction must be that the exemption world apply for a period of 10 years and will continue to be available until the suit is disposed of or adjudicated.
Such suit or proceedings must be instituted within the stipulated period of 10 years.
Once rights crystallise the adjudication must be in accordance with law.
[535E] PG NO 530 Vineet Kumar vs Mangal Sain Wadhera, [1984] 3 S.C.C. 352; Nand Kishore Marwah and Ors.
vs Samundri Devi, ; ; Om Prakash Gupta vs Dig.
Vijendrapal Gupta, ; ; Ram Saroop Rai vs Lilavati, ; , referred to.
2.(a) Purposive interpretation in a social amelioration legislation is an imperative irrespective of anything else.
[534G] (b) Judicial time and energy is more often than not consumed in Finding what is the intention of the Parliament or in other words, the will of the people.
The fairest and most rational method to interpret the will of the legislator is by exploring his intentions at the time when the law was made, by signs most natural and probable and these signs are either the words, the context, the subject matter, the effects and consequences or the spirit and reasons of the law.
[534H 535A] (c) Each word, phrase or sentence has to be construed in the light of the purpose of the Act itself but words must be construed with imagination of purpose behind them.
Though the Court is concerned with seeking of intention, it is rather looking to the meaning of the word that the legislator has used and the true meaning of the words used.
{535B} Poppatlal Shah vs State of Madras, ; and Black Clawson International Ltd. vs Papierwerke Walnhof Aschaffenburg A G, {1975] A.C. 591 at 613.
