Pursuant to separate disciplinary proceedings the penalty of `reduction in rank ' was imposed on the appellants, Nyadar Singh and M.J. Ninama, reducing each of them to a post lower than the one to which they were directly recruited.
The Central Administrative Tribunals rejected the appellants ' challenge to the orders imposing the penalty.
Before this Court, the appellants ' contention was that as a result of the imposition of the penalty, they were reduced in rank to posts lower than the one to which they were initially recruited, which on a proper construction of Rule 11 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1965 was not permissible.
The Additional Solicitor General, on the other hand, contended that this limitation which might be appropriate in the case of a `reversion ', was inappropriate in a case of `reduction in rank ' imposed as a penalty.
The argument was that `reduction in rank ' had a wider import than `reversion ' and there was no reason why the power to impose this penalty which was permissible on the plain language of the Rule, be whittled down by any other consideration.
PG NO 547 PG NO 548 Disposing of the appeals, it was, HELD: (1) The meaning to be given to a particular statutory language depends on the evaluation of a number of interpretative criteria.
Shorn of the context, the words by themselves are `slippery customers '.
The general presumption is that these criteria do not detract or stand apart from, but are to be harmonised with, the well accepted legal principles.
Considerations relevant to interpretation are not whether a differently conceived or worded statute would have yielded results more consonant with fairness and reasonableness.
Consequences do not alter the statutory language, but might only help to fix its meaning.
[555H; 556A B, G H] (2) The expression `rank ', in `reduction in rank ' has, for purposes of Article 311(2), an obvious reference to the stratification of the posts or grades or categories in the official hierarchy.
It does not refer to the mere seniority of the Government Servant in the same class or grade or category.
[552B C] (3) The penalty of `reduction in rank ' of a Government servant initially recruited to a higher time scale, grade, service or post to a lower time scale, grade, service or post virtually amounted to his removal from the higher post and the substitution of his recruitment to lower post, affecting the policy of recruitment itself.
ln conceivable cases, the Government servant might not have the qualification requisite for the post which might require and involve different, though not necessarily higher, skills and attainment.
[551B C, 557G] [Worthington vs Robin, [1896] 75 Law Times Reports 446, referred to.] (4) Rule 11 must be read in consonance with general principles and so construed the expression `reduction ' in it would not admit of a wider meaning.
[557H; 558A] Babaji Charan Rout vs State of Orissa, [1982] 1 SLJ 496; Shivalingaswamy vs State of Karnataka, [1985] ILR Kar.
1453; approved.
Gopal Rao vs C.I.T., ; Mahendra Kumar vs Union of India, [1984] 1 All India Ser.
Law Journal 34; ; S.N. Dey vs Union of India, [1983] 2 SLJ All. 114; C.S. Balakumar vs The lnspecting Asstt.
Commissioner of Income Tax, [1987] 1 All India SLJ 18, over ruled.
PG NO 548 P. V. Srinivasa Sastry vs Comptroller & Auditor General of India, and Hussain Sasan Saheb Kaldgi vs State of Maharashtra, , referred to.
