% The Emergency Risks (Factories) Insurance Act, 1962 was enacted to provide for expeditious rehabilitation of industrial undertakings in the event of damage in times of war.
The Central Government accordingly undertook to insure the factories against war risks.
The Act envisaged the promulgation and effectuation of the Emergency Risks (Factories) Insurance Scheme mandating a compulsory insurance of factories against war risks on payment of prescribed premia.
The Director of Emergency Risks Insurance Scheme, after giving an opportunity to the appellant to show cause, determined the sum of Rs.47,59,109.00 as balance of premia due from the appellant.
The appellate authority the Central Government dismissed the appellant 's appeal.
The legality of the proceedings so culminating in the said appellate order was assailed by the appellant in the Writ Petition before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, which was rejected.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
The contentions pressed by the appellant were (1) that "Distribution and Transmission lines" did not constitute 'Factory ' in the concept of 'insurable property ' under the 'Act '; (2) that in ascertaining the value of the insurable property, depreciation had had to be granted under the relevant provisions of the Income Tax, Act, 1922; (3) and that the 'Act ' was itself a piece of temporary legislation and the notice dated 217 28.11.1968 issued after 10.1.1968 when the legislation had spent itself out by efflux of time was without the authority of law.
Dismissing the appeal, it was ^ HELD: (1) The inhibitions of the limited import of the expression 'factory ' do not limit the identity of the 'insurable property ' which will have to be ascertained and determined in accordance with the provisions of the 'scheme '.
The Act enables the Central Government to declare that provisions of the 'Act ' and of the 'scheme ' shall apply to assets specified in section 17(1)(d), which include the whole or a specified part of the distribution and transmission system.
The 'scheme ' prepared and promulgated by notification S.O. 3974 which came into force with effect from 1.1.1963 provides, among other things, that the whole of the "Distribution and Transmission Systems" shall constitute 'insurable property ' and that the 'Act ' and the 'scheme ' shall be applied to them.
[220C H] (2) The provisions as to depreciation in a taxing law like the Income Tax Act contain elements of incentives and are also informed by considerations of policy of the tax and do not reflect purely economic criteria relevant to the determination of the depreciation.
In the instant case, the High Court found that the Electricity (Supply) Act itself provided a formula for working out the allowance of depreciation and the appellant had been adopting that formula for valuation of its properties, assets, etc.
There was, therefore, no error in principle in applying the standard of depreciation provided in .
[221G; 222D] (3) Whatever be the principles of construction of temporary statutes and the effect of the rights and obligations under them after the expiry of the statute itself, the 'Act ' in the instant case contains specific provisions preserving the rights and obligations.
For that purpose the 'Act ' invokes the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act.
The principle behind section 6 of the General Clauses Act is that all the provisions of Acts would continue in force for purposes of enforcing the liability incurred when the Acts were in force and any investigation, legal proceedings, or remedy, may be instituted, continued or enforced as if the Acts had not expired.
[222F H; 223A B] Amadalavalasa Cooperative Agricultural & Industrial Society Ltd. vs Union of India, ; at 738, followed.
