% The appellant undertook construction of certain houses for the respondent Development Authority and completed the same on 2nd April, 1980.
The appellant sent several letters to the respondent requesting for finalisation of the bills; the first one on 28th February, 1983 and the last on 4th September, 1985.
Ultimately, the appellant served notice, through his counsel requesting the respondent to release the security amount and refer the dispute to arbitration.
On respondent 's failure to do so, the appellant filed an application in the Court, under section 20 of the seeking a direction for filing the arbitration agreement in the court and referring the dispute to arbitration.
A Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the application as barred by time.
This decision was upheld by the Division Bench.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.1 Article 137 of the would apply to any petition or application filed in a civil court.
[353E F] Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum vs T.P.K.K. Amsom and Bensom, Kerala, ; relied on. 1.2 In order to be entitled to an order of reference under section 20, it 352 is necessary that there should be an arbitration agreement and secondly, difference must arise to which this agreement applied.
The existence of a dispute is, therefore, essential for appointment of an Arbitrator under section 8 or a reference under section 20 of the Act.
[353H, 354A] 1.3 Dispute entails a positive element and assertion in denying, not merely inaction to accede to a claim or a request.
Whether in a particular case, a dispute has arisen or not has to be found out from the facts and circumstances of the case.
[354F] 1.4 A right to get payment would normally arise on completion of the work and a party cannot postpone accrual of cause of action by writing reminders or sending reminders.
But where a bill had not been finally prepared, the claim made by the claimant is the accrual of the cause of action.
[354C D] In the instant case there was an arbitration agreement.
There has been an assertion of claim by the appellant and silence as well as refusal in respect of the same by the respondent.
Therefore, a dispute has arisen regarding non payment of the alleged dues of the appellant.
Since final bills had not been prepared, and there was assertion of claim on 28th February, 1983 and there was non payment, the cause of action arose on that date.
[354A B, D] The application under section 20 of the Act having been filed in the Court in January, 1986, i.e. within the period of three years from the date of cause of action, it was within time and the High Court was in error in dismissing it on the ground of limitation.
[354G]
