The rule that a statute is not to have retrospective operation can apply only where it is doubtful from the language used whether or not it was intended to have such operation.
Where the language of the statute plainly gives it a retrospective operation, there can be no scope for applying the rule of presumption against retrospective operation.
The rule does not require that the Courts should be obdurate in refusing to give a statute retrospective operation, equally it does not justify the reading of more words than there are into the statute in order that the rule may apply.
Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. vs Income Tax Com missioner, Delhi, (1927) L. R. 54 I.A. 421, Smith vs Callander, and Reid vs Reid, , considered.
The appellant brought a suit for specific performance of an agreement of sale in the High Court of Indore at a time when Indore was a Princely State in British India.
On April 22, 1948, the Rulers of Gwalior, Indore and certain other States entered into a Covenant to form the United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa (Madhya Bharat).
The suit was heard by a single Judge and decreed on June 11, 1948.
The Ruler of Indore on June 16, 1948, made over the administration of his State to the Raj Pramukh of the United State in terms of the Covenant.
By an ordinance promulgated by the Raj Pramukh a High Court was established for the United State and the High Court of Indore ceased to function from July 29, 1948.
The respondents preferred an appeal to the Divisional Bench of the High Court of the United State on August 24, 1948, and the appellant preferred a cross appeal under the provisions of that Ordinance.
The Divisional Bench found in favour of the respondents in both the appeal and cross appeal and dismissed the appellant 's suit by a judgment dated December 2, 1948.
The Interim Legislative Assembly of the United State enacted the United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa (Madhya Bharat) High Court of Judicature Act, VIII Of 1949, which came into force on January 18, 1949, and repealed the Ordinance.
40 314 By section 2(b) of the Act it was provided : This Act shall apply to all Criminal and civil proceedings including those under.
testamentary, intestate, matrimonial divorce and insolvency jurisdiction pending in the courts in any State on the date on which the State is included in the united State and to such proceedings, arising in the said states, after those dates.
By section 25 it was provided : Special appeal shall lie to the Full Bench of the High court from : (1) a decree or an appealable order passed by the Divisional Bench of two judges Of the High Court in the exercise of extraordinary or appellate civil jurisdiction.
The appellant preferred an appeal to the Full Bench of the High Court under section 25 against.
the judgment of the Divisional Bench.
The Full Bench dismissed the appeal as incompetent holding that section 25 could not be given retrospective operation so as to disturb the right that had vested in the respondents as to the finality of the judgment of the Divisional Bench which was passed before the Act came into force : Held, that section 25 Of the Act, although not in terms retrospective, has to be read with section 2(b) of the Act which made the Act, and consequently section 25, applicable to the proceedings mentioned in it and since the appeal before the Divisional Bench, filed after the inclusion of the State of Indore in the United State, was beyond doubt one of such proceedings, the competency of the appeal could not be questioned.
Although there can be no hard and fast rule that in no case should the pre existing law be referred to for the purpose of interpreting a new enactment, where, as in the present case, the language is simple, free from doubt and clearly indicates that a change in the pre existing law is intended and no reason existed requiring a reference to the pre existing law, no such reference is permissible.
Tumahole Bereng vs The King, , Abdur Rahim vs Mohomed Barkat Ali, (1927) L.R. 55 I.A. 96 and In re Mayfair .Property Co. (1898) 2 Ch .
28, referred to.
