The dispute as to the refund of earnest money deposit to the respondent contractor was referred to an arbitrator named in the arbit ration clause of the agreement.
The respondent filed claim before him.
During the pendency of the claim before the said arbitrator, there was succession to that office by another incumbent.
The succeeding Officer wanted to continue the arbitration proceedings but before that the respondent made an application under section 5 of the for removal of the arbitrator on the ground that he being an employee of the State the petitioner apprehended bias.
The Judge, City Civil Court found that the Chief Engineer of the Circle concerned was in favour of the cancellation of the contract in question and when it came to be terminated the construction was sought to be entrusted at the risk and cost of the petitioner on the advice or the proposal of the Chief Engineer.
Being of the view that the arbitrator, the Superintending Engineer, being subordinate to the said Chief Engineer, would necessarily have a leaning to accept the attitude expressed by latter, he concluded that there could legitimately be a bias in the mind of the arbitrator.
The High Court dismissed the appeal in limine.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, HELD: A named and agreed arbitrator cannot and should not be removed in exercise of a discretion vested in the court under section 5 of the Act unless there is allegation either against his honesty or capacity or mala fide or interest in the subject matter or reasonable apprehensiors of the bias.
[677E F] A predisposition to decide for or against one party, without proper regard to the true merits of the dispute is bias.
There must be reasonable apprehension of that predisposition based on cogent materials.
Mere imagination PG NO 673 PG NO 674 of a ground cannot be an excuse for apprehending bias.
[677F G; 678C] International Authority lndia vs
K.D. Bali & Anr.
,J.T. 1988 2 S.C.1.
and Commercial Arbitration, by Mustill & Boyd., [1982] Edn. p.214, Hulsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
Vol. 2, para 551, p. 282 referred to.
In the instant case, when the parties entered into the contract they knew the terms of the contract including arbitration clause providing that the Superintending Engineer of a particular Circle shall be the arbitrator.
They also knew the scheme and the fact that the said Superintending Engineer was subordinate to the Chief Engineer of the Circle.
ln spite of that the parties agreed and entered into arbitration and indeed submitted to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator at that time to begin with, who however, could not complete the arbitration because he was transferred and succeeded by a successor.
In these circumstances no bias could reasonably be apprehended and made a ground for removal of a named contractor.
In numerous contracts with the Government, clauses requiring the Super"intending Engineer or some official of the Government to be the arbitrator are there.
It cannot be said that the Superintending Engineer as such cannot be entrusted with the work or arbitration and that apprehension simpliciter in the mind of the contractor without any tangible ground, would he a justification for removal.
[677C F] The case is remanded back to the Judge, City Civil Court, Madras to appoint the Superintending Engineer, Trichy to be the arbitrator in accordance with the arbitration agreement.
[678C D]
