In supersession of its earlier order issued in I968, the Union Government communicated in I971 its policy regarding reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in post filled by promotion on the basis of seniority subject to fitness.
Whenever such promotion were to be made in appointments to Class I, Class II, Class III and Class IV posts in grades or services in which the element of direct recruitment, if any, did not exceed 50 per cent, 15 per cent and 7/1 per cent of the vacancies were to be reserved for SCs and STs respectively.
Detailed instructions were issued to the appointing authorities to make promotions accordingly so that the SCs and STs could have an advantage of getting promotion to a higher grade much earlier than the others.
In 1974, further instructions were issued with regard to reservation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in posts filled by promotionts/appointments to Selection Grade Posts directing reservation of 15 per cent/7 1/2 percent of the vacancies for SCs/STs.
PG NO 623 PG NO 624 In the Posts and Telegraphs Department, the aforesaid policy continued till 1983 when an agreement was arrived at between the Ministry of Communications and certain associations of Post and Telegraphs employees, and a fresh order relating to the policy of promotion to be adopted in the P & T Department was issued in supersession of the scheme of reservation followed till then.
Under the policy, all official belonging to basic grades in Group C and Group D to which there was direct recruitment either from outside and/or by means of limited competitive examination from lower cadres and who had completed 16 years of service in that grade would be placed in the next higher grade.
Whether an employee belonged to general category or to the category of SCs and STs, he would get his promotion on the completion of 16 years ' service.
Under the previous scheme it was possible for the SC and ST employees to secure promotion within a period of 1() to 12 years, while the other employees had to wait for nearly 20 to 23 years.
Thus, the comparative advantage enjoyed by employees belonging to SCs and STs was taken away.
No specific order was issued by the Government regarding reservation for SCs and STs, though clause 6 of the new scheme provided for it.
But the earlier orders providing for reservation for SCs and STs were made inapplicable.
Aggrieved by the new policy, which deprived the SC and ST employees of the advantage which they were enjoying, the petitioners approached this Court by way of the present writ petition.
Petitioners prayed for a direction to the Govt.
of India for issuing an order under clause 6 of the new scheme conferring such additional advantage to them as are enjoyed by SC and ST employees in other departments.
The Respondent contended that the new scheme was advantageous to all the employees since all of them would get automatic promotion after completing 16 years of service in a cadre and that it was done with the consent of the Federations of Employees of the P & T Department.
Allowing the writ petition, HELD:1.The advantage of promotion within a shorted period is being enjoyed by persons 'belonging to the Departments and only the petitioners have been deprived of it.
Such deprivation violates the equality clause of the PG NO 625 Constitution.
While it may be true that no writ can be issued ordinarily compelling the Government to make reservation under Article 16(4) which is only an enabling clause, the circumstances in which the members belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Posts and Telegraphs Department are deprived of indirectly, the advantage of such reservation which they were enjoying earlier, while others who are similarly situated in the other departments are allowed to enjoy it, make the action of Government discriminatory and invite intervention by this Court.
[629G H; 630A B] 2.
One of the methods by which the Government can confer some extra advantage on the employees belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in cases of this nature where promotion to higher cadre is a time bound one is to direct that the employees belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes may be promoted to the higher cadre on completion of a shorter period of service than what is prescribed for others.
In this particular case it is open to the Government to direct that while all others would be entitled to be promoted to the higher cadre on completion of 16 years of service, the members belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes may nay be promoted to the higher cadre on completion ot, say 12 or 13 years of service.
There may be other methods of achieving the same result.
In what way it should be done is a matter left to the discretion of the Government.
This should be decided by the Government taking into consideration al aspects of the case.[630B F] 3.
The Government of India shall within four months issue an order under clause 6 of the letter dated 23.11.1983 conferring some additional advantage on the employees belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Posts & Telegraphs Department commensurate with similar advantages which are being enjoyed by the employees belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the other departments.
Any order that may be issued by the Government shall operate prospectively.
All promotion that have been made so far pursuant to the policy contained in the letter dated 23.11.1983 and that may be made hereafter till the date on which the direction to the issued by the Government under claus 6 comes into operation, shall however, remain undisturbed.
[630 F H;631A]
