The appellant was in the service of Respondent firm from April,1944 till he resigned on 24.5.83.
The employer did not determine the amount of gratuity payable to the appellant.
Appellant furnished the necessary application for payment of gratuity and since no action was taken by the employer, the appellant approached the statutory controlling authority for gratuity and interest thereon.
The employer contested.
The controlling authority determined the amount of gratuity at Rs.16,380 and directed the employer to pay the same along with compound interest at 9%.
On appeal by the employer, the appellate authority confirmed the determination of gratuity but set aside the order for payment of interest.
This appeal by special leave is in regard to payability of interest on gratuity.
The appellant relied on the provisions of the Interest Act and section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, also.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: If It is only when the Collector issue a certificate for recovery of the dues as a public demand that interest as provided under Section 8 is admissible.
[745Hl 1.2 In the instant case the appellant is not entitled to interest on the amount of gratuity found due to him.
The controlling authority had directed interest as provided in Section 8 to be paid, which the Appellate Authority had vacated.
From the facts of this case, it is clear that the stage for action under section 8 had not been reached in as much the appellant had not applied for recovery of gratuity to the Collector.
[745G H] PG NO 742 PG NO 743 2.
There was no provision in the Act for payment of interest when the same was quantified by the controlling authority and before the Collector was approached for its realisation.
In fact, it is on the acceptance of the lacuna in the law that Act 22 of 1987 brought about the incorporation of sub section (3A) in Section 7.
But that provision has prospective, and not retrospective application.
[746A B] 3.
The provisions of the Interest Act and the provisions of Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure would be of no avail to the appellant since no notice was given demanding interest and the controlling authority is not a court for falling back on section 34 of the Code.
[746C]
