The Superintendents of the Delhi High Court by writ petition claimed better rights of promotion, objected to their being treated as on par with the Private Secretaries to Judges and Court Masters, and being included in a joint seniority list alongwith them, particularly as far as the promotion to the next higher post of Assistant Registrar was concerned.
The petitioners contended inter alia that there was a violation of Article 14 of the Constitution in treating the posts of Superintendents, Court Masters or readers and Private Secretaries to Judges as equal status posts; that the sources of recruitment to these posts were not identical and so also the qualifications required for appointments to these posts; that the duties of the incumbents of these posts were different; that in treating these posts as equal status posts, unequals had been treated equally and the rule of equality had been violated.
Dismissing the petition, the Court, HELD: Where an employer has a large number of employees, performing diverse duties, he must enjoy some discretion in treating different categories of his employees as holding equal status posts or equated posts, as questions of promotion or transfer of employees inter se will necessarily arise for the purpose of maintaining the efficiency of the organisation.
[781C D) PG NO 772 PG NO 773 There is nothing inherently wrong in an employer treating certain posts as equal posts or equal status posts, provided that in doing so he exercises his discretion reasonably and does not violate the principles of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[781D E] For treating certain posts as equated posts or equal status posts, it is not necessary that the holders of these posts must perform the identical functions or that the sources of recruitment to the posts must be the same, nor is it essential that the qualifications for appointments to the posts must be identical.
But, there must not be such difference in the pay scales or qualifications of the incumbents of the posts or in their duties or responsibilities or regarding any other relevant factor that it would be unjust to treat the posts alike and posts having substantially higher pay scales or status in service or carrying substantially heavier responsibilities and duties or otherwise distinctly superior, cannot be equated with the posts carrying much lower pay scales or substantially lower responsibilities and duties or enjoying much lower status in service.
[781E G] The petitioners could not challenge the aforesaid posts being treated as equal status posts as that had been done in accordance with the Seniority Rules of 1971 the vires of which had not been challenged.
[782B] Neither the combined seniority list nor the treating of the said posts as equal status posts could be said to be arbitrary in the absence of any material, particularly in view of the fact that the Chief justice and the Judges of the High Court had taken the view that it was necessary in order to provide adequate promotional opportunities to the various sections of the employees.
[784D] The challenge to the said posts being treated as equal status posts had come too late in 1970 to be entertained in a writ petition, after the seniority Rules of 1971 became effective.
This challenge could be negatived on the ground of delay or latches apart from other considerations.
[784E G] There was nothing unreasonable in the restriction that out of the total number of candidates who satisfied the eligibility requirement, the zone of consideration would be limited to a multiple of 3 to 5 times the number of vacancies or in determining the persons to be considered on the basis of their seniority in the combined seniority list.
It was open to the High Court to restrict the zone of consideration in any reasonable manner, and limiting the PG NO 774 zone of consideration to a multiple of the number of vacancies and basing it on seniority according to the combined seniority list cannot be regarded as arbitrary or capricious or mala fide, nor can it be said that such a restriction violates the, principle of selection on because even experience in service is a relevant consideration in assessing merit.
[791C E] It is not as if either Rule 7 of the Establishment Rules of 1972 or Rule 5 of the seniority Rules of 1971 which provides for a combined seniority list negatives the chance of promotion to the posts of Assistant Registrars being granted to the Superintendents.
[794A B] So far as the zone of consideration is Limited by the competent authority in a manner not inconsistent with the Rules or in a manner not arbitrary or capricious or mala fide, the validity of the decision to limit the zone of consideration cannot be called in question on the ground that the manner in which the zone was limited was not uniform.
[795D E] V. T. Khanzode and Ors.
vs Reserve Bank of India and Anr., ; Guman Singh vs State of Rajasthan und Ors., ; Sant Ram Sharma vs State of Rajasthan and Anr., [19688] 1 S.C.R. III; Reserve Bank of India vs N.C. Paliwal and Ors., ; ; Ashok Kumur Yadav and Ors., etc.
vs State of Haryana and Ors., etc., [1985] Suppl.
1 .S.C.R. 657; V.J. Thomas and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, l1985] Suppl.
S.C.C. 7; Madan Mohan Saran and Anr.
vs Hon 'ble the Chief Justice and Ors., and Mahesh Prasad Srivastava vs Abdul Khair, , referred to.
