The appellant, an employee of Respondent No. 1, was subjected to disciplinary proceedings as also a criminal prosecution simultaneously on the allegation that he physically assaulted a supervising officer.
He filed a civil action in the trial court asking for injunction against the disciplinary action pending criminal trial.
The trial court stayed further proceedings in the disciplinary action till disposal of the criminal case.
In appeal, the appellate court affirmed the aforesaid order.
However, the High Court allowed the Revision Application of the Respondent and set aside the impugned order on the ground that there is no bar for an employer to proceed with the departmental proceeding with regard to the same allegation for which a criminal case is pending.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD: l.
The order of the High Court is vacated and that of the trial court as affirmed in appeal is restored.
The criminal action and the disciplinary proceedings were grounded upon the same set of facts.
The disciplinary proceedings should have been stayed and the High Court was not right in interfering with the trial court 's order of injunction which had been affirmed in appeal.
[826A B] 2(i) While there could be no legal bar for simultaneous proceedings being taken, yet, there may be cases where it would be appropriate to defer disciplinary proceedings awaiting disposal of the criminal case.
In the latter class of cases it would be open to the delinquent employee to seek such an order of stay or injunction from the court.
[825E F] 2(ii) Whether, in the facts and circumstances of a particular case, there should or should not be such simultaneity of the proceedings would then receive judicial consideration and the Court will decide in the given circumstances of a particular case as to whether the PG NO 821 PG NO 822 disciplinary proceedings should be interdicted, pending criminal trial.
[825F G] The Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. vs Kushal Bhan, ; ; Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. vs Its Workmen, ; and Jung Bahadur Singh vs Baij Nath Tiwari, ; , relied upon.
Rama P. C. vs Superintendent of Police, Kolar & Anr., AIR ; Ali Mohd. & Ors.
vs Chairman T.A. & C. Udhampur, ; Moulindra Singh vs The Deputy Commissioner & Ors., 1564; Shaikh Kasim vs Superintendent of Post Office, Chingletut, AIR 1965 Mad. 502; Khusi Ram vs Union of India, and Project Manager, ONGC vs Lal Chand Wazir Chand Chandna, , referred to.
It is neither possible nor advisable to evolve a hard and fast, straight jacket formula valid for all cases and of general application without regard to the particularities of the individual situation.
