The appellants were awarded by the Land Acquisition Officer compensation ranging from Rs.1,320 to 4,000 per acre depending upon the nature of the land acquired in 1977.
The District Judge enhanced the compensation to Rs.85,000 per acre on the ground that compensation @ Rs.85,000 per acre under Award exhibit A.4 and Rs.70,000 under Award exhibit A.5 had already been awarded in respect of acquisition of certain other similar lands situated in Karimnagar.
However, the High Court, in appeal, remanded the matter for fresh disposal and also observed that the District Judge should exclude exhibit A.4 and exhibit A. 5 from consideration as the land concerned in those awards are not comparable lands.
In appeals to this Court by Special Leave, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the matter should not be remanded to the District Judge, since the claimants being small holders and agriculturists, are hard pressed and unable to fight another round of litigation and that they are prepared to accept any compensation which this Court may think fit to award.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: (1) The Judgments of the High Court and the District Judge e are set aside.
The compensation at the rate of Rs.25,000 per acre regardless of categorisation would be sufficient to meet the ends of justice.
It is needless to state that the claimants are entitled to mandatory solatium at 30% and also statutory interest.
[857G H] 2(i) It is of utmost importance that the award should be made without delay.
The enhanced compensation must be determined without 108s of time.
[857C] PG NO 853 PG NO 854 2(ii) The appellate power of remand at any rate ought not to be exercised lightly.
It shall not be resorted to unless the award is wholly unintelligible.
It shall not be exercised unless there is total lack of evidence.
If remand is imperative, and if the claim for enhanced compensation is tenable, it would be proper for the appellate court to do modest best to mitigate hardships.
The appellate court may direct some interim payment to claimants subject to adjustment in the eventual award.
[857C D] 3.
This is not a case of no evidence.
This is a case of both relevant and irrelevant evidence mixed up together.
Therefore irrelevant and exaggerated claim must be excluded.
[857F] In the instant case, the location of lands will have to be borne in mind while ascertaining the market value.
The Commissioner has stated that the lands are more suitable for house sites than for agriculture.
There is, no reason to discard this evidence and reject exhibit A. 5 altogether.
[856C D]
