In October 1971 the appellant company entered into an agreement with the Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board, respondent No. 1, for supply of electricity.
The quantity of electricity to be supplied varied from time to time.
To meet the situation arising out of insufficient generation of electricity, the State of Madhya Pradesh issued two orders.
By the Madhya Pradesh Electricity (Supply and Consumption Regulation) Order, 1975 the consumers were asked to reduce their consumption failing which they would have to pay charges at penal rates for excess consumption, without prejudice to the Board 's power to disconnect the supply.
By the Generation Order, the consumers who had alternative sources of captive power were required to generate electricity to the maximum extent technically feasible, from their own sources of electricity.
After the assessment of their generating capacity, the appellant was directed to generate additional electricity of 2,500 K.W. Sub Clause (iii) of Proviso to clause 3 of the Generation Order provided that if in certain contingencies there was reduction in the generation of electricity by the PG NO 979 consumer, the Board would try to make good the deficit against the appropriate charge for it.
Under this provision the appellant, on pleading emergency, was supplied additional energy from time to time.
For excess consumption drawn without the Board 's prior approval, the appellant was sent bills at penal rate.
The appellant company challenged the demand before the High Court by filing a writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution, which was dismissed by the High Court except for granting some minor reliefs.
Before this Court, it was contended by the appellant: (l) There is no sanction in Law for charging at the Penal rate for the electricity consumed beyond what is permissible under the Generation Order.
(2) That the assessment of their generating capacity was not made by the authority empowered to do so.
i.e. the Divisional Engineer, and (3) that the assessment was based on irrelevant and extraneous considerations Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) A perusal of the documents on record, including admissions on the part of the appellant company.
furnishes unimpeachable evidence, proving that the assessment of the maximum feasible capacity of the appellant 's capative power sets was duly made in accordance with the Generation Order, and that the Divisional Engineer, who had been authorised by the Generation Order to assess the appellant 's generating capacity, reached the conclusion after personally considering the matter thoroughly.
(2) In pursuance of the assessment of the generating capacity the required direction was issued which was acted upon by the parties for a number of years.
The Company not only took steps to generate the additional energy as was required of it, it also took advantage of the provisions of proviso (iii) to clause 3 of the Generation Order and benefited by it from time to time.
[988A B] (3) The appellant company was fully conscious of the fact that it was consuming electricity beyond its entitlement under the two Orders.
For several years the Company was particular to obtain the permission of the Board PG NO 980 for drawing electricity in excess of what it was entitled to by the agreement, as modified by the Regulation Order and the Generation Order, but later, it not only stopped seeking the advance sanction in this regard, it did not even care to inform the Board of the excess drawal.
[1001B C;F G] (4) Section 22B of the permits the State Government to issue an appropriate order for regulating the supply, distribution and consumption of electricity.
[1010B] (5) The expression "regulate" occurs in other statutes also, as for example, the , and it has been found difficult to give the word a precise definition.
It has different shades of meaning and must take its colour from the context in which it is used having regard to the purpose and object of the relevant provisions, and as has been repeatedly observed, the Court while interpreting the expression must necessarily keep in view the object to be achieved and the mischief sought to be remedied.
[1010C D] (6) There does not appear to be any doubt that either under section 49(1) of the 1948 Act read with the agreement or under section 49(3) or under both the provisions the respondent Board was fully authorised to levy and to make a demand at a higher rate than the usual tariff.[1014E F] (7) The necessity for issuing the two orders arose out of the scarcity of electricity available to the Board for supplying to its customers.
The situation did not leave any option to the Board but to make limited supply of electricity to its consumers.
and it must be held to have, in the circumstances,.
the right to stagger or curtail the supply.
The orders were issued in this background and to make the direction mentioned therein effective it was considered essential to impose sanctions which could take any reasonable from; either disconnection in case of gross violation or the lesser sanction of enhanced tariff.
Hence none of the two Orders was illegal or unreasonable.
Adoni Cotton Mills vs A.P. State Electricity Board, ; ; State of U.P. v Hindustan Aluminium Corporation, ; and New Central Jute Mills v U.P. State Electricity Board, [1986] Supp.
SCC581.
