The Respondents, in 1968, obtained grant from Bhoodan Yagna Samiti under section 14 of the U.P. Bhoodan Yagna Act, of various plots of land situated in a village in Kanpur.
On the basis of a report submitted by the Tehsildar concerned in 1972, the Additional Collector issued notices to the respondents under the Act, requiring them to show cause as to why the settlement obtained by them should not be cancelled on the grounds, that they did not reside in the village where the plots are situated, that they did not fall under the category of landless persons and that the grants had not been approved by the Government.
After considering the objections filed by the respondents, the Additional Collector quashed all the grants made in favour of the respondents.
Against the order of the Additional Collector, the respondents filed writ petitions in the High Court.
The High Court held that the respondents were covered by the definition landless persons as they had no land in that village and the district, though they may be traders and paying income tax and may have properties in the city of Kanpur, and quashed the order passed by the Additional Collector and maintained the grants in favour of the respondents.
These appeals are against the said order of the High Court.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that the expression landless person has to be interpreted in the background of the law and the philosophy behind the movement which was the basis of the enactment of the law.
Allowing these appeals.
HELD: 1.1 It is now well settled that in order to interpret a law one must understand the background and the purpose for which the law was enacted.
If one has bothered PG NO 859 PG NO 860 to understand the common phrase used in the Bhoodan Movement as Bhoomihin Kissan which has been translated into English to mean landless persons there would have been no difficulty.
[868F G] 1.2 At the time when Acharya Vinoba Bhave started his movement of Bhoodan Yagna our rural society had a peculiar diversity.
There were some who owned or had leasehold rights in vast tracks of agricultural lands.
And there were those who were working as labourers in the fields and depending on what little they got from their masters.
Sometimes they were even bound down to their masters and therefore had to lead a miserable life.
It was this problem in rural India which attracted the attention of Acharya Vinoba Bhave followed by Shri Jaya Prakash Narain and they secured large donations of land from big land holders and the scheme of the Bhoodan Yagna movement was to distribute this land to those Bhoomihin Kissan who were living on agriculture but had no land of their own.
It was to make this effective and statutory that this law was enacted and in this context it is clear that if one had noticed even the slogan of the Acharya Vinoba Bhave s movement or its basis and the purpose, it would have clearly indicated the problem which was to be remedied by this enactment and if this was looked into for the purpose of interpretation of the term landless persons no Court could have come to the conclusion which has been arrived at in the instant case.
[866C F] 2.
Section 15 provides that all grants shall be made so far as may be in accordance with the scheme of the Bhoodan Yagna.
It could not be disputed that Bhoodan Yagna scheme only contemplated allotment of lands in favour of those landless agricultural labourers who were residing in the villages concerned and whose source of livelihood was agriculture.
In that context only, the expression landless person could be understood as contemplated under section 14.
section 14 was amended in 1975 to substitute the words landless agricultural labourers in place of `landless persons. ' The objects and reasons contained in the Amendment Bill clearly go to show that it was because of such errors committed that it became necessary to make this amendment.
[864G H; 865A B] Lord dennings 's `The Discipline of law ', pp.
10. 12 and`Vinoba and His Mission 'by Suresh Ram, referred to.
