In exercise of the powers conferred upon it by section 3 of the Commissions of Enquiry Act, 1952, the Central Government by a notification dated December 11, 1956, appointed a Commission of Inquiry to inquire into and report in respect of certain companies mentioned in the Schedule attached to the notification and in respect of the nature and extent of the control and interest which certain persons named in the notification exercised over these companies.
By subsequent notifications the Central Government made all the provisions of sub sections
(2), (3), (4) and (5) Of section 5 Of the Act applicable to the Commission and fixed a period Of 2 years from February 11, 1957, as the period within which the Commission was to exercise its function and to make its report.
The four persons named filed three applications under article 226 of the Constitution before the Bombay High Court questioning the validity of the Act and of the notification and praying for writs for quashing the same.
The High Court dismissed the applications and ordered that the said notification was legal and valid except as to the last part of cl. 10 thereof which empowered the Commission to recommend the action which should be taken as and by way of securing redress or punishment or to act as a preventive in future cases.
The petitioners as well as the Union of India filed appeals : Held, that the Act wag ' valid and intra vires and that the notification was also valid excepting the words " as and by way of securing redress or punishment " in cl. 10 thereof which went beyond the Act.
The Act was enacted by Parliament under entry 94 of List I and entry 45 of List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution which relate to inquiries for the purposes of any of the matters in List I and in Lists 11 and III respectively.
The inquiry which may be set up by a law made under these entries is not limited, 280 in its scope and ambit, to future legislative purposes only.
Such a law may also be for administrative purposes and the scope of the inquiry under such a law will cover all matters which may properly be regarded as ancillary to such inquiries.
The Act does not delegate to the Government any arbitrary or uncontrolled power and does not offend article 14 Of the Constitution.
The discretion given to the Government to set up a Commission of Inquiry is guided by the policy laid down in the Act that the executive action is to be taken only when there exists a definite matter of public importance into which an inquiry is necessary.
Kathi Raning Rawat vs State of Saurashtra, [1952] section C. R. 435, applied.
The Commission is merely to investigate, record its findings and make its recommendations which are not enforceable proprio vigore.
The inquiry or report cannot be looked upon as judicial inquiry in the sense of its being an exercise of judicial function properly so called and consequently Parliament or the Government cannot be said to have usurped the functions of the judiciary.
The notification was well within the powers conferred on the Government by section 3 Of the Act and did not go beyond the provisions of the Act.
The conduct of an individual person or company or a group of individual persons or companies may, in certain circumstances, become a definite matter of public importance within the meaning Of section 3(i) and call for an inquiry.
Besides, section 3 authorises the Government to appoint a Commission.
of Inquiry not only for the purpose of making an inquiry into a definite matter of public importance but also for the purpose of performing such functions as may be specified in the notification.
It has not been established that the petitioners and their companies have been arbitrarily singled out for the purpose of hostile and discriminatory treatment and subjected to a harassing and oppressive inquiry.
In matters of this kind the Government has of necessity to act upon the information available to it.
It is the best judge of the reliability of the source of the information and if it acts in good faith and honestly comes to the conclusion that the act and conduct of the petitioners and the affairs of their companies constitute a definite matter of public importance the Court will be slow to adjudge the action to be bad and illegal.
The bare possibility that the powers may be misused or abused cannot Per se make the power bad.
The power having been entrusted to the Central Government and not to any petty official, abuse of power cannot be easily assumed.
In determining whether there is any intelligible differentia on the basis of, which the petitioners and their companies have been grouped together it is permissible to look not only at the facts appearing in the notification but also the facts brought to the notice of the Court upon affidavits.
The facts in the present case 281 afford sufficient support to the presumption of constitutionality of the notification and the petitioners have failed to discharge the onus which was on them to prove that other people or companies, similarly situated have been left out and that the petitioners and their companies have been singled out for discriminatory and hostile treatment.
The recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry are of great importance to the Government in order to enable it to make up its mind as to what legislative or administrative measures should be adopted to eradicate the evil found or to implement the beneficial objects it has in view.
There can be no objection to the Commission recommending the imposition of some form of punishment which will, in its opinion, be sufficiently deterrent to delinquents in future.
But the Commission cannot be asked to make recommendations for taking any action " as and by way of securing redress or punishment " in respect of wrongs already done or committed as this is the function of a Court of law.
Even though the original notification appointing the Commis sion did not fix the time within which the Commission was to complete its report the Government could validly do so by a subsequent notification.
