The appellant manufactured one of the three parts, i.e., Indicating system, required for the manufacture of weighbridges, and after procuring the other two parts brought the three components together at site, fitted and assembled them together and thus created a new weighbridge.
The appellant challenged the excise duty levied on the manufacture of weighbridges under the .
The appellant 's contention before the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal was that it was preparing only a part of the weighbridge which was dutiable as a separate part, and that as a part of machine was liable to duty then the whole end product should not be dutiable as separate excise goods.
The Tribunal held that by whatever process it became a complete weighbridge, as long as a weighbridge had been made and completed, duty had to be paid.
According to the Tribunal, though the parts were themselves liable to excise duty, the complete machine was also a new excisable Commodity.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) Section 2(f) of the Act provides an inclusive definition and states that the word "manufacture" includes any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product.
So any process by which an object becomes new commercial Commodity, including any process identical or ancillary to to the completion, would be manufacture.[3C] (2) Manufacture means bringing into existence new goods.
There must be transformation and a new and different article PG NO 1 PG NO 2 must emerge having a distinctive name, character or use.
[3D E] Union of India vs Delhi Cloth Mills, [l963l Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 586; Allenburry Engineers (p) Ltd. vs Ramakrishna Dalmia, ; and Idandas vs Anant Ramchandra Phadke, ; , referred to.
(3) If the end product is a separate product which comes into being as a result of the endeavour and activity of the appellant, then the appellant must be held to have manufactured the said item.
When parts and the end product are separately dutiable both are taxable.
[4A B]
