The Respondents, manufacturers of refrigerators, give one year warranty for the complete refrigerator and all parts thereof.
During this warranty period, they provide free repair and replacement for defects in material and workmanship under normal use and service.
They include the cost of this one year warranty in the sale price as well as assessable value of the refrigerator.
After the free warranty period of one year, the respondents offer a four year service contract only for the sealed system or parts thereof.
This contract is on payment which may vary from Rs.300 and Rs.400 per refrigerator.
The dealers enter into contract with the Respondents, and the consumer in turn enters into contract with the dealer from whom he buys his refrigerator.
The service is rendered by the Respondents and the entire contract money accrues to them.
Though the contract is optional, 91% of Customers did enter into this contract, and only 9% did not.
The Assistant Collector held that the four year service charge is includible in the value of the refrigerator for the purpose of Central Excise dub under section 4 of the Act.
The Appellate Collector upheld the said decision.
On appeal the Tribunal held that the said optional service charge was not includible in the assessable value.
These appeals by Revenue under Section 35L(b) of the Act are against the Tribunal 's decision.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The contract for four years warranty service was optional which was entered into later on.
This is clearly after sale 657 facility and cannot be includible in the assessable value of the refrigerator.
[661G] 1.2 The Tribunal was right in the view it took that the optional service charge after the expiry of the first year warranty period was not includible in the assessable value.
It rightly observed that if any consumer did not like to have the service, there was no compulsion on him to go in for it and once the conclusion is reached that post warranty service activity could not be subjected to excise, it ceases to be material that 91% of the customers had opted for the service contract.
The Tribunal also observed that the respondents offered the four year service by a stamped endorsement on their sale invoice itself, but it did not mean that the subsequent exercise of option by the buyer related back to the date of purchase itself and that there was no evidence to conclude that the service contract was a facade to split the true value of refrigerators into taxable and non taxable components.
[658H;661D F] Union of India and Others etc.
vs Bombay Tyre Interna tional Ltd.; , and Assistant Collector of Central Excise and others vs Madras Rubber Factory Ltd. and others, , referred to.
