The respondent company was engaged in the manufacture of Carbon Paper.
It was served with a notice demanding central excise duty on carbon papers cleared from its factory during the period 25.3.1979 to 24.9.1979 under section 11 B of the .
The respondent stated in reply that the notice was without jurisdiction because it was only after 28.2.1982 that the product was subjected to duty under sub item (3) of item 17 of the Central Excise Tariff.
The Assistant Collector of Central Excise, confirmed the demand.
The appellate Collector, however, accepted the respondent 's contention.
The Collector (Appeals) and the Appellate Tribunal dismissed the Revenue 's appeals.
The Tribunal upheld the contention of the respondent that for the period before its amendment in 1982, carbon paper fell under Tariff item 68 and not under Tariff Item 17(2), as was contended by the Revenue.
Before this Court the Revenue contends that (I) carbon paper being akin to coated paper was covered since 1976 under sub item (2) of item 17 of the Central Excise Tariff which included paper which had been subjected to coating; (2) the introduction of specific name `carbon paper ' as sub item (3) of item 17 in 1982 was with a view to subject it to a different rate of duty; and (3) the amendment so far as item 17(3) was concerned was mere clarificatory and was introduced ex abundanti cautela.
The respondent, on the other hand, contends that if carbon paper was already included then there was no purpose of introducing these subsequent amendments.
Disposing of the appeal, it was, PG NO 12 PG NO 13 HELD: (1) Where no definition is provided in the statute itself for ascertaining the correct meaning of a fiscal entry, reference to a dictionary is not always safe.
The correct guide is the context and the trade meaning, which is prevalent in that particular trade where that goods is known or traded.
[21D E] (2) If a statute contains language which is capable of being construed in a popular sense, such a statute is not to be construed according to the strict or technical meaning of the language contained in it, but is to be construed in its popular sense, meaning, of course, by the words "popular sense" that which people conversant with the subject matter with which the statute is dealing would attribute to it.
The ordinary words in every day use are, therefore, to be construed according to their popular sense.
[23F G] (3) Paper simpliciter cannot include ' carbon paper because that would not be in consonance with the popular understanding of the expression "paper".
[23G H; 24A] (4) Where paper of a special type defined in the particular statute as one including paper which have been subjected to various treatments such as coating, impregnating, how that paper be understood, there must be evidence of that understanding.
[24A] (5) There is authority of the Indian Standards Institute 's publication "Glossary of Terms used in Paper Trade and Industry" to the effect that carbon paper is understood as a coated paper in trade.
[23A C] (6) The trade notices and the tariff advices issued by the Board are not relevant, as such, in construing items in Tariff Schedule.
[24E F] (7) Understood in the accepted notion of construing entries of fiscal Statute not from a technical or scientific point of view but from the point of view of the people in the trade dealing with that particular type of goods and having regard to the evidence of the Indian Standards Institute and in the absence of any other evidence to the contrary, on the basis of the definition of paper or it was in the year 1976, carbon paper would come within item 17(2) of the Tariff Items, and would not fall into the residuary entry.
[23B C] Sai Giridhara Supply Co. vs Collector vs Collector of Central Excise, Bombay, Tribunal; Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. vs M.S.N. Brothers, Kanpur, PG NO 14 ; ; King vs Planters Nut and Chocolate Company Ltd., [1951] C.L.R. exhibit 122; Union of India and Anr.
vs Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd., AIR 1963 S.C. 791; Grenfell vs I.R.C., ; Porritts & Spencer (Asia) Ltd. vs State of Haryana, [1979] I S.C.C. 82; Kores (India) Ltd. Thane vs Collector of Central Excise, Thane.
; State of Uttar Pradesh vs M/s. Kores (India) Ltd., ; ; Attorney General vs Winstar lay. ; ; Khoday Industries Ltd. vs Union of India, ; Orient Paper Mills Ltd. vs Union of India; , ; M/s Colgate Palmolive (India) P. Ltd., [1979] E.L.T. J. 567; Dunlop India Ltd. vs Union of India, AIR 1977 S.C. 597; Md. Qasim Larry, Factory Manager, Sasamusa Sugar Works vs Muhammad Samsuddin, ; , referred to.
