Respondent No. 2, a Co operative Society allotted a flat to respondent No. l. Respondent No. 2 sought recovery of possession of the flat on the ground that the appellant was inducted into the flat without the written consent of the Society.
The appellant pleaded that it was continuing in possession of the flat on the basis of the lease and licence agreement by payment of licence fee, and as such the dispute did not come within Section 91 of the Co operative Societies Act as it had become as tenant under Section 15A of the Bombay Rent Act.
The Cooperative Court after hearing all the parties made an award holding that the dispute fell within the jurisdiction of the Cooperative Court and that the appellant was occupying the flat in question as a trespasser after the licence in its favour was terminated and that there was no subsisting licence to occupy the flat by the appellant on Ist February, 1973 and so Section 15A of the Bombay Rent Act was not applicable.
The appellant 's appeal to the Appellate Authority and writ petition to the High Court having been dismissed, the appellant appealed by special leave to this Court.
Dismissing the Appeal, HELD: 1.
The appellant is an outsider who has been permitted to possess the suit premises as licencee of respondent No. 2 in contravention of the Rules, bye laws and regulations of the society.
The dispute falls squarely within the provision of section 91 of the Maharashtra PG NO 29 PG NO 30 Cooperative Societies Act 1960 and the Cooperative Court has exclusive jurisdiction to entertain and decide the dispute and not the Court under the Bombay Rent Act, 1947.
M/s. A.V.R. & Co. & Ors.
vs Fairfield Cooperative Housing Society Ltd., [1988] Supp.
3 S.C.R.48.
The decree will not be executed for a period of four months.
The appellant will not transfer, assign or encumber the flat in any manner whatsoever, and hand over peaceful possession of the flat on or before the expiry of the aforesaid period.
He will go on paving the occupation charges equivalent to the amount he had been paying for each month 7th of succeeding month.
In default of compliance the decree shall become executable forthwith.
[31E F]
