Mohini R. Adwani, a member of the Maitrai Co operative Housing Society Ltd., was allotted flat No.15 in Societies 'F ' building in Scheme No. I at Chambur Bombay 71.
She inducted the appellant in the premises aforesaid without obtaining the prior written consent of the society, on the basis of a leave & licence agreement for a period of 11 months.
The said society was divided by order of the Assistant Registrar Co operative Housing Society Ltd. Bombay into two units i.e Maitra Park Co operative Housing Society Ltd., Chambur (and the Maitra BUoy Co operative Housing Society Ltd., Chambur 74 Scheme No. 2) the former being the owner of the building in Scheme No. i including building No. F '.
Thus on division Smt.
Mohini R. Adwani automatically became a member of the disputed society in respect of the said flat No. 15 in `F ' building.
The appellant after the expiry of the period of the licence was occupying the premises unauthorisedly & was asked to vacate the flat by the member of the society.
As he did not accede to her request.
the society had to take steps for evicting the appellant from the said flat so that Respondent 2 could occupy the same for her residence.
The society accordingly served a notice on the appellant asking him to vacate the flat.
On his failure to vacate, the society filed a dispute before the Co operative Court for eviction of the appellant who was in unauthorised occupation of the premises and was using the residential flat for canteen purposes in violation of the bye laws framed by the Society.
The appellant questioned the jurisdiction of the Co operative Court to entertain the matter on the ground that the dispute in question does not come within the purview of section 91 of the Co operative Societies Act as he was continuing in possessing as licencee and the member of the Society was receiving licence fee from him till the date of filing the dispute.
He also asserted that in one of the receipts issued to him the word "rent" has been used.
He also pleaded that as a licencee he has became a tenant u/s 15A of the amended PG NO 33 Bombay Rent Act on and from 1st February, 1973.
The Co operative Court found against the appellant and made an award holding that the dispute is covered u/s 91 of the Maharashtra Co operative Societies Act, 1960 as the appellant is claiming to be in possession of the flat as licencee through a member of the Society.
It also held that there was no subsisting agreement of licence in favour of the appellant on the date of the coming into force of section 15A of the Bombay Rent Act and as such the appellant could not become deemed tenant.
Appellant 's appeal before the Maharashtra State Co operative Appellate Court having failed he moved the High Court by means of Writ Petition.
On dismissing the Writ Petition by the Bombay High Court, the appellant filed this appeal by special leave.
Following the Court 's Judgment in CA.
No. 472 of 1985, M section A. V.R. & Co. & Ors.
vs Fairfield Co operative Housing Society Ltd., [1988] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 84 Court dismissed the appeal, but directed that the decree should not be executed for a period of 4 months subject to the appellants filing usual undertaking.
The Court, HELD: That the dispute in question comes within the purview of section 91 of the Maharashtra Co operative Societies Act, 1960 as the appellant claims to be in possession of the flat through a member of the Society which is a Co partnership Housing Society and Sec.
15A of the Bombay Rent Act does not apply as there was no subsisting agreement of licence on 1.2.1973.
[34G H;35A]
