These three groups of special leave petitions/appeals/writ petitions concern the policy and legality of the levy of Court fees under the Provisions of the Karnataka Court Fees and Suits valuation Act, 1958, the PG NO 155 PG NO 156 Rajasthan Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1961 and the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959.
The petitioners from Rajasthan had challenged before the High Court the constitutional validity of the provisions of section 20 read with Article 1 Schedule 1 of the Rajasthan Act which prescribed and authorised the levy of court fees on an uniform ad valorem basis without the prescription of any upper limit.
the High Court upheld the constitutionality of the impugned provision.
The appeal and the special leave petitions from Karnataka are directed against the common order of the Karnataka High Court upholding the validity of the corresponding provision of the Karnataka Act which similarly imposed an ad valorem court fee without prescribing any upper limit.
The writ petitions have challenged the provision directly in this Court.
So far as the Bombay Act is concerned, the State of Maharashtra has come up in appeal against the judgment of the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court affirming the order of the learned Single Judge striking down the provisions of section 29(1) read with entry 10 of Schedule I of the Act in so far as they purport to prescribe an ad valorem court fee, without any upper limit, on grants of probate, letters of administrative etc., while in respect of all other suits, appeal and proceedings an upper limit of court fee of Rs.15,000 is prescribed.
The High Court held this prescription of ad valorem court fee without any upper limit on this class of proceedings alone was constitutionally impermissible in that it sought to single out this class of litigants.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners/appellants that (i) the imposition of court fees at nearly 10% of the value of the subject matter in each of the courts through which the case sojourns before it reaches a finally would seriously detract from fairness and justness of the system; (11) the exaction of ad valorem fee uniformly at a certain percentage of the subject matter without an upper limit or without the tapering down after a certain stage onwards would negate the concept of e fee and part take of the character of a tax outside the boundaries of the State 's power; (111) the ad valorem yardstick, which is relevant and appropriate to taxation, is wholly inappropriate because the principle or basis of distribution in the case of a fee should be the proportionate cost of services inter se amongst the beneficiaries; (iv) in the very nature of the Judicial process, a stage is reached beyond which there could be no proportionate or progressive increase in the services rendered to a litigant either qualitatively or PG NO 157 quantitatively; (v) in the process of `adjudication of disputes before courts, judicial time and the machinery of justice are not utilised in direct proportion to the value or the amount of the subject matter of the controversy; (vi) a recognition of the outermost limit of the possible services and a prescription of a corresponding upper limit of court fee should be made, lest the levy, in excess of that conceptual limit, becomes a tax; and (vii) though India is a federal polity, the judicial system, however, is an integrated one and that therefore different standards of court fee in different States would be unconstitutional .
The contentions of the State were that (i) as long as their power to raise the funds to meet the expenses of administration of civil justice was not disputed and as long as the funds raised show a correlation to such expenses, the States should have sufficient play at the joints to work out the incidents of the levy in some reasonable and practical way; (ii) it would, quite obviously, be impracticable to measure out the levy directly in proportion to the actual judicial time consumed in each individual case, hence the need to tailor some rough and ready workable basis which, though may not be an ideal or the most perfect one, would at least be the least hostile; (iii) if an upper limit is fixed and the collection fell short of what the Government intends and is entitled to collect, this would eventually result in the enhancement of the general rates of court fee for all categories; (iv) if the value of the subject matter is a relevant factor in proportioning the burden of the court fee.
where the line should be drawn in applying the principle it is more a matter of legislative wisdom and preference than of the strict judicial evaluation and adjudication; and (v) courts cannot compel the State to bring forth any legislation to implement and effectuate a Directive Principle.
Dismissing the appeals, writ petitions and the special leave petition, this Court, HELD: ( I) All civilised Governments recognise the need for access to justice being free.
Whether the whole of the expenses of administration of civil justice also in addition to those of criminal justice should be free and met entirely by public revenue or whether the litigants should contribute and if so, to what extent, are matters of policy.
[170G] (2) A fee is a charge for the special service rendered to a class of citizens by Government or Government agencies and is generally based on the expenses incurred in rendering the services.
[174B] PG NO 158 The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Shirur Mutt., [1954] SCR (1) 1005 and Om Prakash Agarwal vs Guni Ray, AIR 1986 (SC) 726 referred to.
(3) It is for the governmental agencies imposing the fee to justify its impost and its quantum as a return for some special services.
(4) Once a broad correlation between the totality of the expenses on the services, conceived as a whole, on the one hand and the totality of the funds raised by way of the fee, on the other, is established, it would be no part of the legitimate exercise in the examination of the constitutionality of the concept of the impost to embark its effect in individual cases.
Such a grievance would be one of disproportionate nature of the distribution of the fees amongst those liable to contribute and not one touching the conceptual nature of the fee.
[184A B] (5) The test is one of the comprehensive level of the value of the totality of the services, set off against the totality of the receipts.
If the character of the `fee ' is thus established, the vagaries in its Distribution amongst the Class, do not detract from the concept of a `fee ' as such, though a wholly arbitrary distribution of the burden might violate other constitutional limitations.
[185G] Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Ors.
vs Mohd .
Yasin.
, ; H.H. Sudhundra Thirtha Swamiar vs Commissioner for Hindu Religious & Charitahle Endowments., [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 302; Sreenivasa General Traders & Ors.
vs Andhra Pradesh & Ors., ; State of ' Maharashtra & Ors.
vs The Salvation Army, Western India Territorv ; Kewal Krishan Puri & Anr.
vs State of Punjab & Ors. ; Secretary.
Government of ' Madras, Home Department & Anr.
vs Zenith Lamp & Anr.
vs State of Kanataka, AI 1979 (SC) 119; The Commissioner Hindu Religious Endowments Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swantiar of Sri Shirur Mutt., ; ; Om Prakash Agarwal vs Giri Raj Kishori, 730; N.M. Desai vs The Teesteels Ltd. & Anr., AIR 1980 (2) SC 2125; Lady Tanumuti Girijaprasad & Anr.
vs Special Rent Acquisition Officer, Western Railway Special Civil Application No. 979 of 1970 with Special Civil Application 287 of 1967; The City Corporation of Calicut vs Thachambalath Sadasvian & Ors., , referred to.
Indian Organic Chemicals vs Chemtax Fibres, Secretary, Government of Madras Home Department vs Zenith Lamp & Electrial Ltd., ILR 1968 (Madras) 247 overruled.
PG NO 159 (6) Though legislative measures dealing with economic regulation are not outside article 14, it is well recognised that the State enjoys the widest latitude where measures of economic regulation are,concerned.
These measures for fiscal and economic regulation involve an evaluation of diverse and quite often conflicting economic criteria and adjustment and balancing of various conflicting social and economic values and interests.
It is for the State to decide what economic and social policy it should pursue and what discriminations advance those social and economic policies.
In view of the inherent complexity of these fiscal adjustments, courts give a larger discretion to the Legislature in the matter of its preferences of economic and social policies and effectuate the chosen system in all possible and reasonable ways.
[187G H; 188A B] East India Tobacoo Co. vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; The State of Gujarat & Anr.
vs Shri Ambica Mills Ltd. Ahmedabad, referred to.
(7) The lack of perfection in a legislative measure does not necessarily imply its unconstitutionality.
It is rightly said that no economic measure has yet been devised which is free from all discriminatory impact and that is such a complex arena in which no perfect alternatives exist, the court does well not to impose too rigorous a standard of criticism.
under the equal protection clause.
reviewing fiscal services.
[189F G ] G.K. Krishnan etc.
vs The Slate of Tamil Nadu [1975] 2 SCR 715 730; San Antonic Independent School Districf vs Bodriguer.
411 U.S.I. at p. 41.
Income Tax Officer, Shillong & Anr.
vs N. Takim Roy Rymbai etc.
; , referred to.
It is trite that for purposes of testing a law enacted by one State in exercise of its own independent legishtive powers for its alleged violation of Article 14 it cannot be contrasted with laws enacted by other States.
[192C] The State of Madhya Pradesh vs G.C. Mandawar, ; , referred to.
(9) Having regard to the nature and complexity of this matter It is, perhaps, difficult to say that the ad valorem principle which may not be an ideal basis for distribution of a fee can at the same time be said to be so irrational PG NO 160 as to incur any unconstitutional infirmity.
The presumption of constitutionality of laws requires that any doubt as to the constitutionality of a law has to be resolved in favour of constitutionality.
Though the scheme cannot be upheld, at the same time, it cannot be struck down either.
[192E F] (10) The State is in theory entitled to raise the totality of the expenses by way of fee.
Any interference with the present yardstick for sharing the burden might in turn produce a yardstick less advantageous to litigants at lower levels.
[192G] (11) The High Court has struck down the provisions of section 29(1) read with entry 10 of Schedule I of the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959 on the ground that the levy of court fee on proceedings for grant of probate and letters of administration ad valorem without the upper limit prescribed for all other litigants is discriminatory.
If in respect of all other suits of whatever nature and complexity an upper limit of Rs.15,000 on the court fee is fixed, there is no logical justification for singling out this proceeding for an ad valorem impost without the benefit of some upper limit prescribed by the same statute respecting all other litigants.
[193A B; F] (12) The Directive Principles of State Policy though not strictly enforceable in courts of law, are yet fundamental in the governance in the country.
They constitute fons juris in a Welfare State.
[194E] U.B.S.E. Board vs Hari Shanker, AIR 1979 SC 69 referred to.
(13) The power to raise funds through the fiscal tool of a `fee ' is not to be confused with a compulsion to do so.
