The appellant had taken the demised premises on lease in 1953 for running a hotel.
In August 1969 the hotel came to be run by the second respondent.
Thereupon, the landlady Ist respondent terminated the tenancy as she had reasons to believe that the appellant had either transferred his rights under the lease or sublet the premises.
On the appellant refusing to vacate, the first respondent filed petition under section 10 of the Andhra Pradesh Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1960 seeking eviction on the ground of sub letting.
The Rent Controller ordered eviction.
The appeals before the Appellate Authority failed.
The High Court, in revision, affirmed the finding of sub letting.
Before this Court, it was contended on the basis of the terms of the agreement entered into between the appellant and the second respondent, that the appellant transferred only the management rights of the hotel and had retained his rights under the lease.
It was urged that the courts must look at the dominant intention of the parties.
On the other hand, the first respondent contended that the true nature of the transaction was the handing over of the hotel on a permanent basis together with the tenancy rights of the appellant.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: (I) On a conspectus of all the terms of the agreement the High Court was fully justified in taking the view that the appellant and the second respondent had used all the ingenuity at their command to camouflage the real nature of the transaction and made it appear that there was only a transfer of the managing rights of the business and PG NO 200 PG NO 201 not a transfer of the business in toto together with the right to occupy the leased premises.
[208G H] (2) It was patent that the burden of paying the rent had been passed on to the second respondent and this could occur only if the premises had been sublet to him.
[208B] (3) Though the agreement was initially for 11 months, the renewal clause would enable its extension for any length of time which was binding upon the heirs, successors, and assigns of the parties.[207G] (4) The agreement conferred proprietary rights on the second respondent over the hotel business inasmuch as he was made the sole authority to appoint the staff as well as terminate their services and empowered him to run the business on his own account and responsibility.
[208B C] (5) Besides the agreement, the manner in which the second respondent had been conducting the business would also show that he was not a transfer of the managing rights alone but was a transfer of the business together with the appellant s interest in the leased premises also.
[209C] Dwarka Prasad vs Dwarka Das Barar, 11976] I SCR 277; Md. Salim vs Md. Ali, ; , distinguished.
M. Rodgers vs N. Prakash Rao Naidu, 11969] I MLJ 352 and Bhagwan Das vs section Rajeev Singh, , referred to.
(6) At the end of the arguments in the case it was represented at the Bar that the second respondent has since vacated the premises and handed over the business to the appellant and hat the appellant himself was now running the hotel through his son.
The changed circumstances could not, in the Court s opinion, affect the rights of the first respondent in any manner to have the appellant evicted on the ground of subletting.
[211C D]
