The petitioner company had offered for public subscription secured convertible debentures after obtaining the consent of the Controller of Capital Issues.
Before the public issue was due to open, certain writ petitions etc.
were filed in some High Courts challenging the grant of consent or sanction for the public issue.
The petitioner there upon filed an application under Article 139A of the Constitution seeking transfer of those cases to this Court and prayed inter alia for vacation of any injunction or stay granted by the High Courts.
On August 19, 1988 this Court, while issuing notice on the transfer applications, directed that the public issue be proceeded with "without let or hindrance".
and vacated all orders of injunction in respect of the said issue .
On August 25, 1988 an article appeared in the Indian Express to the effect that the Controller of Capital Issues had not acted properly and legally in granting the sanction to the issue, and that the issue was not a prudent or a reliable venture.
The petitioner moved the Court for initiating contempt proceedings against the respondents for alleged interference with the due administration of justice by publication of an article commenting on a matter which was sub judice.
The petitioner also sought injunction against the threatened or expected publication of similar PG NO 212 PG NO 213 comments.
The Court, while declining to take cognizance of contempt in the absence of the consent of the Attorney General, issued an order of injunction restraining publication of articles, etc.
questioning the legality or validity of any of the consents, approvals or permissions for the public issue.
The matter came up before the Court again to consider the question whether there was any necessity for the continuance of the order of injunction.
It was contended that pre stoppage of newspaper article or publication on matters of public importance was uncalled for and contrary to freedom of press enshrined in the Constitution and the laws; that public had a right to know about this issue of debentures which was a matter of public concern, and the newspapers had an obligation to inform; and that there was no jury trial involved here and no likelihood of the trial being prejudiced because trial was by professionally trained Judges.
On the other hand, it was contended that there was an inherent jurisdiction to restrain by injunction any publication that interfered with a fair trial of a pending case or with the administration of justice in general, that publication was permissible provided it did not amount to prejudgment or prejudice of a matter in Court; that liberty or freedom of Press must subserve the due administration of justice, and that there was need to continue the injunction because contribution to the debentures could be withdrawn as the final allotment had not yet been made.
While disposing of the application for the continuance of the injunction, it was, HELD: Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (1) The Constitution of India is not Absolute with respect to freedom of speech and expression, as enshrined by the First Amendment to the American Constitution.
{223F] (2) A judiciary is not independent unless courts of justice are enabled to administer law by absence of pressure from without, whether exerted through the blandishments of reward or the menace of disfavour.
A free Press is vital to a democratic society for its freedom given it power.
1227F] [3] The law of contempt must be judged in a particular situation.
The process of due course of administration of justice must remain.
Public interest demands that there should be no interference with judicial process and the PG NO 214 effect of the judicial decision should not be pre empted or circumvented by public agitation or publications.
At the same time, right to know is a basic right which citizens of a free country aspire in the broader horizon of the right to live in this age in our land under Article 21 of our Constitution.
A balance has to be struck between the requirements of free Press and fair trial.
[235B C; A] (4) The Court must examine the gravity of the evil.
In other words, a balance of convenience in the conventional phrase of Anglo Saxon Common Law Jurisprudence would, perhaps, be the proper test to follow.
[228Bl (5) The Court must see whether there was a present and imminent danger for the issuance/continuance of injunction.
It is difficult to lay down a fixed standard to judge as to how clear, remote or imminent the danger is.
[234D] (6) The orders passed on 19th August, 1988 as reiterated on 25th August, 1988 stated that there must be no legal impediment in the issue of the debentures or in the progress of the debentures, taking into account the overall balance of convenience and having due regard to the sums of money involved and the progress already made.1234D] (7) The continuance of this injunction would amount to interference with the freedom of Press in the form of preventive injunction and it must therefore be based on reasonable grounds for the sole purpose of keeping the administration of justice unimpaired.
[234El (8) There must be reasonable ground to believe that the danger apprehended is real and imminent.
The subscription to debentures having been oversubscribed, there is no such imminent danger of the subscription being withdrawn before the allotment so as to make the issue vulnerable by any publication of article.
[235DI (9) As the issue is not going to affect the general public or public life, nor any injury is involved, it would be proper and legal, on an appraisal of the balance of convenience between the risk which will be caused by the publication of the article and the damage to the fundamental right of freedom of knowledge of the people concerned and the obligation of Press to keep people informed, that the injunction should net true any further.
[235H] PG NO 215 (10) Publication, if any, however, would be subject to the decision of the Court on the question of the contempt of court, namely, prejudging the issue and thereby interfering with the due administration of justice.
[236A] (11) Preventive remedy in the form of an injunction is no longer necessary.
Whether punitive remedy will be available or not, will depend upon the facts and the decision of the matter after ascertaining the consent or refusal of the Attorney General.
[236B] Per Ranganathan, J. (1) It would not be correct to say that when the Court passed the order dated l9.9.1988, it had formed any prima facie opinion on the question whether the debenture issue had been validly approved or consented to by the various authorities.
What predominantly influenced the Court was that, even assuming, prima facie, as was contended in the writ petitions, that there could be some doubt regarding the validity or otherwise of the consent orders etc.
, the restraint by any court or tribunal on the issue of debentures at a late stage might prove catastrophic, and cause irreparable loss or damage to the petitioner.
The balance of convenience required that there should be no order of any court or tribunal staying the debenture issue.[238 E] (2) The article published by the respondents, though not violative of the terms of the injunction granted by this Court, could have the effect of circumventing the order of this Court and rendering it ineffective.
It had, prima facie, a tendency to affect the efficacy of, and defeat the object with which this Court had passed, the interim order dated 19.8.1988.
That is the reason why the second order dated 25.8.1988 was passed.
The said order was rightly passed and the contention that no such injunction ought to have been granted at all is not acceptable.
[239A B] (3) The position has radically changed.
The danger apprehended by the petitioner is not so real or substantial as to warrant the continuance of the injunction orders.
[239C] Attorney General vs British Broadcasting Corporation.
, ; 354; Harry Bridges vs State of California, at page 260; Express Newspapers (Pvt.] Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; Ramesh Thapar vs State of Madras, ; at 597: Brij Bhushan & Anr.
vs State of Delhi, ; ; State of Travancore PG NO 216 Cochin & Ors.
vs Bombay Co. Ltd. ; ; State of Bombay vs R.M.D. Chamatbaugwala, [19S7] SCR 874 at 918; P. C. Sen 's case; , ; C. K. Daphtary & Ors.
vs O. P. Gupta, ; Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Abrams vs United States, 11963] L.Ed. 1173 at 1180; P.N. Duda vs P. Shiv Shanker & Ors., ; ; John D. Pennekamp vs State of Florida, 11945] ; Neoraska Press Association vs Hugh Stuart, 49 L.Edn. 683; Attorney General vs British Broadcasting Corpn., ; Attorney General vs B.B.C., ; Attorney General vs Times Newspapers Ltd., ; Ex Parte Bread Manufacturers Ltd., ; and Charlotte Anita Whitney vs People of the State of California, 71 L.Edn. 1095 at 1106.
