In the ceiling proceedings under the Maharashtra Agricultural Land (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961 the petitioner alleged that there was no surplus land in the holding of his family Unit as certain lands had been leased out to various tenants and the same had been transferred to them under the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region) Act, 1958 and, therefore, the tenanted lands should be excluded from his total holdings as the orders of the Tenancy Authorities had become final and were binding on the Ceiling Authorities.
Rejecting the claim of the petitioner the sub Divisional officer held that the orders passed by the Tenancy Courts conferring tenancy rights and issuing certificates in favour of the tenants were not justified and declared 58.28 acres of land as surplus.
This finding was maintained by the Revenue Tribunal.
The challenge made by the petitioner before the Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the High Court also failed.
In the special leave petition under Article 136 of the Constitution to this Court, on behalf of the petitioner it was contended that in view of sub section
(2) of section 100 of the Bombay Act, the Tenancy Tahsildar had exclusive jurisdiction to decide the issue of tenancy, and section 124 of the Bombay Act bars the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to deal with any question covered by section 100 and, therefore, determination of the question of tenancy by the Ceiling Authorities was without jurisdiction.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, this Court, HELD: l. Land had been transferred to the various tenants under the Bombay Tenancy & Agriculture (Vidarbha Region) Act, 1958 in the name of the respective tenants by the order of the Tenancy Tahsildar.
[272F] PG NO 270 PG NO 271 2.The Ceiling Authority had to determine the land holdings of the petitioner.
[274C] 3.Where a transfer is made by the land holder creating a tenancy, whether the transfer was made bona fide or made in anticipation to defeat the provisions of the Ceiling Act, is a question which falls for determination squarely by the Ceiling Authorities, to give effect to or implement the Ceiling Act.
[274C D] 4.
Unless the Acts, the Ceiling Act and the Tenancy Act, with the intention of implementing various socio economic plans, are read in a complementary manner, the operation of the different Acts in the same field would create contradiction and would become impossible.
It is, therefore, necessary to take a constructive attitude in interpreting provisions of these types and determine the main aim of the particular Act in question for adjudication before the Court.
[274E F] 5.
In the Ceiling Proceedings it has been held that the transfer to the tenant was not bona fide and was done in anticipation of the Ceiling Act.
This Court finds no ground to interfere with the Order of the High Court.
[275A]
