The Rules of the Central Public Works Department (CPWD) adopted by the Delhi Development Authority (DDA) stipulate and provide that 50% of the posts of Assistant Engineers in DDA be filed up by promotion from the cadre of Junior Engineers comprising of both Graduates in Engineering and Diploma Holders in Engineering in the equal ratio (50%:50%) of the promotional posts.
Half of it, i.e. 25% were to be filled up by promotion of Graduate Junior Engineers with three years ' service experience as Junior Engineers; the other 25% to be filled up from Diploma Holder.
Junior Engineers.
who had X years service experience as Junior Engineers.
The Rules further provide that the Executive Engineers ' post in DDA were purely promotional and Graduate Assistant Engineers with 8 years ' service experience and Diploma Holder Assistant Engineers with 10 years ' service experience were eligible for promotion.
No inter se quota between the two class of officers; was prescribed.
The Diploma Holders in the Cadres of .junior Engineers and Assistant Engineers filed separate writ petitions in the High Court assailing the constitutional validity of the prescriptions made by the rules in the matter of requirement of differential service experiences between the Graduates and the Diploma Holders for promotion to the higher caders of Assistant Engineers and Executive Engineers respectively.
They also assailed the promotion of Graduate Engineers to the higher cadres made on the strength of the Rules.
PG NO 253 PG NO 254 The High Court allowed the writ petitions and declared the different standards of service experience prescribed for Degree Holders and Diploma Holders in respect of both the cadres as violative of Articles 1 1 and 16 of the Constitution.
In the appeal to this Court, on behalf of appellants it was contended; (l) that the view taken by the High Court is demonstrably erroneous and opposed to well settled principles; (2) that the High Court took an erroneous view that in Shujat Ali 's case ; this Court struck down the service rule impugned in that case; (3) that the fundamental distinction between Triloki Nath Khosa 's, case ; and Shujat Ali 's case was lost sight of by the High Court;(4) that the present case was not one in which the Diploma Holders, proprio vigore and without more, were held eligible for promotion.
The educational qualification of a Diploma in engineering was not treated as equivalent to a Degree for purposes of determining eligibility.
Nor the Degree itself was determinative of eligibility for promotion.
The eligibility of promotion is based on a combination of factors which vary according to the basic educational qualification of the two classes of engineers; (5) that this distinction was germane to the requirements of higher technical and academic quality for the higher posts which involved expertise in structural design.
and (6) that even where recruitment to a particular cadre was made from different sources,resulting in the formation of a single homogeneous cadre it was not impermissible to make a further classification amongst the members of such a cadre for purposes of further promotion based on the higher educational qualification of the candidates.
On behalf of the respondent Diploma Holders it was contended(1) that this Court had, more than once.
cautioned against undue accent, in the matter of promotional opportunities, on academic qualification alone which might lead to elitist perferences and tend to obscure the egalitarian principle and social justice; (2) that the effect of the distinction is really an imperceptible extension or magnification of insubstantial factors subverting the precious guarantee of equality and(3) that to discriminate between Diploma Holders and Graduates who belong to the same cadre and hold inter changeable posts, both in the present cadre and in the prospective promotional posts, on the mere lack of some higher academic attainment is to place a high premium on these social and economic pursuits for the economically disadvantaged difficult.
Allowing the Appeals, PG NO 255 HELD: l.
The inherent distinction between a person with a Degree and one who is merely a Diploma Holder is much too obvious.
But the question for consideration, in the present context, is whether the differences have a reasonable relation to the nature of the office to which the promotion is contemplated.
The idea of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicated only when the candidates for promotion are drawn from the same source.
If the differences in the qualification has a reasonable relation to the nature of duties and responsibilities.
that go with and are attendant upon the promotional post, the more advantageous treatment of those who possess higher technical qualifications can be legitimised on the doctrine of classification.
There may,conceivably, be cases where the differences in the educational qualifications may not be sufficient to give any preferential treatment to one class of candidates as against another.
Whether the classification is reasonable or not must, therefore, necessarily depend upon facts of each case and the circumstances obtaining at the relevant time.
When the State makes a classification between two sources, unless the vice of the classification is writ large on the face of it, the person assailing the classification must show that it is unreasonable and violative of Article 14.
[263A C ] 2.
A wooden equality as between all classes of employees irrespective of all distinction or qualifications, or job requirements is neither constitutionally compelled nor practically meaningful.
[263D] The process of classification is in itself productive of inequality and in that sense antithetical of equality.
The process would be constitutionally valid if it recognises a pre existing inequality and acts in aid of amelioration of the effects of such pre existent inequality.
The the process cannot merely blow up or magnify in substantial or microscopic differences on merely meretricious or plausible.
The over emphasis on the doctrine of classification or any anxious and sustained attempts to discover some basis for classification may gradually and imperceptibly deprive the article of its precious content and end in re placing doctrine of equality by the doctrine of the classification.[264C D] 4.
The presumption of good faith in and of constitutionality of a classification cannot be pushed to the point of predicating some possible or hypothetical but undisclosed and unknown reason for a classification rendering the precious guarantee of equality "a mere rope of sand".
[264E] PG NO 256 Central Railway vs A.V.R. sidhanti; , at 214 and T.Devadasan V. The Union of India, [1964] 4 SCR at 689 & 690 followed.
5."To overdo classification is to undo equality".
The idea of similarity or dissimilarity of situations of persons to justify classification, cannot rest on merely differentia which may, by themselves rational or logical, but depends on whether the differences are relevant to the goals sought to be reached by the law which seeks to classify.
The justification of the classification must, therefore, be sought beyond the classification.
All marks of distinction do not necessarily justify classification irrespective of the relevance or nexus to objects sought to be achieved by the law imposing the classification.
[264F G] State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa & Ors.,[1974] I SCR 771; Bidi Suppy Co.v.
Union of India; , , relied no; Mohammad shujat Ali vs UOI and others, [1975]1 SCR 449; H.C. Sharma and Ors.
vs Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Ors., [1983]3 SCR 372 and Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala, and Anr.v.
Ravinder Kumar Sharma & Ors.
,[1986] 4 SCC 617 distinguished; State of Mysore vs Narasinga Rao, ; and Union of India vs Mrs. S.B. Kohli, [1973]3 SCR 117, referred to.
In the present case, the possession of a diploma.
by itself and without more, does not confer eligibility.
Diploma, for purposes of promotion, is not considered equivalent to the degree.
[268d] 7.If the educational qualification by itself was recognised as confering eligibility for promotion, then the super imposition of further conditions such as a particular period of service, selectively, on the Diploma Holders alone to their disadvantage might become discriminatory.
This does not prevent the State from formulating a policy which prescribes as an essential part of the conditions for the very eligibility that the candidate must have a particular qualification plus a stipulated quantum of service experience.[268G H;269A]
