With a view to produce T.V. Serials based on themes e.g. national integration, Communal harmony, against exploitation of child labour, equal status for women etc.
, Doordarshan invited proposals from producers sponsors.
The last date for submitting such projects was 7th May, 1986 and it was also made obligatory by Doordarshan that projects should comply with the guidelines prescribed by it.
Clause (2) of the guidelines inter alia required that the proposals for sponsored programs should consist of break up of the story in episodes; complete synopsis of each episode; detailed scenario, script of at least one episode etc.
As per clause (3) of the guidelines the proposals on receipt by Doordarshan were to be given a reference No. and acknowledged.
The guidelines also prescribed that if any proposal is not accompanied by any of the documents required by the guidelines, that deficiency was to be pointed out to the producer of the proposal and was to be treated complete only when all the requirements contained in the guidelines referred to above are complied with.
On the theme of national integration the Petitioner and Respondent No. 2 had submitted projects on the life and history of the great urdu poet Mirza Ghalib.
The projects submitted by the Petitioner and by another person were not approved/selected for telecast as the same were not found to be either attractive or interesting but the one sent by Respondent No Gulzar was selected.
The Petitioner challenged the said action of Doordarshan as arbitrary and based on malice by filing writ petition in the High Court u/a 226 of the Constitution praying for a direction to the Union of India and the Doordarshan to accept the script of the Petitioner and eventually to give him the contract.
His contention before the High Court was mainly that Respondent No. 2 Shri GULZAR had been preferred over the Petitioner by practising discrimination PG NO 282 PG NO 283 nation in the matter of selection of T.V. Serial even though the Petitioner had submitted his project on 7th May 1986 whilst Respondent No. 2 had not.
The High Court did not f~nd substance in any of the contentions raised by the Petitioner and dismissed the Writ Petition.
Against the order of the High Court of 13th July, 1988 dismissing the Writ Petition the Petitioner filed a petition for special leave to appeal u/a 136 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the petition for Special leave, this Court, HELD: That Respondent No. 2 Gulzar had by a letter dated the 4th February, 1986 submitted the theme of the matter and Doordarshan had asked him to furnish further details to make the proposal complete and after the proposal was so made complete, the same alongwith others was placed for consideration 'before the Committee.
Though the proposals might not have been considered strictly in accordance with the order of precedence yet they were considered fairly or reasonably.
[285C; 286F G] That there was obJectivity in the actual consideration of the different proposals and that there was fairness in the decision and that no malice or ill will coloured the decision making process in the case.
The Petitioner was not refused proper consideration because Respondent 2 described the petitioner as one who is a ~ 'maverick", on the contrary the serial submitted by the Petitioner was neither found to be attractive nor interesting.
[287A B] Ram & Shyam Co. vs State of Haryana & Ors., [l985] 3, SCC 267 at pp.
268 and 269 Haji T.M. Hassan Rawther vs Kerala Financial Corporation, AIR 1988 SC 157 at p. 161, referred to.
