The respondent, Andhra Pradesh Rayons Ltd., manufacturing Rayon Grade Pulp, a base material for the manufacture of synthetics or man made fabrics, was assessed by the petitioner under the provisions of which provided for levy and collection of Water cess from the specified industries enumerated in Schedule I of the Act.
On appeal, the Appellate late Committee confirmed the order of assessment on the ground that the respondent was manufacturing Rayon Grade Pulp which came under the category of Textile industry.
The respondent filed a writ in the High Court challenging the levy Inter alia on the ground that it was not one of the industries mentioned in the Schedule.
The High Court upheld this contention.
Before this Court, it was sought to be canvessed by the petitioner that Rayon Grade Pulp was covered either by Item No. 7 of the Schedule, which was chemical industry, or item No. 10 which was textile industry, or item No.11 which was paper industry.
Dismissing the petition, it was, PG NO 380 PG NO 381 HELD: (I) The Act being fiscal in nature must be strictly construed.
The question as to what is covered must be found out from the language according to its natural meaning, fairly and squarely read.
[385F; 386B] (2) In a taxing Act one has to look merely at what is clearly said.
There is no room for any intendment.
There is no equity about a tax, there is no presumption as to tax.
Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied.
[385H] (3) Whether a particular industry is an industry covered in Schedule I has to be judged normally by what that industry produces mainly, its predominant purpose and process, and not by any ancillary or incidental process carried on by it.
[386D] (4) Chemical process would be involved to a certain extent, more or less in all industries, but an industry would be known as a chemical industry if it carries out predominantly chemical activities and is involved in chemical endeavours.
[386E] (5) Taxing consideration may stem from administrative experience and other factors of life and not artistic visualisation or neat logic and so the literal, though pedestrian, interpretation must prevail.
[386C] (6) One of the well recognised canons of construction is that the legislature speaks its mind by use of correct expression and unless there is any ambiguity in the language of the provision the Court should accept literal construction if it does not lead to an absurdity.
[387E] (7) There is no absurdity in the literal meaning.
Broadly and literally it can be said that the Rayon Grade Pulp is neither chemical industry nor textile industry nor paper industry.
[387G;386H] In Re Micklethwait., [1885] II EX 452. 456; Tenant vs Smith; , ; St. Aubyan vs AG., [1951] 2 All E.R. 473; Cape Brandy Syndicate vs IRC.
, at 71; Gursahai Saigal vs C.I.T. Punjab, ; ; C.I.T. Madras vs MR.
P. Firm, Muar, ; ; Controller of Estate Duty, Gujarat vs Kantilal Trikamlal, ; ; IRC vs Duke of Westminster, at 24; AV Fernandez vs The State of Kerala, ; ; Martand Dairy & Farm vs Union of India, [1975] Supp.
SCR 265; Lt Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi vs Union of India, , referred to.
PG NO 382 M/s. Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg.
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd. Mavoor vs The Appellate Committee for Water Cess, Trivandrum, A.I.R. 1983 Kerala 110.
overruled.
