The All India Sainik Schools Employees Association in a petition filed in this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution has asked for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents, primarily, to extend to the employees working in the Sainik Schools all.
the service benefits and advantages in the same pattern as obtaining in Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangthan.
The petitioner 's contentions are that the Sainik School Society is `State ' within the meaning of Article 12 and is accordingly amenable to claim and enforcement of fundamental rights, and further that the society has to be guided by what is provided in Part 4 of the Constitution by way of Directive Principles of State Policy.
Disposing of the petition, this Court, HELD: (1) The entire funding of the Sainik Schools is by the State Governments and the Central Government.
The overall control vests in the governmental authority.
It cannot therefore be doubted that the Sainik School Society is `State ' within the meaning of Article 12. 1405C] (2) Once it is held that the Sainik School Society is `State ', application of Article 14 is attracted.
Similarly under the Directive Principles, the claim for equal pay for equal work becomes tenable.
[405D] PG NO 398 PG NO 399 (3) Substantial contribution for running the Sainik School comes from the funds of the State where the school is located.
The Central Government 's contribution is minimal.
The mode of funding is mainly through scholarship by the State payable to the students.
It follows out of this fact that the employees of the Sainik School cannot be treated as Central Government employees nor can they betreated as at par with the employees of Kendriya Vidyalayas.
They are a class by themselves.14.
[405F G] (4) In view of the position that the employees of the Sainik Society are a distinct class by themselves, there is no merit in the claim that there has been discrimination.
To put unequals as equals is against the objective of Article 14.
[405G] (5) The claim of equal pay for equal work is indeed not tenable.
A Sainik School intended essentially to draw young men for being recruited into the National Defence Academy is not an ordinary school.
Its curriculum, the pattern of teaching, the life style, the discipline and attention differ.
A claim for equal pay on the allegation of equal work reguires clear material to support the basis that the work is both the institutions is the same.
The claim of the petitioner that the work in the two institution is equal, and, therefore, the claim for equality of pay cannot be accepted.[406A,C E] (6) The Sainik School Society being, `State ' is amenable to the jurisdiction of the Court and it is open to the court to examine whether the conditions of service are of an acceptable pattern.
[406E] (7) The Court accordingly examined the petitioner 's demands and passed appropriate orders directing specific reliefs in terms of medical, leave travel concession benefits and house building and other advances.
The Court however found nothing unreasonable in the condition of service pertaining to age of retirement.
[407G] Ajay Hasia & Ors.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors., ; and International Airport Authority case., [1979]3 SCC 489.
