The appellant was appointed from July 3, 196X as principal of the School run by the respondent society, a body registered under the M.P. Non trading Corporation Act, 1962.
On June 23, 1971 the appellant 's services were terminated with immediate effect by giving one month 's salary in lieu of notice.
The appellant made representation to the Divisional Superintendent of Education who directed the Society to rescind the order of termination because, according to him, the termination of the appellant was wrongful being in breach of Regulation 79 of the Regulations framed by the Board of Secondary Education under section 28(2)(d) of Madhya Pradesh Madhyamik Shiksha Adhiniyam, 1955.
The appellant however was not re instated by the society.
The appellant therefore filed a petition in the High Court, which was dismissed.
The High Court held that (1) the said Regulations had on statutory force and therefore the violation in this case of the procedure prescribed in Regulations 71 and 79 would not render the order of termination null and void; (2) the appellant 's remedy was only by an action for damages for breach of master and servant contract; and (3) the school being run by a private body, no writ of mandamus could he issued.
Allowing the appeal, it was, HELD ection 28(2)(d) of the Act confers power on the Board to make Regulations regarding the conditions of recognition of the Institutions as well as for framing of School Code" to ensure minimum standard of efficient and uniform management of such schools.
[447B C] PG NO 442 PG NO 443 (2) As has been held by this Court in Sukhdev Singh 's case, there is no subtantial difference between a rule and a regulation inasmuch as both are subordinate legislation under powers conferred by the statute.
There is therefore, no escape from the conclusion that the regulations, in the present case, have force of law.1449B] (3) A observed in Sukhdev Singh 's case, the doctrine of ultra vires as applied to statutes, rules and orders should equally apply to the regulations and any other subordinate legislation.
[450G] (4) The order of termination of the appellant from the post of Principal of the Higher Secondary School in breach of Regulation 79 is illegal and as such the same is liable to be quashed as the Regulations have got statutory force.
The appellant is liable to be reinstated in the service as Principal of the said school.
[454A B] (5) The Higher Secondary School in question though run by a private trust receives 100% grant from the Government and as such it is amenable to the writ jurisdiction for violation of the provisions of the said Regulations in passing the order of termination of service of the appellant.
454B C] Dr. Ram Pal Chaturvedi vs State of Rajasthan, [1970] I SCC 75; Indian Airlines Corporation vs Sukhdeo Rai, ; ; Sukhdev Singh & Ors.
vs Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi and Anr., ; ; Prabhakar Ramakrishna Jodh vs A.L Pandi and Anr., ; Manmohan Singh Jaitla vs Commissioner, U.T. of Chandigarh & Ors., [1984] Supp.
S.C.C. 540; and Indra Pal vs Managing Committee,, Model Inter College Thora, [l984] 3 SCC 384, referred to.
