The respondents had sought admission to post graduate courses in the five medical colleges affiliated to the Rajasthan University through a competitive examination which was common for all these five colleges.
They were not able to secure admission in any discipline even though they had secured more marks as compared to the successful candidates who had been granted additional marks on the basis of Ordinance 278 E(d)(ii) of the Ordinance of University of Rajasthan.
Under this proviso the successful candidates were entitled to a uniform addition of 5% marks in the percentage of aggregate marks if they had passed the final M.B.B.S. examination from the same institution for which selection was being made.
The respondents challenged this provision as violative of the equality principle enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.
The High Court struck down as unconstitutional the impugned provision embodied in note (d)(ii) of Ordinance 278 E. Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) The aggregate marks for all subjects put together is 2750.
5% of these makrs would work out to 137.5 marks.
In the result, a candidate from the same college will have an advantage of 137.5 marks over candidates from other PG NO 493 PG NO 494 colleges.
In medical courses where there is intense competition and candidates run neck to neck so often with a difference of a mark or two, a difference of 137.5 marks by way of college wise institutional preference would virtually make a mockery of the merit criteria.
[498C D] (2) This factor coupled with other factors leave no room for doubt that while on the face of it the impugned rule appears to extend or accord equal treatment of 5% weightage to the students of each of the five Medical College, in actual operation it brings about oppressive and obnoxious inequality.
Once the veil of apparent equality is pierced, the ugly inequality stares one in the eyes which are opened to the offensive 'reality ' [502B C] (3) Admission to post graduate courses st SMS College at Jaipur being considered as most advantageous, a candidate from Jaipur College will get admission in P.G. Course at Jaipur in preference to the other more meritorious candidates merely because he passed the M.B.B.S. examination at Jaipur even though all of them secured their marks at the indentical competitive examination to all the Colleges.
It needs no argument that Article 14 is seriously shattered.
[498D] (4) What may 'appear ' to be equal treatment accorded in obeisance to the equality doctrine embodied in Article 14 of the Constitution in its application in 'reality ' may result in denial of equality and may accordingly be liable to be condemned for defying the equality doctrine.
[495B] (5) Such being the position the constitutional validity of the impugned rule cannot be sustained.
It has to be buried unceremoniously as unconstitutional being violate of article 14 of the Constitution of India.
[502C D] Nidamarti Mahesh kumar vs State of Maharashtra, AIR 80 SC 1362 (1980) 3 SCR 1302, referred to.
