The petitioners were working as Grade A officers on the appointed date, i.e., 1.10.1979 when the State Bank of Patiala (Officers ') Service Regulation, 1979 pertaining to the placement and fitment of existing officers in the new grades and scales of pay became effective.
By virtue of Regulation 7 read with Schedule 1, the pre existing Grade A officers were placed in two different grades Senior Management Grade and Middle Management Grade Depending on their date of promotion to Grade A being before or after 31.12.1975.
The petitioners who were placed in the Middle Management Grade have challenged in their writ petition to this Court the validity of Regulation 7 read with Schedule I of the Regulations on the grounds that (i) the Regulations merely brought about a revision of pay scales; (ii) to divide the officers of the same cadre and doing the same nature of work into two groups for the purposes of mere revision of pay scales purely on the basis of the fortuitous circumstance of the date of their promotion to the existing Grade A would be arbitrary and violative of Article 14; and (iii) the number of posts in the revised senior grade were far more than the officers arbitrarily cut off and initially placed in that grade.
P. Savita vs Union of India, [1985] Suppl I S.C.R. 101 and Randhir Singh vs Union of India, ; , relied upon.
PG NO 479 PG NO 480 On behalf of the Bank it was contended that: (i) the Regulations did not contemplate revision simpliciter of pay scales of the existing cadres of officers; (ii) new categories of posts and new scales of pay not corresponding to the pre existing categories of posts and scales had been created and, therefore, new criteria had to be evolved and applied for the placement and fitment of the existing officers into the new categories of posts and scales of pay; (iii) all the officers of any particular pre existing category could not, en bloc, be grafted on a particular new category or scale of pay; and (iv) there was a rational differentia in placing certain officers in the Senior Management Posts as the cut off date was fixed having regard to the number of posts vacant in that grade on the appointed date.
Dismissing the petition, it was, HELD: (l) The Regulations did not bring about a mere revision of pay.
[490B C] (2) This was not a case to which the principle of 'equal pay for equal work ' could straight away be applied.
[490E] (3) The qualitative differences in regard to degrees of reliability and responsibility could not be put aside as irrelevant.
There could not be any Thumb Rule to decide the invalidity of the provisions which recognised and provided for differentiation on the basis of higher experience, reliability and responsibility.
[490E F] Randhir Singh vs Union of India, ; ; All Customs & Central Excise Stenographers (recognised) vs Union of India,[1988] 2 JT 519 and State of U.P. v.J.P.Chaurasia,C.A.No 56 of 1987 dated 27.9.1988, referred to.
P. Savita vs Union of India [1985] 1 SUPP.
SCR 101; distinguished.
(4) The principle of classification amongst the existing Grade A officers for purposes of fitment in the new dispensation brought about by the statutory regulations could not be said to be unreasonable and arbitrary requiring to be struck down as violative of Article 14.
[492C D] (5) If more number of posts were categorised under Senior Management Grade Scale IV` than the number of existing officers placed into the higher scale pursuant to PG NO 481 Regulation 7 read with Schedule 1, those extra number of posts in the higher scale would have to be filled up by promotion under Regulation 17 and not by a continuing process of placement and fitment.
[492F]
