Section 3 of M.P. Sthaniya Kshetra Me Mal Ke Prevesh Par Kar Adhiniyam 1976 provides for levy of entry tax on the entry of goods specified in Schedule Il for consumption, use and sale therein, and on entry of goods specified in Schedule III for consumption or in the execution of work contracts but not for sale.
Section 6(c) provides that where a dealer purchases goods specified in Schedule II and Schedule III in a local area from a person or a dealer who is not a registered dealer, it is presumed, unless the contrary is proved by him, that the entry of such goods had been effected by him into such local area before they were purchased by such dealer.
Iron and steel are listed among other goods in Schedule II, and cement in Schedule III.
Section 13 provides that certain provisions of the M.P. General Sales Tax Act apply mutatis mutandis to a dealer in respect of entry tax payable under the Adhiniyam.
The appellant company, a building contractor and registered as a dealer under the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, entered into a Works Contract with the P.W.D. for construction of foodgrains godown and ancillary buildings.
It was on item rate basis.
In the tender submitted by the appellant, the prices of the materials to be used for construction including cost of iron, steel and cement were included.
The P.W.D. had agreed to supply from its stores the iron, steel and cement for the construction work and to deduct the prices of materials so supplied and consumed in the said construction work from and out of the final bill of the appellant.
Under clause 10 of the Works Contract, the contractor was `bound to procure ' certain materials of special description, and in order to ensure that quality materials are procured, the PWD undertook to PG NO 657 PG NO 658 supply such materials and stores from time to time as required by the contractor to be used for the purpose of performing the contract.
The value of such quantity of materials and stores so supplied was specified at a rate and got set off or deducted from any sum due or to become due thereafter to the contractor.
It also provided that all materials supplied to the contractor, remained the absolute property of the Government and could not be removed on any account from the site of the work and were at all times open to inspection by the Engineer in charge.
Any such materials remaining unused and in perfectly good condition at the time of completion or determination of the contract were to be returned to the Engineer in charge.
Iron, steel and cement were supplied by the P.W.D., an unregistered dealer, to the appellant for the construction of work.
The Taxing authority assessed the appellant to purchase tax under section 7(1) of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act and also held it liable for payment of entry tax for iron, steel and cement, the entry for the same having been effected at the instance of the appellant because it had ultimately used the materials for the construction work.
The aforesaid assessment orders were affirmed by the Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax by dismissing the revision petitions of the appellant.
The appellant challenged the aforesaid assessment orders in a writ petition before the High Court, on the ground that the entry of materials so supplied by the P.W.D. was effected by it and not by the appellant and that as these materials were used for construction of the building, there was no sale as such and consequently no entry tax could be levied.
On behalf of the Taxing authorities respondent, it was argued that since the appellant and purchased the iron, steel and cement from the PWD and not from the market as per the contract the prices of which had been deducted from its final bill, the entry of material could be presumed to have been made at the instance of the appellant who had ultimately used the materials for the construction work, and since these materials were purchased from the unregistered dealer, i.e., the P.W.D., the appellant was liable for payment of purchase tax and entry tax.
The Full Bench of the High Court, which disposed of the writ petition found that there was `sale ' and that the tax was leviable.
In the appeal by special leave by the assessee to this Court, on the question: whether there was sale and whether the property in the goods had passed to the appellant or continued to remain with the PWD, although the PWD had in the final bill debited the prices of the goods so supplied to the appellant under clause (10) of the contract: PG NO 659 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
Whether a contract for service or for execution of work involved a taxable sale of goods must be decided on the facts and circumstances of each case.
The burden in such a case lay upon the taxing authorities to show that there was a taxable sale, and that burden was not discharged by merely showing that property in the goods which belonged to the party performing service or executing the contract stood transferred to the other party.
[664G H] 1.2 Even in a contract purely of work or service, it is possible that articles may have to be used by the person executing the work and property in such articles or materials may pass to the other party.
That would not necessarily convert the contract into one of sale of those materials.
In every case, the court has to find out the primary object of the transaction and the intention of the parties while entering into it.
[667F G] 1.3 In order to be 'sale taxable to duty ', not only the property in the goods should pass from the contractor to the Government, or the appellant in the instant case, but there should be an independent contract separate and distinct apart from mere passing of the property where a party purchases or procures goods from the Government.
Mere passing of property from the contractor to the Government would not suffice.
There must be sale of goods.
The primary object of the Bargain judged in its entirety must be viewed.
[668B C] 1.4 In the instant case, by use or consumption of materials in the work of construction, there was passing of the property in the goods to the Assessee from the PWD.
By appropriation and by the agreement, there was a sale as envisaged in terms of clause (l0) of the contract, and consequently such sale was liable to tax.
[669A B] The Government of Andhra Pradesh vs Guntur Tobaccos Ltd., 16 STC 240; Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The State of Orissa, 25 STC 211, The State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors.
vs Associated Hotels of India Ltd., 29 STC 474, relied on.
Brij Bhushan Lal Parduman Kumar etc.
vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and New Delhi III, , referred to.
PG NO 660 Construction Company Changanacherry & Anr.
vs State of Kerala, 36 STC 320,; Cementation Patel (Durgapur) vs Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, West Bengal, Calcutta, 47 STC 385, distinguished.
