On taking over the Agra Electric Supply Co. in December 1973, the respondent U.P. State Electricity Board intimated to the appellant U.P. Hotels that the Bulk Supply Agreement between the appellant and the Agra Electric Supply Co. would continue to be in force until such time the agreement was determined in accordance with its relevant provisions.
The agreement contained terms of rates, discounts, minimum sum payable and increase in the rates and sums payable once a year on account of increase in cost of production and distribution of electrical energy (clause 9) and also contained an arbitration clause (clause 18).
In November 1976, the appellant received a communication from the respondent informing that the uniform tariff rates issued under section 49 of the Electricity Supply Act, 1949 would be applicable to them.
The Board also withdrew the contractual discount and rebates.
While sub sections (1) and (2) of section 49, stipulate a uniform tariff for electric supply, sub section (3) authorises the Board to fix different tariffs for the supply of electricity.
The appellant protested against this unilateral increases and withdrawal, but without success.
The appellant then informed the respondent that it was referring the disputes for decision by the arbitrator and appointed a retired High Court Judge as its arbitrator.
The respondent in turn appointed another retired High Court Judge as a joint arbitrator.
The joint arbitrators appointed Justice V. Bhargava, a retired Judge of the Supreme Court, as the Umpire.
The arbitrators having failed, the proceedings started before the Umpire.
The Umpire gave his award in June 1983 and held that the Board having accepted the agreement, it became binding on the Board and once the agreement was binding, its terms under sub section (3) of section 49 could not be varied by PG NO 670 PG NO 671 fixation of uniform tariff under sub sections (1) and (2).
The Umpire further held that the present case was fully covered by the decision of the Supreme Court in Indian Aluminium Co. wherein it was held that where a stipulation in a contract was entered into by a public authority in exercise of a statutory power then, even though such stipulation fettered subsequent exercise of the same statutory power, it would be valid and the exercise of such statutory power would pro tanto stand restricted.
In that view of the matter the Umpire held that in terms of clause 9 the increase in unit rate was permissible and the fuel cost variation charges which were variable every month was contrary to clause 9 as increase was permitted only once in a year of accounts, and further that the appellant was entitled to discount of 50% of the charges for electricity and also to discount for prompt payment of bills.
Objections were filed by the respondent before the IInd Additional District Judge during the proceedings initiated for making the award the Rule of the Court.
The IInd Additional Distt.
Judge set aside the award on the ground that the reference made to arbitration was unilateral.
In appeal, the High Court, while holding against the above finding of the IInd Addl.
Judge, set aside the award on the ground that the Indian Aluminium Co. case was inapplicable to the present case, and the mistake committed by the Umpire in this regard was error of law apparent on the face of the award.
The High Court held that even if the stipulation as to the tariff structure in the agreement be taken to have been Continued in existence in view of sub section (3) of section 49 of the Act, the same was not unrestricted, and that the stipulation was expressly made subject to certain reservations as would be clear from the opening sentence of clause 9 of the agreement the main clause was "subject to the provisions hereinafter contained".
It was further held that in drawing distinction between `rates ' and `discount ' and upholding the right of the Board to tamper with the former and negating similar right in respect of the latter, the Umpire had committed an error.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that a specific question of law being a question of construction had been referred to the Umpire and hence, his decision, right or wrong, had to be accepted.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that there was no specific question of law referred to the Umpire but it was a general reference in which a question of law arose, and that it was a question in the proceedings and the question of law, as such, did not arise.
PG NO. 672 Allowing the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) Even assuming that there was an error of construction of the agreement or even that there was an error of a law in arriving at a conclusion, such an error was not an error which was amenable to correction even in a reasoned award under the law.
[683B] (2) Where the question referred for arbitration is a question of construction, which is, generally speaking a question of law, the arbitrator 's decision can not be set aside only because the court would itself have come to a different conclusion, but if it appears on the face of the award that the arbitrator has proceeded illegally, as, for instance, by deciding on evidence which was not admissible, or on principles of construction which the law does not countenance, there is error in law which may be ground for setting aside the award.
[683G H; 684A] (3) In order to set aside an award, there must be a wrong proposition of law laid down in the award as the basis of the award.
[684D] (4) In the instant case, a question of law arose certainly during the course of the proceedings.
Such a question has been decided by the Umpire on a view which is a possible one to take.
Even if there was no specific reference of a question referred to the Umpire, there was a question of law involved.
Even on the assumption that such a view is not right, the award is not amenable to interference or correction by the Courts of law as there was no proposition of law which could be said to be the basis of the award of the Umpire, and which was erroneous.
[689B Cl (5) The Umpire in his award stated that the decision of this Court covered and supported the claim of the claimant.
In the present case the only difference was that there was only an agreement which was held by the Umpire to have become operative.
Once that agreement was binding on the Board, its terms could not be vaired from the uniform rate under sub sections (1) and (2) of section 49.
The Umpire was right.
The Umpire committed no error in arriving at such conclusion.
Further more, such a conclusion was certainly a possible view of the interpretation of the decision of this Court in Indian Aluminium Co. 's case, if not the only view.
[688G H; 689A] Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd. vs Kerala Electricity Board, ; ; Coimbatore Distt.
P.T. Sangam vs Bala PG NO 673 Subramania Foundry; , ; Delhi Municipal corpn.
vs M/s Jagan Nath Ashok Kumar; , ; M/s. Hindustan Tea Co. vs M/s. K. Sashikant & Co., AIR 1987 SC 81; Kanpur Nagar Mahapalika vs M/s.
Narain Das Haribansh, ; Champsey Bhara & Co. vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd., ; Dr. S.B. Dutt vs University of Delhi; , ; M/s. Kapoor Nilokheri Co op.
Dairy Farm Society Ltd. vs Union of lndia, ; Tarapore & Co. vs Cochin Shipyard Ltd. Cochin, ; ; Hitchins & Anr.
vs British Coal Refining, [1936] 2 A.E.R. Reprint 191; Pioneer Shipping Ltd. & Ors.
vs ETP Tioxide Ltd., , referred to.
