The appellant assessee manufactures and supplies to the Indian Railway wheels, tyres and axles as separate items.
The goods are forged products.
After being forged, the goods are rough machined and polished before supplying, thus removing the excess layer of steel, commonly referred to as 'excess skin '.
The appellant also makes and supplies to the Railways wheels and axles as composite units.
Right from 1962 the appellant/assessee was filing classification lists showing the forged goods as liable to excise duty only under Tariff Item No. 26AA(ia) of the Central Excise Tariff set out in the First Schedule to the , and this classification was being accepted and approved by the Excise Authorities.
It is common ground that duty under Tariff Item No. 26AA was payable on the forged product and duty under Tariff Item No. 68 was payable only at the stage of the completion of the manufacture of the finished goods.
In 1981, the Assistant Collector, Central Exicse, called upon the appellant to show cause why it should not be proceeded against for contravention of Rule 173 B, 9(i) read with Rule 173(G)(i) and Rule 173(i)(a) on the ground that the goods supplied to the railways were not forged items as such, but the said goods after they had undergone machining and polishing after having been forged had been turned into a distinct commercial commodity which process amounted to manufacture and hence the goods were liable to excise duty as set out in Item 68.
The notice also called upon the appellant to show cause as to why duty on the forged goods under Tariff Item No. 26AA(ia) should not be payable on the footing of the weight of the goods as forged and before 1024 the removal of the excess skin.
The basic contention of the revenue was that the goods were liable to duties at two stages, namely, under Tariff Item No. 26AA(ia) when they were forged and under Triff Item No. 68 after they were machined and polished.
The stand of the appellant was that the process of forging of the goods could be paid to be completed only after machining and polishing, that machining and polishing was required to be done in order to bring the goods in line with the specification of the Indian Railways, that the goods supplied have to be further precision machined and fine polished at the railway workshop before these could be put to use by the railways, and hence the machining by the appellant did not amount to manufacture.
A Certificate issued by the Railways states that axles are supplied to the railways in rough machined condition and wheels, tyres and blanks are supplied in "as rolled/as forged" condition.
It further states that these wheels, tyres, exles and blanks have to be sometimes rough machined partially to remove excess steel or manufacturing defects, and these products are subsequently precision machined by the Railways at their workshops before being put to use.
The Collector rejected the stand of the appellant and held that the appellant was liable to pay differential duty under Item 26 AA (ia) on the difference between weight of the said goods when forged and the weight after machining to remove the excess skin as well as the duty under Tariff Item No. 68.
The Collector also held that the appellant was liable to penalty of Rs.1 lac under Rule 173 Q for suppression of facts or giving misleading particulars.
On that basis the Collector took the view that the period of limitation for making the demand was 5 years prior to the service of the show cause notice.
The appellant filed writ petition in the Patna High Court for quashing the order passed by the Collector.
The High Court accepted the conclusions of the Collector save and except that they took the view that there was no suppression or mis statement of facts and hence the period of limitation would be only 6 months prior to the service of the show cause notice.
The Appellants contends before this Court that machining and polishing which is done in its workshop was not of a significant character and is only in the nature of shaping by removing the superficial material to bring the forged items upto Railways ' specifications.
It is further 1025 contended that the weight should be measured only after the machining and polishing at the appellant 's workshop was complete.
The Respondents, on the other hand, contend that the forging of the goods was complete before machining and polishing was done and that the duty on the forged goods under Tariff Item No. 26AA(ia) should be payable on the footing of the weight of the goods as forged and before the removal of the excess skin by machining.
Three points arise for decision: (1) at what stage could the goods suplied by said to be forged, and in respect of the said goods whether the weight for the purpose of levy of excise duty under item 26AA(ia) should be taken before or after the machining and polishing is done by the appellant to remove excess skin; (ii) whether as a result of machining and polishing the forged goods were transformed into new commercial commodities; (iii) whether the appellant was guilty of misstatement of facts so as to attract longer period of limitation.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: (i) The removal of extra/unwanted surface steel by either trimming or skin cutting of the forged product must be regarded as incidental or ancillary to the process of "manufacture" as defined in sub section 2(f) of the .
The appellant is, therefore, liable to pay duty on the goods referred to in the petition other than the composite units only under Item No. 26AA(ia) of the First Schedule to the Central Excises Act and the duty will be based on the weight after the machining carried out in the factory of the appellant to remove the excess skin or excess surface steel.
[1030D F] (ii) It is quite clear on facts that the finished goods, namely, finished wheels, tyres, axles and blanks could be said to have come into existence only after the precision machining and other processing at the Railways ' workshops was complete and therefore the appellant is not liable to pay any duty on these goods as under Item No. 68 of the Central Excise Tariff.
[1031F] (iii) It is common ground that right from 1962 the appellant 's classification lists were accepted and approved by the excise authorities.
In these circumstances, it could not be said that the appellant was guilty of any suppression or mis statement of facts or collusion or violation of the provisions of the Central Excises Act as contemplated under the proviso to Section 11 A of the said Act.
In view of this, the period of limitation would clearly be only six months prior to the service of the show cause notice.
[1032E F 1026 (iv) In respect of the composite sets, it is beyond dispute, and it is conceded by the appellant, that the appellant is liable to pay duty both under Items Nos. 26AA(ia) and 68, but only for a period of six months prior to the service of the show cause notice.
[1033A B] Metal Forgings Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India, [1985] 20 E.L.T. approved.
