The appellant, who belongs to the Scheduled Castes community, joined service as a clerk on February 20, 1954 in the Electricity Branch of the Punjab Public Works Department.
In February 1959, the Punjab State Electricity Board was constituted and the employees of the Electricity Branch were transferred to the said Board.
The conditions of service of the employees were governed by the existing terms and conditions.
as well as the existing service rules.
In 1967, the Haryana State Electricity Board was constituted and the appellant was allocated to the said Board.
The Electricity Board by its resolution dated March 16.
1976 adopted the circular letter dated December 18, 1972 providing for reservation of 22% of Vacancies both for initial recruitment as well as for promotion to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as well as to members of the backward classes.
The appellant was promoted on September 25, 1973 as Deputy Superintendent.
The respondent No. 2 was also promoted by the same order as Deputy Superintendent.
However, in the said order, it was made clear by a note appended thereto that the earlier promotion of the officials will not confer on them any right to claim seniority over others.
On April 27, 1972, a circular was issued by the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana to all the Departments regarding the criteria for reservation for members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the service and fixation of their seniority.
As the seniority of the appellant was not determined from the date of his appointment to the post of Deputy Superintendent, he made a representation to the Board requesting for its determination.
This representation was, however, rejected on the ground that seniority in the promoted rank would be accorded only with reference to the inter se seniority in the previous post, and on January 21, 1977, the appellant was finally informed that his seniority will not be computed PG NO 702 PG NO 703 from the date of his promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent.
On January 12, 1977 respondents 2 and 3 who were junior to the appellant as Deputy Superintendent were promoted as Superintendent superseding the claim of the appellant.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid action of the first respondent in promoting respondents 2 and 3, the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court for a mandamus directing respondent 1 to consider his case for promotion for the post of Superintendent on the basis of his being the senior most Deputy Superintendent.
The writ petition was contested on behalf of the respondent l who stated in its counter affidavit that the petitioner could not claim seniority above the respondents 2 and 3 in the rank of Deputy Superintendent on the ground that his seniority had already been fixed in accordance with the exception below rule 9 of the 1952 Service Rules.
A Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition on the ground that the instructions governing the matter of promotion in favour of Scheduled Castes candidate had nothing to do with the determination of the seniority of these candidates and that the letter promoting the petitioner had specifically mentioned that the earlier promotion would not confer on him any right of claim to seniority over and above those who are otherwise senior to him in the cadre from which he was promoted and that in the light of the exception to rule 9 of the 1952 Service Rules, the petitioner being promoted temporarily, his seniority cannot be counted from the date of his appointment in the higher post and that respondents 2 and 3, who could be treated senior to him in the rank of Deputy Superintendent as the were senior to the petitioner in the grade of assistants.
The Letters Patent Appeal filed by the appellant having been dismissed summarily, the appellant appealed to this Court by special leave.
Allowing the Appeal, HELD. 1.
On a plain reading of Rule 9 it appears that the seniority of the members of the service serving in an officiating capacity shall be determined prior to confirmation `in the order of the dates of their appointment ' and after confirmation by their respective dates of confirmation.
The exception to this Rule is that if a member of the is promoted temporarily to a post earlier than his senior for reasons other than inefficiency of the senior person they will take rank inter se according to PG NO 704 their relative seniority in the class from which they were promoted and the Junior person so promoted shall not be confirmed from a date earlier than the date of confirmation of the senior.
[709F G] In the Instant case, the appellant has been promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent which was reserved under the block system for members of the Scheduled Castes.
The appointment to the said reserved post on promotion is a regular one.
The appointment letter does not that the promotion of the appellant to the post of Deputy Superintendent was purely temporary.
This being the position the exception to Rule 9(11) cannot be applied to determine the seniority of the appellant in the post of Deputy Superintendent, and his seniority cannot be based in accordance with the inter se seniority of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 wee promoted to he post of Deputy Superintendent.
[710A D] 2.
The appellant is thus senior to respondent Nos. 2 and 3 in the rank of Deputy Superintendent the was promoted to the said post earlier them the respondents Nos. 2 and 3 and as such his claim for promotion to the post of Superintendent on the dates when the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were promoted to such post is legal and valid.
[710E] 3/ Respondent No. 1 is directed to treat the appellant promoted to the post of Superintendent from the date respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were promoted to the said post and to pay him the emoluments attached to the said post of Superintendent minus the emoluments paid us Deputy Superintendent from that date till May 29, 1981 date of actual appointment is Superintendent.
[711A B]
