Section 92 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act empowers the appellant Undertaking to make appointments to category 'A ' posts after consultation with the I .P.S.C. However.
such consultation is not required if the appointment is for a period not exceeding one year.
In the absence of any regulation made by the Corporation with regard to the conditions of service of its employees, the Central Government has framed Delhi Municipal Corporation Service Regulation 1959.
Regulation 3 of which provides that these Regulations shall he applicable to all Municipal Officers and other Municipal employees whose pay is chargeable to the `General Account ' of the Municipal Fund.
The appellants as well as respondents, who were working as Assistant Engineers, were appointed as Executive Engineers on different dates for a period of one year or till the posts are Filled up in consultation with the Commission.
They all worked continuously in their respective posts till their services were regularised by the Commission with effect from 8 january, 1971.
Their seniority in the cadre of Executive Engineers was determined reflecting the respective rankings in the feeding cadre.
i.e., Assistant Engineer excluding the services rendered on ad hoc appointments.
The learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court dismissed the writ petition, challenging the validity of seniority list, filed by the aggrieved officials.
On appeal the Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeal holding that the determination of seniority of PG NO 633 PG NO 634 officers is not governed by any statutory rule and continuous officiation in the post should be the basis.
In the appeal by special leave before this Court it was argued by the appellants that since the Commission regularised the services of all Executive Engineers with effect from a common date, the inter se seniority in the lower cadre should be the proper basis in the higher cadre also.
On the contrary the respondent Executive Engineers contended that the continuous officiation in the post till regularisation should be the basis for determining the seniority.
The applicability of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Service Regulation 1959 to the employees of the Undertaking was also questioned.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The Service Regulation 1959 applies only to those who were paid out of 'General Account ' and it has no application to the category of officers of the appellant Undertaking as the salary of the employees in the Undertaking is paid out of the account of the Undertaking and not from the 'General Account ' of the Municipal Fund.
[639E F] [2] In the absence of any rule or order the length of service should be the basis to determine the seniority.
[646D] (3) The judgments of Courts or observations made thereon are not to be read as statutes.
They are made in the setting of facts obtained in a particular case.
[643D] The principle of counting service in favour of one should not be violative of equality of opportunity enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
If ad hoc appointment or temporary appointment is made without considering the claims of seniors in the cadre, the service rendered in such appointment should not be counted for seniority in the cadre.
The length of service in ad hoc appointment or stop gap arrangement made in the exigencies of service without considering the claims of all the eligible and suitable persons in the cadre ought not be reckoned for the purpose of determining the seniority in the promotional cadre.
To give the benefit of such service to a favoured few would be contrary to the equality of opportunity enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
But if the claims of all eligible candidates were considered of the time of ad hoc appointments and such appointments continued uninterruptedly till the regularisation of services by the Departmental Promotion Committee or the Public Service Commission there is no PG NO 635 reason to exclude such service for determining the seniorlty.
Of course, if any statutory rule or executive order provides to the contrary, the rule or order will have supremacy.
[645G H; 646A C] Baleshwar Dass & Ors.
vs State of U.P, [1981] 1 SCR 449 at 469; A. Janardhan vs Union of India, ; = ; ; G.P. Doval vs Chief Secretary, Government of U.P. & Ors, ; ; C.S. Lamba vs Union of India, L1985] 3 SCR 431; G.C. Gupta vs N.K. Pandey, [1988] l SCC 316; N.K Chauhan vs State of Gujarat, [l977] l SCR 1037; S.B. Patwardhan vs State of Maharashtra, ; , referred to.
Ashok Gulati and Ors.
vs B.S. Jain and Ors, ; ; Dr. S.D. Choudhury vs State of Assam [l976] I SCC 283, distinguished.
Vasant Kumar Jaiswal vs State of M.P .
[l987] 4 SCC 450.
relied on.
