In August, 1984 the State Government granted permission to various private bodies and individuals for starting colleges of education (B.Ed.) courses, with several conditions required to be complied with within a period of six months.
The appellant was one among these beneficiaries.
When a change of the Government ensued in September 1984, the permissions granted were suspended or cancelled.
The appellant and other institutions aggrieved by the cancellation moved the HighCourt for relief under Article 226.
The High Court while disposing of all the writ petitions by a common order was of the opinion that the cancellation was as arbitrary as the grant of permission.
Since the parties had invested large sums money for establishing the colleges a via media was taken.
The High Court laid down certain conditions and issued directions for compliance for granting permission and recognition to the colleges.
The District Educational Officer inspected the appellant 's college and made a report stating that there was non compliance with the directions of the High Court.
Accepting that report, Director of School Education made an order declaring that the College of the appellant shall cease to exist with effect from the last working day of the academic year 1985 86.
Challenging the validity of that declaration, the appellant again moved the High Court by filing a writ petition.
He filed two more writ petitions for a direction to the Nagarjuna University to grant affiliation to the appellant 's college and for a declaration that the resolution of the Nagarjuna University refusing to grant affiliation to the college of the appellant was arbitrary and illegal.
The students of the college also filed a writ petition for a direction to declare the results of their B.Ed.
examination held in 1985.
The High Court by a common order disposed of all the four writ petitions.
PG NO 893 PG NO 894 The appellant filed an appeal to this Court only against the order dismissing writ petition No. 1645 of 1987, on the ground that the appellant has not complied with the conditions laid down by the High Court.
Before the High Court the appellant did not contend that it had complied with all the conditions laid down for recognition.
However, it was contended that the college is a minority institution and, therefore, it need not comply with all those requirements.
The High Court did not accept this contention.
Before this Court he relied solely on the ground that the conditions laid down by the High Court have been substantially complied with.
On behalf of the respondent State it was contended that the appellant has been a law breaker from the very beginning and no concession should be extended to perpetuate the illegality by permitting the students to appear in the examination and in any event, more than 100 students should not be permitted.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
While considering the validity of the earlier cancellation of the permission, the High Court had laid down certain guidelines and issued some directions for obedience.
The High Court made that order in the interest of the institution and the students, though strictly speaking it was beyond the power of the High Court.
The High Court did make it clear that if those conditions were not complied with within the prescribed period, the institution shall cease to function.
The record reveals that there were many deficiencies in the institution.
The reports of the District Educational Officer and Inspection Commission of Nagarjuna University indicated that the appellant did not satisfy all the requirements for granting permission or affiliation.
[900D E] 2.
The permission to start the college by the appellant was cancelled twice by the authorities for want of requirements.
On that ground,the University also has refused to grant affiliation to the college.
The order of the High Court affirming the decision of the University is not under appeal before this Court.
In spite of it, the appellant 's sought an interim order from this Court and admitted 160 students.
If the Government order had been delayed, the appellant ought to have asked the Convenor, B.Ed.
Common Entrance test to allot the students for admission to the college.
That was one of the conditions laid down by the High Court also.
Even that was not complied with.
[903B D] 3.
They are the students who were admitted on the strength of the interim order made by this Court.
It may not be proper to drive them to street if they have under gone the prescribed course with the necessary syllabi and other PG NO 895 matters relating thereto.
But it would be for the Director of School Education and the Registrar, Nagarjuna University to consider and satisfy themselves and not for this Court at once to permit them to appear in the examination.
[903E F] 4.
Though teaching is the last choice in the job market, the role of teachers is central to all processes of formal education.
The teacher alone could bring out the skills and intellectual capabilities of students.
He is 'engine ' of the educational system.
He is a principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values.
He needs to be endowed and energised with needed potential to deliver enlightened service expected of him.
His quality should be such as would inspire and motivate into action the benefitter.
He must keep himself abreast of ever changing conditions.
He is not to perform in a wooden and unimaginative way.
He must eliminate fissiparous tendencies and attitudes and infusenobler and national ideas in younger minds.
His involvement in national integration is more important, indeed Indispensible.
It is, therefore, needless to state that teachers should be subjected to rigorous training with scrutiny for efficiency.
It has greater relevance to the needs of the day.
The ill trained or sub standard teachers would be detrimental to our educational system; if not a punishment on our children.
The Government and the University must, therefore, take care to see that inadequacy in the training of teachers is not compounded by any extraneous consideration.
[903H; 904A D]
