In the matter giving rise to the Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 8219 of 1982 the plaintiffs filed a suit alleging that their father, who dies in the year 1956, had mortgaged the suit property for 30,000 Koris by a registered mortgage deed dated 20th April, 1943, executed in favour of the power of attorney holder and manager of the defandants Nos.
l and 2.
The defendant No. 3 is the heir of the attorney who was also managing the properties of the defendants Nos.
I and 2.
The mortgage property consisted of two delis having residential houses, shops, etc.
The mortgagees had inducted tenants in the suit property being defandants Nos. 4 to 9 in the original suit.
When the mortgage transaction took place the economic condition of the father of the plaintiffs was weak and he was heavily indebted to others.
Taking advantage of that situation, the mortgagees took mortgage deed from him on harsh and oppressive conditions by getting incorporated a long term of 99 years for redemption of mortgage.
Though possession was to be handed over to the mortgagees, they took condition for interest on the part of principal amount in the mortgage deed.
Mereover, the mortgagees were given liberty to spend any amount they liked for the improvement of the suit property and were also permitted to rebuild the entire property.
A registered notice to the defendants Nos.
I and 2 was given to redeem the mortgage, but they failed to do so, hence, the present suit was filed to redeem the mortgage and to recover actual possession from the defendants Nos. 4 to 9 who were the tenants Inducted by the mortgagees.
PG NO 827 Defendant No. 1 resisted the suit alleging that the term of the mortgage was for 99 years, so the suit filed before the expiry of that period was premature.
The defendant No. 3 resisted the suit by filing the written statement.
The defendants Nos. 4 to 9 resisted the suit on the grounds that the plaintiffs were not entitled to redeem the mortgage and even if they were so entitled, they could not get actual physical possession from the tenants who were protected by the Bombay Rent Act, because they were inducted by the mortgagees.
The Court proceeded against defendants Nos.
2/1 to 2/7 (heirs of mortgagee defendant No. 2) ex parte, and a preliminary decree for redemption of mortgage was passed on 2nd April, 1974 by the Trial Court.
But this ex parte decree was set aside by the District Court in the appeals filed by the heirs of defendant No. 2 on the ground that summons of the suit had not been duly served upon them.
Thereafter defendent No. 2/1 filed his written statement alleging that the suit was bad for non joinder of the sisters of the plaintiffs as parties.
Moreover, as per the terms and conditions of the mortgage deed, there was usufructuary mortgage for 20,000 koris, and the remaining 10.,000 koris were advanced to the mortgagor at monthly interest at the rate of 1/2 per cent.
There was a condition in the mortgage deed that the mortgagor would pay principal amount us well as the interest at the time of redemption.
When the suit was filed in the year 1972, the mortgagees were entitled to recover interest on 10,000 Koris for a period of 29 years, that the total mortgage amount along with interest would come to 47,400 koris equivalent to Rs. 15800 and the Civil Judge had no jurisdiction to try such suit; that the court fees was also not sufficient; that it was not true that the father of the plaintiffs was of weak economic condition.
The grand father of the plaintiffs was as Advocate and the father of the plaintiffs was the clerk of an advocate. 'The plaintiff No. l was also working as an Advocate at the time of the mortgage, so they knew the legal position; that at the relevant time the prevalent custom in Kutch State was to take mortgages of long term for '99 years and when it was permissible to take mortgage deeds with such a long term, it was also necessary to give permission for rebuilding the whole property, for better enjoyment of lt.
So these terms could not amount to clog on equity of redemption of mortgage, the mortgagees did not take any undue advantage and they were not present physically when the transaction took place through their power of attorney holders.
If the conditions of mortgage deed did not amount to clogs on equity of redemption, the suit would be clearly premature.
The plaintiff No. I had subsequently became a Civil Judge and was ultimately the Chairman of the Tribunal so if the said terms and conditions of the mortgage were onerous and oppressive, he would not have sat idle for 29 years.
But he remained silent because he was aware of the PG NO 828 said custom.
The prices of immovable properties had increased tremendously, therefore, the suit had been filed with mala fide intention; that in case the Court comes to the conclusion that there was a clog on equity or redemption and the plaintiffs were entitled to the redemption, then the interest on 10,000 koris should be awarded to the mortgages; and that the suit should be dismissed as there was no clog on equity of redemption and the Court had no jurisdiction to try the suit.
The other defendants remained absent.
The Trial Court while decreeing the suit came to the conclusion that there was mortgage transaction between the father of the plaintiffs and the mortgagees on 20th April, 1943, that the terms and conditions in the mortgage deed being harsh and oppressive, amounted to clog on equity of redemption, so the plaintiffs were entitled to file the suit even before the expiry of the term of the mortgage; that the sisters of the plaintiffs were not necessary parties to the suit and even if they were, a co mortgagor was entitled to file the suit for redemption so the suit was not bad for want of non joinder of necessary parties; that it had jurisdiction to try the suit; that the mortgagees were not entitled to claim interest on 10,000 koris and that the plaintiffs were entitled to recover possession from the defendants Nos. 4 to 9 who were the tenants inducted by the mortgagees.
The appeals filed by the mortgagees as well as the tenants were dismissed by the first appellate Court holding that the terms and conditions of the mortgage deed were oppressive and harsh, there was clog on equity of redemption and the mortgagor should be freed from that bondage that the tenants had no right to he in possession and were not entitled to the protection of the Bombay Rent Control Act after the redemption of the mortgage.
The High Court dismissed the second appeal.
Civil Appeal No. 9993 of 1983 is an appeal by the tenant.
Civil Appeal No. 397 of l980 is also an appeal by the tenant.
In this case the decree holder instituted a regular suit for redemption of the mortgage property.
The suit was dismissed.
Thereupon the respondent No. l preferred an appeal to the District Judge where the suit was decreed.
The defendants filed a second appeal which was dismissed.
The decree holder made an application for final decree.
The Court while giving the final decree for redemption of the mortgage directed the judgment debtors to hand over the possession of the mortgage property within three months on the decree holder making payment of dues in respect of the mortgage in the court.
In pursuance of the final decree the decree holder took out the execution proceedings and PG NO 829 deposited the dues in the Court and claimed possession of the mortgage property from the appellant herein stating that he was a tenant in the possession of the property.
Notice was issued to the tenant, who submitted his objection stating that he was a tenant, not to be evicted in the execution of the decree and that he was entitled to get the protection under the Bombay Rent Control Act.
The District Judge held that there was no conduct on the part of the decree holder which would stop him from claiming physical possession from the tenant of the mortgagee in possession.
The High Court rejected the appeal summarily.
Hence the appeal.
Civil Appeal No. 1286 of 1981 is also an appeal by the tenant.
The appellant is the tenant of the mortgagee inducted in 1955.
The property was mortgaged in 1948 for a period of five years.
It appears that the tenant was inducted after the period of redemption had expired.
The mortgagor had a right to redeem after the expiration of the mortgage.
The first appellate court came to the conclusion that the tenants were not protected under the provision of the Bombay Rent Control Act.
The appellant preferred this appeal in this Court.
On behalf of the appellants it was contended that in the former Kutch District there was a custom to mortgage for a long term of 99 years and when the period was long, naturally the mortgagee would he required to give full authority to repair and reconstruct the mortgaged property with a view to keep pace with new demands of changing pattern, so the condition should not he treated as clog on equity of redemption; (2) that there is no evidence to lead to the conclusion that there was any undue influence; (3) that the provision for the payment towards cost and expenses of repairs and construction did not amount to a clog on the equity of redemption; (4) that on the evidence and the facts the transactions did not amount to clog on the equity of redemption; (5) that in Civil Appeal No. 9993 of 1982 the plaintiff 's were not entitled to recover possession from the appellants, who are tenants in the mortgage properties, since their rights are protected under the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act? 1947 as the said Act applies to the area of Kutch in the Bombay State.
Therefore, no decree for eviction could he passed against them except in accordance with the provisions of the said Act; (6) that the Trial Court did not make any finding as to when the tenants were inducted, either before or after the rent restriction Act was made applicable to the area of ' Kutch and (7) that the High Court has erred in not following the said legal position entrenched by a line of decisions of this Court with the rights of a tenant inducted by a mortgagee with possession would enure beyond the period of PG NO 830 redemption of the mortgage if his rights are enlarged by subsequent tenancy legislation in force in the area in which the property is situated.
Dismissing the Appeals, HELD: 1.
The Court will ignore any contract the effect of which is to deprive the mortgagor of his right to redeem the mortgage.
[844E] 2.
The rights and liabilities of the mortgagor are controlled by the provisions of section 60 of the .
[846F] 3.
Any provision inserted to prevent.
evade or hamper redemption is void.
[846G] 4.
The doctrine "clog on the equity of redemption" is a rule of justice, equity and good conscience.
It must be adopted in each case to the reality of the situation and the individuality of the transaction [847A] 5.
Freedom of contract is permissible provided it does not lead to taking advantage of the oppressed or depressed people.
The law must transform itself to the social awareness.
Poverty should not be unduly permitted to curtail one s right to borrow money on the ground of justice, equity and good conscience on just terms.
If it does, it is bad.
Whether it does or does not.
however, depends upon the facts and the circumstances of each case.
[847H; 848A] 6.
Whether in the facts and the circumstances of these cases.
the morgage transaction amounted to clog on the equity of redemption, is a mixed question of law and fact.
[848D] 7.
Courts do not look with favour at any clause or stipulation which clogs equity of redemption.
A clog on the equity of redemption is unJust and unequitable.
The principles of English law, as we have noticed from the decisions referred to hereinbefore which have been accepted by this Court in this country, looks with disfavour at clogs On the equity of redemption.
Section 60 of the , in India, also recognises the same position.
(848D E] 8.
It is a right of the mortgagor on redemption, by reason of the very nature of the mortgage, to get back the subject of the mortgage and to hold and enjoy as he was entitled to hold and enjoy it before the mortgage.
If he is PG NO 831 prevented from doing so or is prevented from redeeming the mortgage, such prevention is bad in law.
If he is so prevented, the equity of redemption is affected by that whether aptly or not, and it has always been termed as a clog.
Such a clot is inequitable.
The law does not countenance it.
[848F G] 9.
Whether or not in a particular transaction there is a clog on the equity or redemption, depends primarily upon the period of redemption, the circumstances under which the mortgage was created, the economic and financial position of the mortgagor, and his relationship vis a vis him and the mortgagee, the economic and social condition in a particular country at a particular point of time, customs if any, prevalent in the community or the society in which the transaction takes place, and the totality of the circumstances under which a mortgage is created, namely circumstances of the parties, the time, the situation, the clauses for redemption either for payment of interest or any other sum, the obligation of the mortgagee to construct or repair or maintain the mortgaged property in cases of usufructuary mortgage to manage as a matter of prudent management, these factors must be co related to each other and viewed in a comprehensive conspectus in the background of the facts and the circumstances of each case, to determine whether these are clogs on equity of redemption.
[848H; 849A C] 10.
A mortgage is essentially and basically a conveyance in law or an assignment of chattels as a security for the payment of debt or for discharge or some other obligation for which il is given The security must, therefore, be redeemable on the payment or discharge of such debt or obligation.
,any provision to the contrary, notwithstanding, is a clog or fetter on thc equity of redemption and, hence.
bad and void.
"Once a mortgage must always remain a mortgage", and must not be transformed into a conveyance or deprivation of the right over the property.
[849D E] 11 .
The law must respond and be responsive to the felt and discernible compulsions of circumstances that would be equitable.
fair and just, and unless there is anything to the contrary in the Statute, law must take cognisance of that fact and act accordingly.
Ia the context of fast changing circumstances and economic stability, long term for redemption makes a mortgage an illusory mortgage, though not decisive.
[850D E] 12.
Even apart from section 76(a) of the if the words of the mortgage deed clearly and indubitably express an intention to allow expressly creation PG NO 832 of a tenancy beyond the term of ' the mortgage, then only the lease created in exercise of the power expressly conferred by the mortgage deed would be binding on the mortgagor.
If the words of the mortgage deed do not clearly and indubitably disclose the intention to allow expressly the creation of a tenancy beyond the terms of the mortgage, the mere fact that the mortgage deed authorises the mortgagee with possession to induct a tenant would not create a tenancy binding on the mortgagor after the redemption of the mortgage.
[857E G] 13.
In the instant cases the tenancy rights did not come to be enlarged by the Tenancy Legislation after the tenant was put into possession by the mortgagee and the tenancy created in favour of the tenants by the mortgagor did not have the concurrence of the morfgagor so as to claim tenancy rights even after redemption of the mortgage.
[866C] Khatubai Nathu Sumra vs Rajgo Mulji Nanji and Ors.
, A.I.R. 1979 Gujarat 171; Lalji Purshottam vs Thacker Madhavji Meghaji, 17 Gujarat Law Reporter 497; Maganlal Chhotalal Chhatrappati and Ors.
vs Bhalchandra Chhaganlal Shal, 15 Gujarat Law Reporter 193; Soni Motiben vs M/s. Hiralal Lakhasmhi, 22 Gujarat Law Reporter 473; Vadilal Chaganlal Soni and Others vs Gokaldas Mansukh and Other, ; Sarjug Mahto and Others vs Smt.
Devruo Devi and Others, A.I.R. 1963 Patna 114; Kunjbiharilal vs Pandit Prag Narayan, A.I.R. 1922 Oudh 283; section V. Venkatarama Reddiar vs Abdul Ghani Rowther & Ors., A.I.R. and Devkinandan and Another etc.
vs Roshan Lal and Others, A.I.R. , approved.
Santley vs Wilde, [1989] 2 Ch.
474; Vermon vs Betheli, ; and 839; G. and C. Kreglinger vs New Patagonia Meat and Cold Storage Company Ltd., [1914] Appeal Cases 25; All lndia Film Corporation vs Raja Gyan Nath, ; Sachalmal Parasram vs Ratnabai, and Om Prakash Garg vs Ganga Sahai & Ors., , relied on.
Seth Ganga Dhar vs Shankar Lal & Ors., and Jadavji Purshottam vs Dhami Navnitbhai Amaratlal & Ors., [1987] 4 SCC 223, distinguished, Aziz Khan vs Duni Chand and Others, A.I.R. 1918 P.C. 48; Jarrah Timber & Wood Paving Corporation vs Samuel, 119031 2 Ch.
l; Chhedi Lal vs Babu Nandan, AIR 1944 Allahabad 204; PG NO 833 Bhika and Anr.
vs Sheikh Amir and Ors., A.l.
R. 1923 Nagpur 60; Mahabir Gope vs Harbans Narain Singh, ; ; Hariher Prasad Singh vs Must.
of Munshi Nath Prasad, [1956] S.C.R. l; Asa Ram vs Mst.
Kam Kali, ; Dahya Lal vs Rasul Mohammed Abdul Rahim, ; ; Madan Lal vs Bedri Narain and Others, ; Mulla 's , 7th Edition, pages 401 and 402; Rashbehary Ghose 's 'Law of Mortgage ' 6th Edition, pages 227 and 228; Dalal 's Rent Act 4th Edn.
page 814 referred to.
