Medical Colleges Admission to All India Entrance Examination for MBBS/BDS course Vacant seats as a result of drop out in number of candidates allocated seats Guidelines issued by Court for allocation of vacant seats.
The petitioners in the writ petitions had been allotted seats in MBBS/BDS courses in various Medical/Dental Colleges.
They sought change, and wanted admissions in colleges which were near their home towns.
The Union of India, respondent in the writ petitions also filed Civil Miscellaneous Petitions seeking directions of the Court in the matter of the allocation of 532 vacant seats in the medical colleges in the MBBS/BDS courses pursuant to the result of the All India Entrance Examination conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi.
Disposing of the Writ and Civil Miscellaneous petitions the Court laid down guidelines to be followed: HELD: 1.
The candidates, who have been allocated seats to the Dhanbad Medical College which is not a recognised College, by the Medical Council of India should first be reallocated to the recognised medical colleges having vacancies keeping in view the minimum distance from their home towns.
[907H;908A] 2.
Those candidates who have exercised their choice for MBBS course only or to MBBS course by way of first preference and to BDS course by way of second preference and admitted to BDS Course for want of seats in the MBBS Course shall, if they or any of them desire to be admitted in the MBBS Course, be absorbed against the available vacant seats in order of merit.
[908B C] PG NO 905 PG NO 906 3.
The vacant MBBS or BDS seats, thereafter available should be offered to the candidates on the waiting list in order of merits.
[908C] 4.
The candidates will be given maximum time of twenty days to join the medical colleges, failing with the seats will be declared vacant.
[908F] 5.
The allocation of MBBs seats already made shall not be disturbed.
[908F] 6.
The Director General of Health Services, shall consider the question of allotment to candidates, who have been already admitted to MBBS or BDS Course, nearer to their home town in order of merit.
[908G] [The Director General of Health Services to deal with the cases of the petitioners in the different writ petitions and also the cases of the other candidates in accordance with the above guidelines and dispose of the same within a period of three weaks.] [910B]
