The petitioner and the respondents in the S.L.P. were partners in a partnership firm.
On 8th November, 1980, respondent No. l issued a notice calling for dissolution of the firm alleging mismanagement, loss and exclusion from the management, and later filed a civil suit for: (i) dissolution of the firm, and (ii) accounts.
On 4th November, 1981, respondent No. 9 who was defendant No. 7 in the suit, filed an application under Section 34 of the for stay of the suit.
The Trial Judge after referring to the order sheet in the matter and noticing that the counsel for the petitioner had taken steps in the proceedings in the suit, by seeking and securing adjournments for filing the written statement, held that there was no jurisdiction to stay the suit under On appeal, the Division Bench of the High Court confirmed the order of the Trial Judge, and held that the petitioner having taken steps in the suit, had thereby disentitled himself from asking for the stay of the said suit.
Dismissing the petitioner 's Special Leave Petition, HELD: 1.
Arbitration is an alternative procedure for speedy adjudication of disputes between the parties and should normally be encouraged as parties have bound themselves to have their disputes adjudicated by arbitration, so they should be held bound by the agreement.
[887B] 2.
Section 34 of the is the statutory provision which deals with the powers to stay legal proceedings where there is an arbitration agreement.
One of PG NO 884 PG NO 885 the requirements is that the application for stay must be filed before the filing of the written statement or 'taking any other steps in the proceedings '.[887C; 888E] 3.
The expression 'taking any other steps in the proceedings ' does not mean that every step in the proceedings would come in the way of enforcement of the arbitration agreement.
The step must be such as would clearly and unambiguously manifest the intention to waive the benefit of arbitration agreement, and display an unequivocal intention to proceed with the suit giving up the right to have the matter disposed of by arbitration.
[891E F;B] 4.
Each Court must find out from the context of each case what has happened, and whether a step was taken in the suit which would disentitle the party from obtaining stay of proceedings.
[891C] In the instant case, it is indisputable that the proceeding was commenced by a party to an arbitration agreement against the other party to the agreement and the legal proceedings which was sought to be stayed was in respect of a matter agreed to be referred to arbitration.
From the order sheet in the case as noted by the Trial Judge, it appears that the counsel appearing for the petitioner had sought adjournment 'specifically for filing written statement ', and obtained time on more than one occasion for such purpose.
It was not only the time taken to consider whether written statement should be filed as a defence to the plaint, but it was time taken to have the matter decided by the suit.
The party evinced an intention to have the matter adjudicated by the Court and not keen to have the matter adjudicated by arbitration.
If that is so, the party has disentitled itself to ask for the stay of the said suit.
The High Court was, therefore.
right in affirming the order of the Trial Judge.
[891F H;892A] State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
vs Janki Saran Kailash Chandra & Anr., [1974] 1 SCR 31 and Food Corpn.
of India & Anr.
vs Yadav Engineer and Contractor, ; , referred to.
Law of Arbitration by R.S. Bachawat (Ist Edn.), pp.
498 499, referred to.
