The Caltex (Acquisition of Shares of Caltex Refining (India) Ltd. and of the Undertakings in India of Caltex (India) Ltd.) Act 17 of 1977.
by Section 3 provides for the acquisition of shares of Caltex Oil Refinery (India) Ltd. (for short CORIL).
Section 11(2) of the Act provides that subject to rules made in this behalf under section 23, every whole time officer or other employee of CORIL would, on the day of acquisition, continue to be an officer or other employee of CORIL on the same terms and conditions and with the same rights to pension, gratuity and other matters as are admissible to him immediately before that day and shall continue to hold such office unless and until his employment under CORIL is duly terminated or until his remuneration and conditions of service are duly altered by that company.
Consequent upon the taking over of the CORIL on December 30,1976, the Chairman of the Board of Directors of CORIL issued a circular dated 8th March, 1978 to the effect that the perquisites admissible to the management staff of CORIL should be rationalised in the manner stated in the said circular.
At this stage the undertaking of CORIL was transferred and vested in the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. the appellant in C.A. No. 3214 of 1979.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 4, employees of CORIL in the said appeal, filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the legality and validity of the impugned PG NO 925 PG NO 926 circular on the ground, inter alia, that the employees had not been given any opportunity of being heard before altering to their prejudice the terms and conditions of service and therefore the impugned circular should be struck down as void being opposed to the principles of natural justice.
The High Court accepted the aforesaid contention of the respondents and quashed the impugned circular.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Civil Appeal 3212 of 1979 has been preferred by the respondents.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.
The High Court was perfectly justified in quashing the impugned circular.
Even if any hearing was given to the employees of CORIL after the issuance of the impugned circular that would not be any compliance with the rules of natural justice or avoid the mischief of arbitrariness as contemplated by Article 14 of the Constitution.
[932A B] 2(i) It is now a well established principle of law that there can he no deprivation or curtailment of any existing right, advantage or benefit enjoyed by a Government servant without complying with the rules of natural justice by giving the government servant concerned an opportunity of being heard.
Any arbitrary or whimsical exercise of power prejudicially affecting the existing condition of service of a government servant will offend against the provision of Article 14 of the Constitution.[930F G] 2(ii) The post decisional opportunity of hearing does not subserve the rules of natural justice.
The authority who embarks upon a post decisional hearing will naturally proceed with a closed mind and there is hardly any chance of getting a proper consideration of the representation at such a post decisional opportunity.[931A B] K.I. Shephard & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors., JT 1987 600, followed.
In view of the reasons given in the above appeals, the Court dismissed C.A. No. 3518 of 1979.
[932C]
