Section 3(1) of the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer Regulation 1959 (Regulation I of 1959) prohibited transfer of immovable properties situated in the scheduled areas from a member of scheduled tribe to non tribals without previous sanction of the State Government.
In order to facilitate effective enforcement of the said 1959 regulations, the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment) Regulation, 1970 was introduced.
Regulation 1970 inter alia brought the following changes namely (i) transfers of land in scheduled areas in favour of 'non tribals ' were wholly prohibited in future and (ii) non tribals holding lands in the scheduled areas were prohibited from transferring their lands in favour of persons other than tribals.
The appellants who owned lands in the scheduled areas having acquired them from tribals and 'non tribals ' were affected by this amending Regulation of 1970.
They filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging this regulation being unconstitutional.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
Hence these appeals by Certificate under Article 133(1)(a) of the Constitution.
The main contention of the appellants was that the impugned provisions were unconstitutional as being violative of Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution as it obtained at the 444 material time till it was repealed by the Constitution (Forty fourth) Amendment in 1979 because they imposed unreasonable restrictions on the non tribal holders of properties in the scheduled areas.
Dismissing the appeals and while tracing a short history of the legislation, this Court, ^ HELD: originally all the lands in these tracts were owned by the 'tribals '.
With the advent of the 'non tribals ' in the late 19th Century and early 20th Century, the lands changed hands from 'tribals ' to 'non tribals '.
This change of ownership was a result of exploitation raising: (1) In the context of money lending operations and (2) in the context of dubious and unconscionable dealings in the course of trade.
The 'non tribals ' had so often circumvented the legislation enacted in order to protect the 'tribals ' by recourse to benami transactions and by recourse to dubious devices.
The poor ignorant, illiterate, and unsophisticated tribals had succumbed to the wiles of the economically stronger and unscrupulous 'non tribals '.
A legislation which in essence and substance aims at restoration to the 'tribals ' of the lands which originally belonged to the 'tribals ' but which passed into the hands of 'non tribals ' in the aforesaid background certainly cannot be characterised as unreasonable.
[455G H; 456A C] No unreasonableness is involved in making the prohibition against transfer to 'non tribals ' applicable to both the 'tribal ' as also to the 'non tribal ' owner in the scheduled area.
As a matter of fact it would have been unreasonable to do otherwise.
In the absence of protection, the economically stronger 'non tribals ' would in course of time devour all the available Lands and wipe out the very identity of the tribals who cannot survive in the absence of the only source of livelihood they presently have.
[457C D] The submission that the prohibition against transferring the properties to 'non tribals ' being in absolute terms, a non tribal ' cannot even raise a loan on his properties even in the event of the 'non tribal ' being under economic compulsion to do so cannot be acceded to as it overlooks the amendment introduced by Sec.
3A(1) inserted by Regulation 1 of 1971.
[458A B] Tribes of India The Struggle for Survival (1982 83 edition) by Christoph von Furer Haimendorf; The Continent of Circe, [1965] by Nirad C. Chaudhari; Manchegowda and Ors.
vs State of Karnataka, [1984] 3 SCC p. 301 and Lingappa Rochanna Appelwar vs State of Maharashtra. , referred to.
445 The argument that the expression 'Iand ' has been used in its restricted sense in paragraph 5(2)(a) of Schedule V to the Constitution of India and therefore the impugned provisions prohibiting the transfer of lands along with structures thereon by employing the expression 'immovable property ' is not in accordance with law is devoid of merit for two reasons: firstly, there is no reason to believe that `land ' has not been employed in its legal sense.
The expression 'land ' in its legal sense is a comprehensive expression which is wide enough to include structures, if any, raised thereon and secondly to interpret the expression 'land ' in its narrow sense is to render the benevolent provisions impotent and ineffective.
In that event the prohibition can be easily circumvented by just raising a farm house or a structure on the land.
The impugned provisions were inserted by the Amending Regulation precisely to plug such loopholes and make the law really effective.
[.158C D; 459D E] The Dictionary of English Law, [19591 Edition Vol.
2 p. 1053 by Earl Jowitt; Words and Phrases Judicially Defined, By Roland Burrows Vol.
IlI 1944 Edition p. 206 and The Law Lexicon, By p. Ramanatha Aiyar Reprint Edition 1987 p. 700, referred to.
