On the basis of a vigilance enquiry against Kailash Nath, respondent, pertaining to the purchase of sign boards by him while working as Executive Engineer in the State Public Works Department, a First Information Report was lodged against him in August 1985.
The respondent challenged the F.I.R. in the High Court on the ground that the same having been lodged about three years after his retirement in October 1982 and about six years after the event of purchase in 1979.
was in the teeth of proviso (3) to Rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, which provided that no judicial proceedings if not instituted while the officer was in service, shall be instituted in respect of a cause of action which arose or an event which took place more than four years before such institution.
The same ground was taken by Mangal Singh Minhas, respondent, when a challan was filed against him.
The High Court, relying on its earlier decision, quashed the First Information Report and the challan.
Dismissing the State appeal against Kailash Nath and allowing it against Mangal Singh Minhas, this Court, HELD: (1) Any rule framed under Article 309 has to be confined to recruitment and conditions of service of persons mentioned therein.[916E] (2) The expression "conditions of service" means all those conditions which regulate the holding of a post by a person right from the time of his appointment till his retirement and even beyond it,in matters like pension etc.
PG NO 911 PG NO 912 (3) Rule 2.2.
is in Chapter II of the Punjab Civil Service Rules which deals with ordinary pension.
There can be no manner of doubt that making provision with regard to pension falls within the purview of "conditions of service".
[918D] (4) Whether or not a government servant should be prosecuted for an offence committed by him obviously cannot be treated to be something pertaining to conditions of service.
[917D] (5) Even on a plain reading of Rule 2.2, it is apparent that the intention of framing the said rule was not to grant immunity from prosecution to a government servant, if the conditions mentioned therein are satisfied.
[918C] (6) Making a provision that a government servant, even if he is guilty of grave misconduct or negligence which constitutes an offencepunishable either under the Penal Code or Prevention of Corruption Act or an analogous law should be granted immunity from such prosecution after the lapse of a particular period so as to provide incentive for efficient work would not only be against public policy but would also be counter productive.
[917D E] (7) On the face of it, the government servants cannot constitute a class by themselves so as to bring their case within the purview of reasonable classification, if the purpose of granting immunity from prosecution is ensuring peace of mind in old age.
[918B] (8) Even if in a given case a proviso may amount to a substantive provision, making of such a substantive provision, will have to be within the framework of Article 309.
If a rule containing an absolute or general embargo on prosecution of a government servant after his retirement for grave misconduct or negligence during the course of his service does not fall within the purview of laying down conditions of service under Article 309, such a provision cannot in the purported exercise of power under Article 309 be made by either incorporating it in the substantive clause of a rule or in the proviso thereto.
[919C D] (9) Even if on first impression Rule 2.2 may appear to be placing an embargo on prosecution it has to be interpreted by taking recourse to the well settled rule of reading down a provision so as to bring it within the framework of its source of power, without, of course frustrating the purpose for which such provision was made.
This purpose can be achieved if the said proviso by adopting the rule of reading down is interpreted to mean that even if PG NO 913 a government servant is prosecuted and punished in judicial proceedings instituted in respect of cause of action which arose or an event which took place more than four years before such institution the government will not be entitled to exercise the right conferred on it by the substantive provision contained in clause (b) with regard to pension of such a government servant.
The word "such" in the beginning of the third proviso also supports this interpretation.
[919D H;920A] (10) By applying the role of interpretation with regard to a beneficent legislation, a benefit never intended to be conferred cannot be conferred.
[923D] (11) It is always open to quash a prosecution on the ground of unexplained unconscionable delay in investigation and prosecution on the facts of a given case.
In this view of the matter.
the appeal against Kailash Nath is dismissed whereas the appeals against Mangal Singh Minhas are allowed.
[924F] Des Raj Singhal vs State of Punjab, ; State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
vs Shardul Singh, ; I.N. Subba Reddy vs Andhra University, ; ; M/s. Ram Narain Sons Ltd. vs Asstt.
Commissioner of Sales Tax and Others, ; ; Abdul Jabar Butt vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, ; ; Ishverlal Thanorelal Almaule vs Motibhai Nagjibhai [1966] 1 SCR 367; P.P. Venkatavardan vs The State of Tamil Nadu by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance and Anti corruption Vellore, [1979] 23 MLJ (Crl.) 275; State of Punjab vs Charan Singh, ; ; Madhashwardhari Singh and Another vs State of Bihar, AIR (1986) Patna (Vol.73) page 324, referred to.
