At an election held on 23rd February, 1986, for the post of Panchayat President, the votes were counted on the 25th February, 1986, and the first respondent was declared elected having secured 649 votes.
The petitioner and the second respondent who were the other contestants were declared to have secured only 556 votes and X votes respectively, and 55 votes were declared to be invalid votes.
Two days after the results were declared i.e. on 27th February.
1986, the petitioner sent telegrams and registered notices alleging irregularities in the counting of the votes, and thereafter he filed an election petition under section 178 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayat Act, 1958.
The reliefs claimed in the petition were that the Election Tribunal should set aside the election of the first respondent as the President of the Panchayat, order recounting of votes, and a declaration that the petitioner has been duly elected.
The first respondent opposed the election petition and filed a counter statement denying all the allegations contained in the election petition.
The Tribunal after recording the evidence of the candidates and the Assistant Returning Officer came to the conclusion that the petitioner was entitled to ask for re count of votes and ordered recounting and called for the ballot papers.
In the recount of votes, it was found that there was no difference in the number of votes secured by the petitioner, namely, 556 votes but in so far as the first respondent was concerned he had secured only 528 votes as against the 649 votes, he was originally held to have secured.
The excess of 121 votes were found to be invalid votes and consequently the total number of invalid votes came to 126 (sic) as against 55 votes originally held to be invalid.
There was no difference in the number of 8 votes secured by the third contestant.
Based on these figures of the recounting, the Tribunal declined to order re election and instead declared the petitioner to have been duly PG NO 950 PG NO 951 elected because the recount clearly proved that the petitioner has secured 28 votes more than the first respondent.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the Election Tribunal, the first respondent filed a Civil Revision Petition in the High Court.
A Single Judge allowed the revision petition holding that the Tribunal had erred in ordering a recount of the votes when the petitioner had not made out a prima facie case for an order of recount, and observed that the secrecy of the ballot was sacrosanct and should not be violated unless a prima facie case of a complusive nature had been made out by the defeated candidates.
The High Court set aside the order of the Tribunal and restored the election result in favour of the first respondent.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, HELD: 1.
The right of a defeated candidate to assail the validity of an election result and seek recounting of votes has to be subject to the basic principle that the secrecy of the ballot is sacrosanct in a democracy and hence unless the affected candidate is able to allege and substantiate in acceptable measure by means of evidence that a prima facie case of a high degree of probability existed for the recount of votes being ordered by the Election Tribunal in the interests of justice, a Tribunal or Court should not order the recount of votes.
[957D E] 2.
The salutary rule is that the preservation of the secrecy of the ballot is a sacrosanct principle which cannot he lightly or hastily broken unless there is prima facie genuine need for it.
[957D] 3.
The justification for an order for examination of ballot papers and recount of votes is not to be derived from high sight and by the result of the recount of votes.
On the contrary, the justification for an order of recount of votes should be provided by the material placed by an election petitioner on the threshold before an order for recount of votes is actually made.
[957C D] 4.
An order or recount of votes must stand or fall on the nature of the averments made and the evidence adduced before the order of recount is made and not from the results emanating from the recount of votes.
[958C] In the instant case, the petitioner has neither made such averments in the petition nor adduced evidence of such a compulsive nature as could have made the Tribunal reach a PG NO 952 prima facie satisfaction that there was adequate justification for the secrecy of ballot being breached.
[957F] Ram Sewak Yadav vs Russain Kamil Kidwai & Ors.
, ; Dr. Jagjit Singh vs Giani Kartar Singh, [1967]1 SCJ 762; R. Narayanan vs Sommalai, ; and N. Gopal Reddy vs Bonala Krishnamurthy & Ors., JT , referred to.
