The respondent is the manufacturer of electric fans.
The company brought into its factory nameplates under Tariff Item 68 of the Central Excise Tariff.
The nameplates were affixed to the fans before marketing them.
The respondent claimed the benefit of proforma credit in terms of Notification No. 201/79 dated 4 6 1979 which stated that all excisable goods on which duty of excise was leviable and in the manufacture of which any goods falling under Tariff Item No. 68 being 'the input6 ' had been used, were exempt from so must of the duty of excise leviable thereon was equivalent to the duty of excise already paid on the inputs.
The respondent claimed the benefit of proforma credit for the goods i.e nameplates on the plea that the goods were intended to be used as inputs in the manufacture of electric fans.
The Asstt.
Collector, Central Excise disallowed the proforma credit.
The respondent preferred an appeal before the Collector (Appeals) Central Excise, and the same was allowed treating the said goods as inputs in terms of the June l979 Notifications.
The Department appealed to the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate 'Tribunal which held that even though electric fans could function without the nameplates, no electric, fan was removed from the factory for being marketed without the nameplates, as the Affixation of the nameplate was considered an essential requirement from the point of view of the Excise Tariff.
The Department therefore filed an appeal under Section 35 L(b) of the before this Court.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court.
PG NO 998 PG NO 999 HELD: 1.
The Department 's instructions requiring every manufacturer to affix the nameplates on the fans, indicate that nameplate was an essential ingredient to complete the process of 'manufacture ' for marketable electric fans.
[1001E] 2.
The Tribunal was right in arriving at the conclusion that the nameplate was not a piece of decoration.
Without the nameplates, the electric fans as such, could not be marketed; and that the dealer was entitled to the benefit of the Notification No. 201/79 CE for the purpose of obtaining proforma credit.
[1001F G] 3.
Fans with nameplates, have certain value which the fans without the nameplates, do not have.
If that be so, then the value added for the accretion of nameplate was entitled to proforma credit in terms of the said notification.
It is true that an electric fan may perform its essential functions without affixation of the nameplate, but that is not enough.
Electric fans do not become marketable products without affixation of nameplates.
[1001G H]
