The Gwalior and Northern India Transport Company (GNIT Company) was operating transport services in and around Delhi.
It was taken over on May 14, 1948 by the Government of India, Ministry of Transport and named as Delhi Transport Service.
The services of all employees of the (IT company were taken over by the Government of India, but they continued to be governed by the rules in force before the take over.
Subsequently it was taken over by the Delhi Municipal Corporation and later on by the Delhi Transport Undertaking and came to be known as Delhi Transport Corporation.
All employees of GNIT Company employed before 28.10.46 and were in continuous service at the time it was taken over by the Government of India were treated as protected employees as per clause 7 of the take over agreement.
Prior to the take over they were governed by the Gwalior State Civil Service Rules which stipulate the age of retirement at 60.
Option however was there for the employee to seek voluntary retirement at 55 years and for the Government to compulsorily retire an employee at 55.
The Delhi Transport Corporation retired the petitioners on the ground that they attained the age of superannuation at 58 years.
It was challenged in a writ petition before the Delhi High Court and the petitioners contended that option was there both for the Corporation as also the employees to retire at 55, but superannuation could be only on reaching 60, and not at 58 as claimed by the Corporation.
The Delhi High Court rejected the petition.
Against this, the petitioners have come to this Court by way of a special leave petition.
A writ petition has also been filed claiming the same relief.
Allowing the special leave petition as also the writ petition, this Court, PG NO 1003 PG NO 1004 HELD: The persons who were originally in the employment of GNIT Company and were employed prior to October 28, l946 and continued in service till May 14, l948 and onwards will have the right to remain in service upto 60 years unless the option to retire was exercised by the person or the Corporation at 55 years.
The argument that the age of 55 years at which an employee could be asked to retire has been raised by the Corporation to 58 years and if an employee has been retired at 58, it was not prejudicial to him since he could have been retired in his erstwhile Company only at 55, has little merit in it.
If the Delhi Transport Corporation had exercised its right to retire the petitioners on attaining the age of 58 years, the argument would have been tenable.
But that was not done by the Corporation.
The Corporation retired the petitioners on the ground that they attained the age of superannuation at 58 years.
That meant the Corporation was under the wrong impression that the petitioners had no right to continue beyond the age of 58 years.
[1008C D; 1007E G; 1008C]
