The detenu, in the writ petitions filed by the petitioners under Article 32 of the Constitution, belonged to the Security Unit of Delhi Police.
While on duty, they were alleged to have stopped a rickshaw puller who was carrying some goods to a transport company.
They caught hold of him and started beating him and asked for a receipt for the goods.
Thereafter they removed the goods from the rickshaw and went away in a T.S.R. The aforesaid goods was recovered from their possession and a case under Section 392/34 I.P.C. was registered against them.
Thereafter they were arrested and placed under suspension.
The court, however, released them on bail.
While the case was under investigation.
the Commissioner of Police, Delhi detained them u/s 3(2) of the on the ground that the above criminal activity of the detenu has created a sense of insecurity in the minds of public at large and is pre judicial to that maintenance of public order.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that the said orders are bad in law, since the ground of detention has no nexus to the`public order ', but purely a matter for `law and order '.
Counsel for the respondents, on the other hand argued that though the incident in question was a simple case of robbery, since it was committed by persons to longing to the disciplined police force, it would of certainly disturb the public safety in the life of the community with a sense of insecurity in their minds and therefore the detention orders were justified.
Allowing the writ petitions, HELD: (1) The orders of detention are quashed.
The detenu Ram Ratan and Hawa Singh are set at liberty forthwith.
[1030F] PG NO 1023 PG NO 1024 (2) The law of preventive detention is not different to police personnel.
It is the same law that is applied to police as well as to public.
Therefore, this Court cannot apply a different standard in respect of acts individually committed by any police officer.
[1027D] 3(i) The subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority with respect to the persons sought to be detained should be based only on the nature of the activities disclosed by the grounds of detention.
The grounds of detention must have nexus with the purpose for which the detention is made.
[1027E] 3(ii) The impact on `public order ' and `law and order ' depends upon the nature of the act, the place where it is committed and motive force behind it.
If the act is confined to an individual without directly or indirectly affecting the tempo of the life of the community, it may be matter of law and order only.
But where the gravity of the act is otherwise and likely to endanger the public tranquility, it may fall within the orbit of the `public order '.
What might be an otherwise simple `law and order ' situation might assume the gravity and mischief of a `public order ' problem by reason alone of the manner of circumstances in which or the place at which it is carried out.
Necessarily, much depends upon the nature of the act, the place where it is committed and the sinister significance attached to it.
[1028C E] In the instant case, the offence was committed by two misguided police men under the cover of darkness with the assistance of a member of the public.
It is an isolated criminal case with no sinister significance attached to it.
It way certainly suicidal to those two police personnel.
But it seems to that 110 connection whatsoever to disturb the public order ' having regard to the circumstances of the case.
[1030D E] Superintendent, Central Prison, Fatehgarh vs ram Manohar Lohia, ; Ayya Alias Ayub vs The State of U.P, Aziz vs The Distt.
Magistrate Burdwan & Ors., ; and Mohd. Dhana Ali Khan vs State of West Benal,.
[1975] Suppl.
SC 124 followed.
