Many explosions took place in May 1985 in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh killing many persons.
Consequently, a number of cases were registered.
In Delhi, FIR No. 238 of 1985 was registered wherein the respondent and another accused turned approvers and were granted pardon under section 306 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Both these approvers however resiled from their statements in the Court of the Committing Magistrate.
Four Criminal cases pending in Meerut were later transferred by the Supreme Court to the Court of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi, to be tried along with the case arising out of FIR No. 238 of 1985.
In the supplementary committal proceedings in case FIR No. 238 of 1985, the respondent objected to his being summoned as an approver on the ground inter alia that he could not be examined as a witness in the case because he was figuring as an accused person in the other four cases on the same facts and circumstances, which were being jointly tried.
The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate dismissed the application.
The High Court allowed the respondent 's revision petition and directed the State not to examine the respondent as an approver in case F.I.R. No. 238 of 1985.
In the appeal before this Court, it was inter alia contended that the prosecution could not examine the respondent as a witness because he had cast away the pardon granted to him.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The pardon granted to the respondent was accepted by him and he was examined as a prosecution witness in the Court of the Committing Magistrate, though he resiled from his statement there.
[1097C] PG NO 1093 PG NO.
1094 2.
It is a mandate of the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code to the prosecution to examine the approver to whom pardon had been granted as a witness both in the Committing Court as well as in the trial court.
[1097E] 3.
Section 306 clearly enjoins that the approver who was granted pardon had to comply with the condition of making a full and true disclosure of the whole of the circumstances within his knowledge relative to the offencc and to every other concerned whether as principal or abettor, in the commission thereof.
It is because of this mandate that the State cannot withdraw the pardon from the approver nor the approver can cast away the pardon granted to him, till he is examined as a witness by the prosecution both in the Committing Court as well as in the trial court.
[1097H; 1098A B] 4.
The respondent who has been granted pardon in case F.I.R. No. 238 of 1985 has to be examined by the prosecution in the trial court no matter that he has resiled from his earlier statement and tried to conceal what was within his knowledge with regard to the offence in question.
[1100D] In re: Arusami Goundan, AIR 1959 Mad. 274 and Emperor vs Shandino Bhaniperto, AIR 1940 (Sind) 114 referred to.
Once an accused is granted pardon under section 306, he ceases to be an accused and becomes a witness for the prosecution.
So long as the prosecution does not certify that he has failed to make a full and true disclosure of the whole of the circumstance within his knowledge relating to the offence, he continues to be a witness and the prosecution is under obligation to examine him as a witness both in the Committing Court as well as in the trial court.
[1099H; 1100A B] A.J. Peiris vs State of Madras, AIR 1954 (SC) 616 referred to.
A witness is legally bound to answer any question which is relevant to the matter in issue even if the answer to such question is likely to incriminate him directly or indirectly.
[1100G] 7.
The proviso to section 132 of the Indian Evidence Act clearly protects a witness from being prosecuted on the basis of the answers given by him in a criminal proceeding which tend to incriminate him directly or indirectly.
[1101A] PG NO.
1095 8.
The apprehension of the respondent that his evidence as approver will be used against him in the other four criminal cases where he figures as an accused was without any basis.
On the other hand, he was absolutely protected from criminal prosecution on the basis of the evidence to be given by him when examined by the prosecution as an approver.
[1101B C]
