section 4(a) of the Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax Act; 1947, provided that every dealer whose turnover exceeded certain limits shall be liable to pay tax in accordance with the provisions of the Act on all sales effected after the commencement 428 of the Act ; and by section 2(g) Of the Act, " sale . means any transfer of property in goods .
including a transfer of property in goods made in course of the execution of a contract.
Under section 6(1) of the Act no tax was payable on the sale of goods specified in Sch.
11 to the Act and section 6(2) enabled the State Government by notification to amend the schedule.
Item 33 in Sch.
11 as amended by Act XVl of 1949 and as adapted by the Adaptation Order of 195o, was " Goods sold to or by the State Government ".
In exercise of the power conferred by section 6(2) of the Act, the Government issued a notification on September 18, 1950, amending item 33 by substituting the words " Goods sold by the State Government ".
The appellant, a contractor doing business in the construction of buildings and roads for the Military and Public Works Department in the State of Madhya Pradesh, challenged the validity of the assessment which the respondent proposed to make on the appellant under the provisions of the Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax Act, 1947, on the grounds (1) that the Provincial Legislature had no authority under Entry 48 Of List II, Sch.
VII of the Government of India Act, 1935, to impose a tax on the supply of materials in works contracts and that the provisions of that Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax Act which sought to impose a tax thereon treating it as a sale were ultra vires, and (2) that he was entitled to exemption under item 33 in Sch.
11, to tile Act and that the notification of the Government dated September 18, 1950, withdrawing that exemption was bad as being an unconstitutional delegation of legislative authority : Held, that the expression "sales of goods" in Entry 48 has the same meaning which it had in the Indian , that in a building contract there is no sale of materials as such, and that it is therefore ultra vires the powers of the Provincial Legislature to impose tax on the supply of materials.
The State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co. (Madras) Ltd., ; , followed.
Per Das C. J., Venkatarama Aiyar, section K. Das and A. K. Sarkar JJ It is not unconstitutional for the legislature to leave it to the executive to determine details relating to the working of taxation laws, such as the selection of persons on whom the tax is to be laid, the rates at which it is to be charged in respect of different classes of goods, and the like.
The power conferred on the State Government by section 6(2) of the Act to amend the Schedule relating to exemption is in consonance with the accepted legislative practice relating to the topic, and is not unconstitutional.
Sub sections (1) and (2) of section 6 together form integral part of a single enactment the object of which is to grant exemption from taxation in respect of such goods and to such extent as may from time to time be determined by the State Government, and an 429 exemption granted under section 6(1) is conditional and subject to any notification that might be issued under section 6(2).
The notification dated September 18, 1950, is therefore intra vires.
