The respondent was a permanent and confirmed civilian worker in the Defence Department and he had a right to continue till he attained the age of 60 years.
His services, however, were terminated under Article 310 of the Constitution without assigning any reason.
He instituted a suit for declaration that the termination of his services was illegal and void ab initio.
In the alternative, he claimed damages or compensation for the illegal termination.
The Trial Court awarded him Rs. 25,000 as damages together with interest at 6 per cent per annum for the illegal termination of his services.
That decree was confirmed by the High Court.
The Courts below have proceeded on the basis that Article 311 (2) of the Constitution was not applicable to the respondent, but the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 were, however, applicable.
In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellants it was contended that the reasoning of the Courts below is untenable and uncalled for.
On behalf of the respondent employee it was contended that the 1965 Rules are applicable to the respondent and that the decree under appeal should not be set aside.
The poverty of the respondent and the long drawn litigation by which the respondent was suffered immeasurably were also highlighted.
PG NO 1074 PG NO 1075 Allowing the appeal on a question of law this Court HELD: 1.
The respondent is not entitled to protection of Article 311(2) since he occupied the post drawing his salary from the Defence Estimates.
That being the position, the exclusionary effect of Article 311(2) deprives him the protection which he is otherwise entitled to.
In other words there is no fetter in the exercise of the pleasure of the President or the Governor.
[1079D E] 2.
The 1965 Rules among others, provide procedure for imposing the three major penalties that are set out under Article 311(2).
When Article 311(2) itself stands excluded and the protection thereunder is withdrawn there is little that one could do under the 1965 Rules in favour of the respondent.
The said Rules cannot independently play any part since the rule making power under Article 309 is subject to Article 311.
[1079F G] L.R. Khurana vs Union of India, ; at 911; Ramanatha Pillai vs The State of Kerala, ; at 521 and Union of India vs Tulsi Ram, ; , followed.
This Court will not deny any equitable relief in deserving cases.
The case on hand cannot be an exception to that rule and indeed.
it is eminently a fit case.
[1080F]
