Petitioners, a recognised Export House for purposes of the Import Export Policy, 1982 83 were granted six imprest licences for the import of uncut and unset diamonds with the obligation to fulfil certain export commitment for the export of India, of cut and polished diamonds.
They did not seek the revalidation and endorsement for OGL items within the time prescribed under Paragraph 185(4) of the Import Export Policy 1982 83 (AM 1983).
Only in the year 1986, after a lapse of several years from the completion of their export obligations, they sought such revalidation and en dorsement.
The Joint Chief Controller of Imports and Ex ports, by two orders dated 5.8.1986 and 9.4.1986, declined the request, on grounds of inordinate delay in seeking revalidation and endorsement, and on merits and permissibil ity of the claim.
In the Writ Petition, the petitioners challenged these orders contending that in view of the grant of revalidation of imprest licences of two other Export Houses, consequent upon their writ petitions being allowed by the High Court and the Special Leave Petitions of the Government against the decision being dismissed by the Supreme Court, rejection by the authorities of the petitioners ' claim for similar revalidation, and endorsement of their imprest licences, was discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitu tion inasmuch as the grounds for refusal put forward by the authorities in those cases were exactly similar to those preferred in the case of the petitioners, and those grounds had been found to be insufficient in law to support the refusal, and that there was no basis for any distinction to be made in the case of petitioners who had made their demand for revalidation after the High Court 's decision in one of those cases.
Dismissing the Writ Petition, 14 HELD: Petitioners are re agitating claims which they had not pursued for several years.
They were not vigilant but were content to be dormant and.close to sit on the fence till somebody else 's case came to be decided.
Their case cannot be considered on the anology of one, where a law had been declared unconstitutional and void by a Court, so as to enable persons to recover monies paid under the compulsion of a law later so declared void.
There is also an unex plained, inordinate delay in preferring this writ petition which is brought after almost a year after the first rejec tion.
[18B C] Apart altogether from the merits of the other grounds for rejection, the inordinate delay in preferring the claim before the authorities as also the delay in filing the writ petition before this Court does not pursuade this Court to interfere in this matter.
[18E] The rejection to this Writ Petition shall not prejudice petitioners ' case in the appeal, if such a right of appeal is available under the appeal procedures in the policy.
[19A] Durga Prasad vs Chief Controller, I & E, 1969(2) SCR 861, referred to.
