The petitioner filed a writ petition challenging the legality of the order of his detention passed by the respondent under sub section (2) of Section 3 of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activities, Act, 1985.
In the grounds of detention, it was alleged that the petitioner was a prohibition bootlegger, indulging in use of force and violence, and by illegal sale of liquor the petitioner created an atmosphere of fear and terror by beating innocent citizens, thus indulging in anti social activities which were against public order.
The detention order also indicated that he was prosecuted in two criminal cases under the Excise Act and was acquitted in one case and the other case was pending.
In his writ petition to this Court the petitioner contended that the grounds of detention were vague and there was nothing to show that his activities either affected or are likely to affect adversely the maintenance of public order, and that it is not sufficient to allege that he is a bootlegger to warrant his detention.
The respondent challenged the maintainability of the writ petition in view of the pendency of the representation of the petitioner before the Advisory Board and also contended that the grounds were not vague being supported by statements of the witnesses.
Allowing the writ petition and quashing the order of detention, and directing the release of the petitioner, this Court.
PG NO 1081 PG NO 1082 HELD: A person may be very fierce by nature, but so long as the public generally are not affected by his activities on conduct, the question of maintenance of public order will not arise.
In order that an activity may be said to affect adversely the maintenance of public order, there must be material to show that there has been a feeling of insecurity among the general public.
If any act of a person creates panic or fear in the minds of the members of the public upsetting the even tempo of life of the community, such act must be said to have a direct bearing on the question of maintenance of public order.
[1089H; 1090A B] The Commission of an offence will not necessarily come within the purview of `public order '.
[1090B] Pushkar Mukherjee vs State of West Bengal, ; , relied on.
In the instant case, the detaining authority has failed to substantiate that the alleged anti social activities of the petitioner adversely effect or are likely to affect adversely the maintenance of public order.
It is true some incidents of beating by the petitioner had taken place, as alleged by the witnesses.
But, such incidents do not have any bearing on the maintenance of public order.
[1090H; 1091A] It may be that the petitioner is a bootlegger within the meaning of section 2(b) of the Act, but merely because he is a bootlegger he cannot be preventively detained under the provisions of the Act unless, as laid down in sub section (4) of Section 3 of the Act, his activities as a bootlegger affect adversely the maintenance of public order.
[1091B] Even though a representation is pending before the Advisory Board, the writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution is maintainable before the Court.
[1086B] Prabhu Dayal Deorah vs The District Magistrate, Kamrup, ; , relied on.
