Two social workers addressed a letter to this Court bringing to its notice the miserable conditions of the people of the district of Kalahandi in the State of Orissa on account of extreme poverty.
The said letter was treated as a writ petition.
The petitioners in this petition alleged that in the district of Kalahandi on account of extreme poverty, there are starvation deaths and in order to save themselves from starvation deaths, people are compelled to subject themselves to distress sale of labour and paddy resulting in exploitation of landless labourers, deprivation of legitimate price of paddy to small peasants.
It was also alleged that on account of 'chill penury ' people of Kala handi district are even forced to sell their children.
In the other writ petition, Indian Peoples ' Front al leged miserable conditions of the people of Koraput district in addition to the Kalahandi district.
It was alleged that the starvation deaths, drought diseases and famine have been the continuing phenomenon in the said two districts.
The petitioners accused the Government of Orissa of its failure to 58 protect the lives of the people of the two districts of Kalahandi and Koraput and sought directions that the State of Orissa should be directed to take immediate steps to alleviate the miseries and sorrows of the people of the said two districts.
With a view to ascertaining the correct state of affairs and to know whether the State has implemented the social welfare measures, and the adequacy of such measures to meet the needs of the people, the Court directed the District Judge of Kalahandi to submit a report.
The learned District Judge in its report submitted that the State Government has implemented social welfare measures and there was hardly any case of starvation death.
The correctness of the facts found by the District Judge in his report was challenged by the petitioners, particular ly the question of starvation deaths.
The petitioners sug gested that for the purpose of supervising relief work, a Committee of 11 member should be constituted comprising members of well known social organisations.
On behalf of the State it was stated by the Attorney General that district level Natural Calamities Committees consisting of Collector, Officials, MPs and MLAs are already existing and these Committees review the progress of relief work and the measures taken to meet the drought conditions.
It was submitted that members of voluntary social organisa tions can be inducted in these existing Committees instead of constituting a new Committee as suggested by the peti tioners.
The attention of the Court was also drawn to para 39 of the Orissa Relief Code dealing with enquiry in cases of starvation deaths and relief measures to be taken in such cases.
It was stated that for the purpose of alleviating the miseries and sorrows of the people in the district of Kala handi, State has already undertaken appropriate social meas ures, namely, allocation of Rs.8054 lakhs for Kalahandi during the Sixth Plan, constant vigilance under the direct supervision of the Chief Minister for redressal of the distress of the people, undertaking of massive scale labour intensive work to provide employment, free feeding programme in areas of acute distress, Emergency Feeding Programme in drought affected areas and crop damage areas, undertaking of a number of major, medium and small irrigation projects, digging of tube wells for drinking water, starting affores tation programme to prevent recurrence of drought condi tions, fixation of minimum purchase price for paddy, provid ing adequate funds to purchasing agents to purchase surplus paddy at prescribed rates, direct procurement of entire paddy through Food Corporation of India and State Co opera tive 59 Marketing Federation, strict implementation of the Orissa Agricultural Produce Marketing Act and free supply of seeds to agriculturists in drought affected areas.
Disposing these petitions, the Court, HELD: 1.
It is not disputed that the people of Kalahandi and Koraput are very poor and most of them have been living below the poverty line.
Though the report of the District Judge is against the starvation deaths the happening of one or two cases of starvation deaths cannot altogether be ruled out.
[1E F] 2.
Paragraph 39 of the Orissa Relief Code makes ample provision for taking steps in case of starvation deaths.
[63D] 3.
The State Government shall nominate at least S per sons belonging to the recognised voluntary social organisa tion like Sarvodaya Gandhi Peace Foundation, Ramakrishna Mission, Bharat Sewa Sangha and registered voluntary agen cies as contained in the State approved list of voluntary agencies as members of the said existing district level Natural Calamities Committees of the Districts of Kalahandi and Koraput.
[64B C] 4.
The said Committees shall hold one meeting every two mouths and shall be responsible for looking into the starva tion deaths and the welfare of the people of these dis tricts.
These committees shall also keep a watch over the working of the social welfare measures taken and which are likely to be taken by the State Government.
[66A, B] The social welfare measures and prompt action taken by Government of Orissa will help in ending the miseries of the people.
