The appellants owned an industrial concern and sought aid from the State Government under the Mysore State Aid to Industries Act, 1951 with a view to improve the industry and develop it further.
An application for aid was made to the concerned authorities and the competent authority granted the financial assistance by way of loan.
This financial assistance was secured from the Bank of Mysore and the State Government agreed to stand as surety and also to guarantee the repayment of the loan with interest to the Bank.
The appellants who received the aid executed a deed of simple mortgage in favour of the State Government of their proper ties in consideration of their promise to guarantee the repayment of the loan.
The State Government in turn executed a deed of guarantee in favour of the Bank.
The appellants in addition also executed a promote in favour of the Bank agreeing to repay the said sum with interest.
The appellants were not in a position to pay the loan within the stipulated period as the concern had become financially unsound.
The State Government started compelling the appellants to pay off the loan to the Bank and as it was not paid the State Government got the properties of the appellant sold under the proceedings for recovery of land revenue and got the money recovered.
The appellants filed a civil suit and contended that the sale of the properties was without the authority of law, and that the money could only be recovered from the appellant if the State Government had paid the loan of the Bank first and even thereafter the only course open to the State Government was to file a suit for reimbursement on the basis of the mortgage.
109 The suit was dismissed by the trial court and the order was confirmed by the High Court in appeal.
The Trial Court and the High Court came to the conclu sion that the Government of Karnataka was entitled to recov er the amount which they secured as an aid to the respond ents under the scheme of the Act and for that purpose law fully resorted to the sale of the properties by following the procedure of recovery of arrears of land revenue as provided for in Section 19 of the Act.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the view taken by the High Court that if any sum was payable under the Act, the State Government could take steps under Section 19 of the Act was not justi fied.
Dismissing the Appeal, HELD: 1.
The scheme of the Mysore State Aid to Indus tries Act, 1951 indicate that whether the aid has been provided for by the State or has been secured by the State from other financial agencies, it was contemplated that the State would secure the repayment of the loan or recovery of whatever aid was given, and with a view to secure those repayments Section 19 was specifically enacted.
[113D E] 2.
Legislature in its wisdom therefore did not use the words 'payable to the State ' but used 'all moneys payable under this Act ' in the Section, it appears with a clear intention that whenever money becomes payable which was secured to the industry under the scheme of the Act, it will be open to the State Government to follow the procedure for recovery as has been provided for in clause (1) of Section 19.
[113E F] 3.
It is only in respect of the moneys payable under the scheme of this Act that section 19(1) comes into operation and it appears that it was in accordance with the scheme of the Act that the Legislature in its wisdom chose not to use the further phrase payable to the Government under Section 19(1).
[114B] section Peer Mohammed vs B. Mohan Lal Sowcer, [1988] 2 S.C.C. 513, referred to.
