Rule 49A of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 provided for payment of different rates of interest on the excise duty on the yarn, payment of which was deferred at the option of the manufacturer till the manufacture and clearance of the fabrics made out of the dutiable yarn, depending on whether cotton fabrics were cleared 'grey ' (unproceased) or 'after processing '.
When the fabrics were cleared grey the interest payable was 1 1/2% of the yarn duty.
But where the cotton fabrics were cleared after 'processing ', it was 3% of yarn duty.
Appellant Company, engaged in the manufacture of cotton fabrics, in its composite mills, opted for such deferment of payment of duty of excise.
The cotton fabrics cleared admit tedly underwent the process of 'calendering ' and 'shearing '.
The Appellate Tribunal held that 'calendering ' and 'shear ing ' were 'finishing processes ' which rendered the 'grey ' fabrics to cease to be 'unprocessed ' and thus attracted interest at 3% of yarn duty.
In the appeal before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant company that whether the fabric, after 'calendering ' and 'shearing ' ceased to be 'unproc essed ' fabric would require to be 'resolved on the language of the Rule 49A itself and that the differentium for the attraction of the different rates of interest was whether the cotton fabrics cleared were 'grey fabrics ' as known and understood in the textile industry, and that the condition for levy of 1 1/2% was not whether some process or processes were applied to the 'grey fabrics ' 205 but whether such process or processes to which the grey fabric was subjected had the effect of making such grey fabric ceased to be 'greyfabric ', and that actual processes or 'calendering ' and 'shearing ' involved in the present case were amongst the simplest of the processes and did not have the effect of bringing about any change in the 'greyfabric ', as to take it out of Rule 49A(1)(b).
On behalf of the Revenue it was contended that the conditions for the choice of the different rates of interest were not envisaged in the context whether the process or processes amounted to 'manufacture ' within the meaning of section 2(f)(v) of the Act, but only in the context of estimating the extent of time consumed by the process or processes and that the test appropriate in this context was not whether the greyfabrics under went any change in their nature or quality as a result of the processes but was whether any time consuming process, whatever be its nature, was resorted to by the manufacturer which, in turn, occassioned delays in the clearance of the cotton fabrics and thereby delayed payment of the yarn duty.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.
Though the purpose of Rule 49A of the Central Excise Rules 1944, was to provide for rates of interest depending on the time consumed by the processing, the meas ure of the delay so as to attract one or the other of the rates is not in terms of any period of time specified, but is prescribed to be with reference to the nature of the processes.
The measure of the delay in deferment of yarn duty legislatively considered appropriate to attract higher rate of interest at 3%, is in terms of the processes that would be required to make the 'greycloth ' cease to be grey cloth.
Any processing that can take a case out of Rule 49A(1)(b) must be a process which renders cotton fabric cease to be 'grey ' fabric as commercially known and under stood.
That is why in Rule 49A(1) of the expression 'grey ' is used while in Rule 49A(2), that word is omitted.
[209E F] The matter has to be examined by those standards, which in turn, depends on the fact, whether the process or proc esses concerned were such as to change the nature of the 'grey fabric '.
[209G H] 2.1 There is no dispute that before clearance the cotton fabrics were subjected to 'calendering ' and 'shearing ' which in the jargon of the textile industry are finishing process es.
[207G] 206 2.2 Both 'calendering ' and 'shearing ' involve an assort ment and variety of processes, some of which might and some others might not affect or alter the nature of the fabric.
Both the expressions, 'calendering ' and 'shearing ' are collective expressions representing number of sub species of operations which, depending upon the nature of the particu lar operation, may or may not alter the nature of the 'greyfabric ' as such.
[212B C] 2.3 These matters depend on particularities of the facts of each case and are to be decided on a case by case basis.
[212E] In the present case, the claim of the appellant before the authorities that the 'calendering ' process employed by them was such as to give temporary finish by pressing the fabric is not controverted.
No lasting change is brought about.
There is no finding to the contrary.
Likewise the claim as to the "shearing" which was only to trim protrud ing, stray fibres from the fabric.
If these are the nature of the operations, the 'grey ' fabric, in the facts of these cases, does not become new and commercially different com modity and cease to be 'grey ' cloth.
There is thus no justi fication to take it out of Rule 49A(1)(b).
[212G H; 213A]
