Clause 1, of the agreement arrived at between the con sumerrespondents and the appellant Electricity Board, pro vided for constant supply of electrical energy to the con sumers.
Clause 4 provided that even if the consumer does not consume electricity above the minimum guarantee then it will be incumbent upon the consumer to pay annual minimum charges.
Clause 13 provided for the contingency that if the consumer is prevented from receiving or using the electrical energy due to strikes, riots, fire, floods, explosions, act of God or any other case reasonably beyond the control of the Board or if the Board is prevented from supplying such electrical energy owing to any of the causes mentioned then the consumer was entitled to a proportionate reduction of the annual minimum guarantee bill as determined by the Chief Engineer.
The respondents were served with the hills for annual minimum guarantee for the years 1973 74 to 1982 83 by the Electricity Supply Division.
The respondents filed their claims, under clause 13, with the Chief Engineer denying their liability to pay any such charges because the Board did not supply constant supply as provided in clause 1.
It was alleged that during the period in question due to trip pings, load sheding and power cut the respondents suffered a great loss.
The Chief Engineer negatived the claims of the respondents.
A batch of writ petitions was filed in the High Court, challenging the order of the Chief Engineer.
Although in these petitions relief sought was proportionate reduction of the annual minimum guarantee 169 bills but in view of the interpretation of clauses 1, 4 and 13 the High Court quashed the demand made by the Electricity Board by holding that under clause 1 it was incumbent for the Electricity Board to supply constant electricity supply and that the consumers will be liable to pay annual minimum guarantee charges only if the Board supplies the power as provided in the agreement but the consumer does not utilise the power.
In these appeals by Special Leave, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the 'constant supply ' men tioned in clause I cannot mean 'continuous supply '.
The respondent consumers could not deny the liability to pay annual minimum guarantee bills if the Electricity Board could not supply power for all the 24 hours due to circum stances beyond the control of the Electricity Board.
In case of shortage of supply due to circumstances beyond the con trol of the Board the consumers were entitled to a propor tionate reduction under clause 13 of the agreement.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court was not right in coming to the conclusion that the respondents were not liable at all to pay the annual minimum guarantee charges.
[175C] 1.1.
The High Court in its judgment clearly stated the hours every year in dispute when the power was not supplied and on this basis the respondent*consumers will only be entitled to proportionate reduction as ordinarily the con sumers are expected to have continuous power supply.
Clause 13 clearly provides for the proportionate reduction of the annual minimum guarantee bills.
[175D] 2.
Clause 1 talks of constant supply of electrical energy providing for voltage, cycles, phases and wires.
It does not talk of either of continuous or non continuons or intermittent supply.
[173E] 3.
The Respondent consumers are entitled to a propor tionate reduction of the minimum guarantee bill.
The inabil ity of the Electricity Board to supply electrical energy due to power cut or any other circumstance beyond its control as per the demand of the consumer according to the contract will be reflected in and considered as a circumstance beyond the control of the consumer which prevented it from consum ing electricity as per the contract and to the extent it wanted to consume.
[173G] 170 Northern India Iron & Steel Co. etc.
vs State of Haryana 4.
The Chief Engineer of the Electricity Board shall accordingly assess the proportionate reduction of the annual minimum guarantee bills in respect of disputed years on the basis of non supply as indicated in the High Court Judgment.
[175D E] 4.1.
Pending assessment, the power supply of the consum ers will not be disconnected on the ground of failure to pay the annual minimum guarantee bills.
[175E] 4.2.
The Electricity Board will be entitled to take recourse to the normal procedure if the consumers fail to pay after the proportionate reduction is made and fresh demand is made.
[175E F] Amalgamated Electricity Co. Ltd. vs Jalagaon Borough Municipality, ; ; M/s. Man Industrial Corpo ration vs Rajasthan State Electricity Board and others, AIR and Mukand Iron and Steel Works Ltd. vs Maharashtra State Electricity Board and another, AIR 1982 Bombay 580, referred to.
