In Civil Appeal No. 1118 of 1975 the respondent asses see 's husband gifted certain lands and buildings to his two spouses by three gift deeds dated 26.4.1962, 26.5.1962 and 17.8.1962.
The gifts were chargeable to gift tax and were accordingly assessed to gift tax In the assessment year 1963 64.
In the proceedings for assessment to wealth for the assessment year 1967 68, it was claimed on behalf of the estate of the assessee 's husband, who had later died on 16.12.1968 that as the gifts were chargeable to gift tax, the proviso to section 4(1)(a) was attracted and the assets so transferred were not includible in the net wealth of the deceased for any assessment year commencing after the 31st day of March, 1964.
The Wealth Tax Officer rejected this claim.
On appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the assessment.
Allowing the assessee 's further appeal, the Appellate Tribunal, on a particular construction of the proviso, held that the assets transferred, which had attracted gift tax, were not includible in the net wealth of the deceased for the assessment year 1964 65 onwards.
On a reference made at the Instant of the Revenue, the High Court agreed with the construction placed on the provi so by the Tribunal.
The Revenue filed an appeal, by Special leave In this Court.
156 The appellant assessee in Civil Appeal Nos.
1226 and 1227 of 1975, made a gift of certain amount to her minor daughter on 7.10.1959.
The assets so transferred were in cluded in the assessee 's wealth for the two assessment years 1964 65 and 1965 66 under section 4(1)(a)(ii) of the Wealth tax Act.
The claim of the assessee that the proviso to section 4(I)(a) operated to exclude the asset from the net wealth of the assessee as the transfer was chargeable to gift tax was not accepted by the Wealth tax Officer.
The Appellate As sistant Commissioner rejected the assessee 's appeal.
However, the Appellate Tribunal, accepting the conten tion of the assessee, allowed the assessee 's appeal and held that, on a true construction of the proviso, so long as the gift was chargeable to or exempt under section 5 from gift tax, to that extent section 4(1)(a) ceased to have operation and the statutory fiction embodied in it was not attracted and that since, the gift was chargeable to gift tax, at the relevant time, the exemption was to operate from the assessment year commencing after 31 3 1964.
The High Court, on a reference made at the instance of the Revenue reversed the Tribunal 's view.
Hence, the asses see filed the appeal, by certificate, in this Court.
In the appeals before this Court, it was submitted on behalf of the Revenue that the words "for any assessment year commencing after the 31st day of March, 1964" could, in the context only refer to the gift and gift tax assessments, that only that class of gifts which were chargeable to gift tax for any assessment year 1964 65 or thereafter (hut subject to the time limit fixed by the 1971 amendment) which would otherwise fail under section 4(1)(a) were eligible for the benefit of exemption, and that where the enactment was clear and admitted of only one meaning, and did not admit of two or more meanings, it would be the plain meaning that should be given effect to and no resort could be had to any rules of construction which would denude the provision of its plain and ordinary meaning.
On behalf of the assessees, it was contended that the date of the ' gift was immaterial and as long as the transfer was chargeable to gift tax or was exempted under section 5 what ever may be the year in which the gift was made, the exemp tion from a gift tax must commence for any assessment year commencing after the 31st day of March 1964", that these words should not be read as part of the first part of the proviso relating to gift tax assessments but as part of the second part denoting the commencement of the operation from Wealth tax, and that a construction which promoted its constitutionality has to be preferred to the 157 one which, if accepted, would expose the proviso to the vice of discrimination and unconstitutionality.
Allowing the appeal of the Revenue and dismissing the appeal of the assessee.
HELD: 1.
On a reading of the plain words of the proviso to section 4(1)(a) of the , the clause "for any assessment year commencing after 31st day of March, 1964" can only be read as relating to gift tax assesssments and not to the wealth tax assessments.
[165E] The amendment introducing the proviso was brought about by an amending Act of 1964, but the date of the commencement of its operation was left to be fixed by a Notification.
If the construction that the clause should be read as part of the second part, denoting the commencement of the operation of exemption from Wealth tax is accepted, effect of the Notification issued bringing the proviso into effect from 1.4.1965 would be wholly ignored, and the introduction of the words "but before the 1st day of April, 1972", by a later amendment would operate to take away the benefit of the exemption after 1.4.1972 and the exemption confined only to the assessment years between 1964 65 and 1972 73.
[165C D] Therefore, the gifts in question though chargeable to gift tax would not attract the benefit of exemption and would be liable to be included in the net wealth of the assessees.
[163A] T. Saraswathi Achi vs C.I.T., ; C.W.T. vs Seth Nand Lal Ganeriwala, ; M.G. Kol lankulam vs C.I.T., ITR 160 (Kerala), Malti Harseey vs C.W.T., and C.W.T. vs Rasesh N. Mafatlal, approved.
2.1 One of the pillars of statutory interpretation viz., the literalrule, demands that if the meaning of the Statuto ry Interpretation is plain, the Courts must apply regardless of the result.
[165G] 2.2 The very concept of interpretation connotes the introduction of elements which are necessarily extrinsic to the words in the statute.
Though the words "Interpretation" and "construction" are used interchangeably, the idea is somewhat different.
[165H] 2.3 The rule of construction that if the statutory provision is susceptible or admits of two reasonably possi ble views, then the one 158 which would promote its constitutionality should be pre ferred on the ground that the legislature is presumed not to have intended an excess of its own jurisdiction, is subject to the further rule that it applies only where two views are reasonably possible on the statutory language.
If the words of the statute, on a proper construction, can be read only in a particular way, then it cannot be read in another way by a court of construction anxious to avoid its unconstitu tionality.
[166G H] 2.4 In a case, as here, where a reference arises under 'Act ', the question of the constitutionality of the Act cannot be examined and pronounced upon by this Court.
That is the task of the Court in judicial review.
However, the rule of preference of a particular construction amongst the alternatives, in order to avoid unconstitutionality, is unavailable in the instant case.
[166H; 167A, F] 3.
In a taxing measure, the legislature enjoys a wider latitude and its dispensations are based on an interaction of diverse economic, social and policy considerations.
Further, if the proviso is bad for discrimination, it would follow that the converse situation brought about by the later amendment, a discrimination as between gifts made as between the 31st of March, 1972 and on 1st April, 1972 might also become bad.
This Court is required to notice the provi sion as it stood at the relevant time.
[167D E] State of Punjab vs Prem Sukhdas, ; and Attorney General vs Carlton Bank, , re ferred to.
Dr. Patrick Devlin: Samples of Law Making Oxford Uni versity Press, p. 70 71 and Max Radin "Statutory Interpreta tion" 43 Hat.
L.R. 863 (868), referred to.
