The four appellants along with seven other accused were tried under Sections 147, 148 and 302 read with 149 of the Indian Penal Code.
The trial Court convicted the eight accused, including the four appellants, under section 302/149 I.P.C. and awarded life imprisonment.
Appellants Nos. 1, 2 & 4 were also convicted under Section 147 I.P.C. and each awarded one years R.I.
Appellant No. 3 was also convicted under Section 148 I.P.C. and awarded two years R.I.
The remaining three accused were acquitted by the Trial Court for want of corroboration.
On appeal by the eight convicted persons the High Court upheld the conviction of only four appellants on all the counts and allowed the appeal of the other four co accused for want of corrobora tion.
In this appeal by special leave it was contended that appellants No. 3 and 4 should also be acquitted for want of corroboration as the Trial Court has acquitted three accused and the High Court, on appeal, has further acquitted four accused for want of corroboration.
The appeal was contested on behalf of the State contend ing that in case of conviction under section 302 read with section 149 of the I.P.C. corroboration in case of individu al accused was not necessary and there 131 was enough corroboration on record to prove that the accused were members of the unlawful assembly at the time of commis sion of offence.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Section 149 creates a specific and distinct offence.
It imposes constructive or vicarious criminal liability of the members of the unlawful assembly for the unlawful acts committed pursuant to the common object by any other member of the assembly.
[135B] 1.1.
It is not necessary that all persons forming an unlawful assembly must do some overt acts.
The section makes a member of the unlawful assembly responsible as a principal for the acts of each, and all, merely because he is a member of an unlawful assembly.
While overt acts and active partic ipation may indicate common intention of the persons perpe trating the crime, the mere presence in the unlawful assem bly may fasten vicarious criminal liability under the sec tion.
The basis of the constructive guilt under section 149 is mere membership of the unlawful assembly, with requisite common object or knowledge.
[135E F] 1.2.
The two essentials of the section are the commis sion of an offence by any member of an unlawful assembly and that such offence must have been committed in prosecution of the common object of that assembly or must be such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed.
The common object of the assembly must be one of the five objects mentioned in section 141 of the Indian Penal Code.
[134G H] 2.
In an appeal by the persons convicted under section 302 with the aid of section 149 I.P.C. the question whether a particular person was a member of the unlawful assembly at the relevant time may be examined; and if it is found from the evidence on record that he was not a member of the unlawful assembly, he could not be convicted with the aid of section 149.
[136F G] 2.1.
But once the Court holds that certain accused persons formed an unlawful assembly and an offence is com mitted by any member of that assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly or such as the members of the assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every person who at the time of committing that offence was a member of the same assembly is to be held guilty of that offence.
After such a finding it is not open to the 132 Court to see as to who actually did the offensive act.
The prosecution is not obliged to prove which specific overt act was done by which of the accused.
[135G H; 136A] 2.2.
From the evidence on record it has been satisfacto rily established that appellants No. 3 and 4 were members of the unlawful assembly at the relevant time.
Both the Courts below have held them to have been members of the unlawful assembly.
The fact that they were not active participants and whether any specific injury could individually be at tributed to them or not are not at all material.
[136D E] 2.3.
In the instant case the High Court having held that the appellants formed an unlawful assembly carrying danger ous weapons with the common object of resorting to violence and committed an offence punishable with the aid of Section 149 I.P.C. erred in acquitting some of the members on the ground that they themselves did not perform any violent act or that there was no corroboration of their participation.
Doing so would amount to forgetting the very nature and essence of the offence created by Section 149.
[136B D] 2.4 The Court in undeserving cases cannot afford to be charitable in the administration of criminal justice which is so vital for peace and order in the society.
[136D]
