Section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Planning and Devel opment Act, 1973 provides for declaration of an area to be a 'development area ' by gazette notification.
Section 14(1) of the Act interdicts development of land in such an area by any person or body unless permission has been obtained from the Vice Chairman of the Development Authority.
Section 15(1) requires every person or body desirous of obtaining permission to make an application in the manner prescribed.
Section 15(3) empowers the Vice Chairman, after making such an enquiry as he considers necessary, either to grant the permission subject to such conditions as he may specify, or refuse the permission.
Section 15(5) provides for an appeal to the Chairman against an order made by the Vice Chairman refusing permission.
Section 37 inter alia makes an order of the Vice Chairman made under section 15 final.
Section 41(1) makes it incumbent on the Authority (the Chairman or the Vice Chairman) to carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the State Government for the efficient administration of the Act.
Section 41 (3) confers revisional powers on the State Government.
The respondent lessees applied to the appellant Develop ment Authority under section 15(1) of the Act for permission to put up a multistoreyed building on the demised plot.
The Vice Chairman of the Authority sanctioned the permission by his order dated January 31, 177 1985.
However, on July 24, 1985 the State Government issued directions purporting to be under section 41(1) of the Act inter dicting the progress of construction on ground of violation of the conditions of the lease.
The High Court allowed the writ petition preferred by the respondents and quashed the said directions.
Thereafter, on August 12, 1985 the State Government brought to the notice of the Vice Chairman serious illegali ties in the building sanction and indicated that the same he reviewed and revoked, to which he did not agree.
Finally, by its communication dated October 15, 1985 addressed to the Chairman of the Authority the State Government directed him to initiate immediate proceedings against the respondents for making misrepresentations, fraudulent statements and concealing material facts in obtaining building permission.
To that letter was annexed a notice for service on the lessees and the builder associated with construction to show cause for cancellation of the lease and demolition of unau thorised construction.
The respondents filed their objec tions against the proposed cancellation, but the Government by its order dated November 19, 1985 found the explanation unacceptable and proceeded to terminate the lease.
This order was challenged by the respondent lessees in a writ petition before the High Court.
Subsequently, the Vice Chairman of the Authority in a separate action issued notice dated January 9, 1986 to the respondents to show cause why the building permission grant ed on January 31, 1985 should not be cancelled.
Respondents objected to the proposed action but the Authority found the objections unacceptable and proceeded by its order dated April 19, 1986 to cancel the permission.
The two lessees challenged this cancellation in writ petitions before the High Court.
The High Court found that the proceedings initiated and the action taken by the Government and the Vice Chairman of the Authority in the matter, respectively, of forfeiture of the lease and the cancellation of the permission to build were both infirm in law and required to he quashed.
It took the view that a reasonable opportunity of being heard had been denied to the lessee respondents, and that the grounds for forfeiture of the lease were irrelevant and illusory; that there was no provision in the Development Act confer ring powers on the ViceChairman to review the decision in the matter of sanctioning a plan to build after the same was acted upon and constructions were being made only in accord ance with it; that section 41(1) of the Act could authorise the Vice Chairman to review the earlier permission but that there being no such directive from the Government the Vice Chairman acting as a 178 statutory authority had no power to revoke or cancel the permission once granted, and that there was no casual con nection between the Government 's directive dated October IS, 1985, which had confined itself to the cancellation of the lease, and the proceedings initiated by the Vice Chairman on January 9, 1986.
It further found that as personal hearing has not been given to the petitioners the order passed by the Vice Chairman violates the principles of natural justice and that the grounds alleged were not sufficient to sustain the cancellation of the permission.
In the appeals by special leave preferred by the State Government in the matter of forfeiture of lease, it was contended for the appellants that the High Court fell into an error in allowing a matter, which should properly have been the subject matter of a civil suit, to be agitated in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The submission was that the question whether there were breaches of covenants on the part of the lessees involved the con struction of the terms of the lease deed which required evidence on the matter and such a dispute could not be resolved on mere affidavits, and that the relationship between the parties being one of lessor and lessee the dispute between them pertained to a private law situation.
It was also submitted that no hearing could be contemplated in the context for forfeiture of a lease of this nature.
For the respondents it was contended that the State, even as a lessor, could not act arbitrarily either in the grant or premature termination of the leases of public property and disputes arising in such context cannot always be reckoned as private law situations, and that at all events, the threatened exercise of extra judicial re entry by the State, being violative both of the limitations of the powers of the State as lessor under the law of landlord and tenant and or its actions as State, was a matter which required to be mandated against.
In the appeals by special leave by the Development Authority in the matter or cancellation of permission to build, it was contended for it that the order dated April 19, 1986 itself disclosed the extent or opportunities af forded to the lessees and there could, therefore, be no question of failure or natural justice, that if permission had been obtained by the lessees by misrepresentation or fraud or, if after obtaining the permission there had been violation of the terms and conditions or the grant, as in the instant case, the statutory authority granting the permission has itself the inherent and incidental and sup plemental powers to revoke the permission, and that no express grant of power in this behalf was necessary.
For the respondents it was contended that the proceedings for can cellation of the permission having been initiated at 179 the instance of and compelled by the directions issued by the Government purporting to act under section 41(1) of the Act there was a surrender of statutory discretion on the part of the Vice Chairman thereby vitiating the decision; that the Vice Chairman had no authority in law to cancel the permis sion, that the power to cancel or revoke a licence or per mission, even assuming_ that the statute enables such can cellation, was clearly distinguishable from the power of refusal of an initial grant and that the exercise of power of cancellation which prejudicially affects vested fights partakes predominantly of quasi judicial complexion; and that as there was denial of a reasonable opportunity of being heard the order passed by the Vice Chairman violates the principles of natural justice.
Allowing appeals by the State, HELD: 1.
The question whether the purported forfeiture and cancellation of the lease were valid or not should not have been allowed by the High Court to he agitated under Article 226 of the Constitution since it involved resolution of disputes on questions of fact as well.
[191C] Express Newspapers vs Union of India, [1985] Suppl. 3 SCR 382, referred to.
A lessor, with the best of title, has no right to resume possession extra judicially by use of force, from a lessee, even after the expiry or earlier termination of the lease by forfeiture or otherwise.
The use of the expression 're entry ' in the lease deed does not authorise extrajudi cial methods to resume possession.
Under law the possession of a lessee, even after the expiry or its earlier termina tion is judicial possession and forcible dispossession is prohibited.
He cannot, therefore, be dispossessed otherwise than in due course of law.
[191F G] In the instant case, the fact that the lessor is the State does not place it in any higher or better position.
On the contrary, it is under an additional inhibition stemming from the requirement that all actions of Government and governmental authorities should have a 'legal pedigree '.
The State Government is, accordingly, prohibited from taking possession otherwise than in accordance with law.
[192C] Bishandas vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to.
The question of the legality and validity of the purported cancella 180 tion of the lease and the defence of the lessees is left open to be urged in appropriate legal proceedings, whenever and wherever Government proceeds to initiate action in accordance with law for resumption of possession.
[192D E] Partly allowing the appeals by the Development Authority, HELD: 1.1 The Vice Chairman, for purposes of section 15(3) of the Act is a distinct statutory authority with statutory powers of his own distinct from Development Authority, which under section 4(2) is a body corporate having perpetual succes sion and common seal.
[197C D] 1.2 An order made by him under section 15(3) of the Act granting permission is not one of the orders revisable by Government under section 41(3).
Such an order, under the scheme of the Act, is not also appealable but assumes a finality contemplated by section 37.
[197F G] 1.3 The power of control of the State Government under section 41(1) consistent with the scheme of the Act, cannot be construed as a source of power to authorise any authority or functionary under the Act to do or carry out something which that authority or functionary is not, otherwise, competent to do or carrying under the Act.
The section is not a Super Henry VIII clause for the supply or source of additional provisions and powers not already obtaining under the Act.
[198A B] 2.1 The view of the High Court that in the absence of a directive or authorisation from the Government under section 41(1), the ViceChairman, acting as the statutory authority dispensing permissions for development under the Act, cannot revoke or cancel a permission once granted is clearly erro neous.
[198F] 2.2 The grant of permission is part of or incidental to the statutory power to regulate orderly development of the 'development area ' under the Act under regulatory laws.
The power to regulate with the obligations and functions that go with and are incidental to it, are not pent or exhausted with the grant of permission.
The power of regulation which stretches beyond the mere grant of permission, takes within its sweep the power, in appropriate cases, to revoke or cancel the permission as incidental or supplemental to the power to grant.
Otherwise, the planitude of the power to regulate would be whittled own or even frustrated.
[198F H] 2.3 The power to grant, where the grant is itself vitiated by fraud 181 or misrepresentation on the part of the grantee at the time of obtaining the grant, or where the grantee, after the grant violates the essential terms and conditions subject to which grant is made, must therefore, be held to include the power to revoke or cancel the permit, even in the absence of any other express statutory provisions in that behalf.
The grounds must, of course, be such as would justify such drastic action.
This cancellation is a preventive step.
There may, however, be cases of the third kind where the grant may be voidable at the instance of the Development Authority or otherwise entitling the Development Authority to initiate appropriate declaratory or other action to get rid of the effect of the permission.
[199G H; 200A B] 2.4 It is erroneous to equate the powers under sections 14 and 15 of the Act with judicial power which, in the absence of express provisions, could not enable the review of a judicial order after its exercise on the principle of func tus officio.
[198H; 199A] Sardul Singh vs The District Food and Supplies Control ler, Patiala and O rs.
, W.P. No. 126 of 1962 decided on December 19, 1962 referred to.
The power of revocation or cancellation of the per mission is akin to and partakes of a quasi judicial complex ion.
In exercising the power the authority must bring to bear an unbiased mind, consider impartially the objections raised by the aggrieved party and decide the matter consist ent with the principles of natural justice.
The authority cannot permit its decision to be influenced by the direction of others as this would amount to abdication and surrender of its discretion.
It would then not be the authority 's discretion that is exercised, but someone else 'section If an authority hands over its discretion to another body it acts ultra vires.
Such an interference by a person or body extra neous to the power would plainly be contrary to the nature of the power.
conferred upon the authority.
[200B D] Judicial Review of Administrative Action by S.A. de Smith referred to.
In the instant case, however, there was no such surren der of discretion by the Authority.
The directive from the Government dated August 12, 1985 had spent itself out with the then the Vice Chairman declining to act in accordance with it.
The directive dated October 15, 1985 confined itself only to the cancellation of the lease and as inciden tal thereto, required the stoppage of work pending decision whether the lease should be cancelled or not.
[201B D] 182 4.1 It not unoften happens that what appears to be a judicial review for breach of natural justice is, in reali ty, a review for abuse of discretion.
[201H] 4.2 Judicial review under Article 226 cannot be convert ed into an appeal.
Judicial review is directed, not against the decision, but is confined to the examination of the decision making process.
[202B] 4.3 When the issue raised in judicial review is whether a decision is vitiated by taking into account irrelevant, or neglecting to take into account of relevant, factors or is so manifestly unreasonable that no reasonable authority, entrusted with the power in question could reasonably have made such a decision, the judicial review of the decision making process includes examination as a matter of law, of the relevance of the factors.
In the instant case, it is, however, not necessary to go into the marits and relevance of the grounds.
[202F H] Chief Constable of the North Wales Police vs Evans, ; referred to.
There has been a denial of natural justice in the proceedings culminating in the order of cancellation.
The show cause notice itself is an impalpable congeries of suspicions and fears, of relevant or irrelevant matter and has included some trivia.
On a matter of such importance where the stakes are heavy for the lesses who claim to have made large investments on the project and where a number of grounds require the determination of factual matters of some complexity, the statutory authority should, in the facts of the case, have afforded a personal hearing to the lessees.
Both the show cause notice dated January 9, 1986 and the subsequent order dated April 19, 1986 cannot, therefore, be sustained.
[203B D] It is left open to the statutory authority, should it consider it necessary, to issue a fresh show cause notice setting out the precise grounds, and afford a reasonable opportunity, including an opportunity of personal hearing and of adducing evidence wherever necessary to the respond ent lessees.
In view of this liberty, reserved to the au thority, the finding recorded by the High Court on the merits of the grounds is set aside.
[203D E]
