It was alleged that the appellant, a youth of 18 years, forcibly lifted P.W. 1, a girl of tender age of 11, 12 years, took her to a shallow place, and committed rape on her, on account of which she began to bleed profusely; that on hearing the call of P.W. 7 the appellant ran away.
A report was lodged with the police next morning.
The girl was examined by a lady doctor, who issued a medical certificate.
The leaves collected from the place of occurrence, the slides, the swabs and the salwar were for warded to the Chemical Analyser and Serologist for examina tion and report.
The appellant was prosecuted for committing rape on P.W. 1.
The trial court convicted him under section 376 I.P.C. and sentenced him to suffer imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.2,000 in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a further period of two years.
On appeal, the High Court, while confirming the convic tion reduced the substantive sentence from imprisonment for life to rigorous imprisonment for seven years but retained the punishment in default thereof.
In the appeal before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the carbon copy of the medical certificate given by the lady 124 doctor, who examined P.W. 1 was inadmissible in evidence, that having regard to the girl 's age and the fact that her vagina admitted one finger with difficulty, it was not possible to believe that there was penetration, that there was delay in filing the First Information Report, that since the girl was of a tender age the possibility of her wrongly involving the appellant could not be ruled out and that this possibility was strengthened by prior enmity, absence of spermatozoa, and infirm medical opinion.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Section 32 of the Evidence Act provides that when a statement written or verbal, is made by a person in the discharge of professional duty whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay, the same is relevant and admissible in evidence.
[127F] In the instant case, the lady doctor, who examined P.W. 1 and issued the medical certificate was not available for giving evidence as she had proceeded on long leave.
In her absence, the trial Judge felt that it would not be possible to secure her presence without undue delay and therefore permitted the prosecution to prove the certificate through P.W. 2, who was conversant with her hand writing and signa ture.
Besides, since the carbon copy was made by one uniform process the same was primary evidence within the meaning of Explanation 2 to section 62 of the Evidence Act.
Therefore, the medical certificate was clearly admissible in evidence.
[127D G] 2.
In the absence of penetration, there would not be absence of hymen with the edges torn and profuse bleeding from the vagina staining the salwar.
Merely because the Doctor found that the vagina admitted one finger with diffi culty, it cannot be inferred that there was no penetration as the muscles must have contracted by then.
The appellant, a robust man must have penetrated the vagina for otherwise there would not have been so much of bleeding.
[128B C] 3.
Mere absence of spermatozoa cannot cast a doubt on the correctness of the prosecution case.
The report of the Chemical Analyser and Serologist supports the version of the prosecution witnesses that there was profuse bleeding from the vagina.
[129F; 128F] 4.
Immediately after the incident was narrated to the mother and other ladies, no decision could be taken because of the absence of the 125 father.
On his arrival, he informed the Sarpanch, who ad vised him to report it to the Police next day in the morn ing, since it was too late to travel to the Police Station at that hour and accordingly the F.I.R. was lodged on the next day.
Therefore, there is no delay in filing the F.I.R. [128G H] 5.
It is not possible to believe that the prosecutrix and her parents would allow the real culprit to escape and falsely involve an innocent person for the commission of the Crime.
Except for the suggestion made in the cross examina tion of P.W. 8 and the statement under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure there is no material on record to give credence to the suggestion that the son of P.W. 8 was inti mate with the prosecutrix and he had raped the girl.
[129C] 6.
There is strong, reliable and dependable evidence of the prosecution witnesses which clearly proves that the prosecutrix was raped by the appellant.
In such circum stances, there can be no merit in the appeal.
[127G]
