Sub section (1) of section 8 of the Bombay Cotton Contracts Act, 1932, provides: " Save as hereinafter provided in this Act, any contract . which is entered into after the date on which this Act comes into operation and which is not in accordance with the by laws of any recognized cotton association shall be void ".
In respect of the transactions in cotton entered into between the parties, the appellants had to pay the respondents a sum of money for failure to give delivery of the cotton bales under the 347 contracts, but the payment was made without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties.
Subsequently, the appellants sued the respondents for recovery of the amount on the footing that the contracts were void under section 8(1) of the Bombay Cotton Contracts Act, 1932, as being not in accordance with the by laws of the East India Cotton Association Ltd., of which both the parties were members, in as much as the contract notes did not company with the terms contained in the official contract form provided by the by laws of Association, by reason of the omission to fill in the blanks relating to measurements and difference above or below the settlement rate.
The respondents contended that the relevant provisions contained in the official contract form bad either become obsolete or were suspended at all material times.
The evidence showed that according to the practice of the trade the parties to the contract were not tied down to a literal compliance with the terms contained in the official contract form but were required to act according to the position as it then obtained and that it was sufficient if they substantially complied with the requirements of the contract form : Held, that in the circumstances of the case the official contract form had to be filled in so far as it was practicable and that the omission to fill in the blanks in the contract notes did not spell any departure from an essential or a characteristic part of the contract form; consequently, the legal effect of the contracts was not in any manner changed so as to render the contracts void as not being in accordance with the by laws of the Association, within the meaning of section 8 of the Bombay Cotton Contracts Act, 1932.
Radhakisson Gopikisson vs Balmukund Ramchandra, (1932) L. R. 60 I. A. 63, relied on.
