Customs Notification No. 200/79 dated 28.9.1979 exempts components required for the manufacture of heavy commercial motor vehicles or of tractors from customs duty in excess of 25 per cent ad valorem and whole of the additional duty leviable thereon.
Notification No. 179/ 80 dated 4.9.1980 exempts components required for the purpose of initial setting up or for the assembly or manufacture of tractors, an article falling under Heading No. 87.01(1) of the First Schedule of the Act from so much of the customs duty as is in excess of the rate applicable to the said article when imported complete.
The appellant company imported three consignments of components of agricultural tractors.
The Directorate General of Technical Development issued certificate in terms of notification No. 179/80 stating that the appellant company was holding a valid industrial licence for the manufacture of agricultural tractors and have an approved manufacturing programme.
The appellant cleared the goods availing itself of the said concession.
Having realised later that it was entitled to the larger concession available under Notifica tion No. 200 of 1979, it filed three applications in respect of the said consignments claiming refund to the extent of the difference between the entitlements to concession under the two notifications.
The DGTD issued certificates in terms of notification No. 200 of 1979 in its favour.
The Assistant Collector of Customs rejected assessee 's prayer on the ground that it had failed to produce end use certificate.
Its appeals before the Collector of Customs (Appeals) failed.
The Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal dismissed the appeal on the ground that the appellant did not produce the approved manufacturing programme at the time of clearance of the goods as required under Notification No. 200 of 1979.
282 In these appeals it was contended for the respondents that since the amended certificates were not produced at the time of clearance but only much later the assessee was not entitled to the concession under Notification No. 200 of 1979.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.
The assessee is entitled to the concession available under Notification No. 200 of 1979.
[287B C] 2.1 The grant of concession depends on production of evidence by the importer to the Assistant Collector of Customs at the time of clearance of the components or the goods that they have a programme duly approved by the Minis try of Industry and the Industrial Adviser or Additional Industrial Adviser of the Directorate General of Technical Development of the Ministry of Industry for the manufacture of such motor vehicles or of tractors and not on the refer ence in the certificates to the notifications that can be availed of by the assessee.
[286C D; 287B] 2.2 In the instant case, the assessee had produced unequivocal evidence in the form of original set of certifi cates from DGTD at the time of clearance of the goods of the fact that the appellant held a valid industrial licence for the manufacture of agricultural tractors and that it also had an approved manufacturing programme.
That was sufficient compliance with the terms of the notification in question.
The omission of the assessee to request the DGTD to refer to the assessee 's entitlement under the 1979 notification or the omission of the DGTD to refer to the assessee 's entitle ment under the 1979 notification cannot take away the asses see 's rights.
The order of the Tribunal is, therefore, set aside.
[286F H; 287A]
