The is a Central Enact ment providing for the control of the production, supply and distribution, trade and commerce in certain specified essen tial commodities, Section 3 of the Act confers power on the Central Government to provide for regulating or prohibiting the production, supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce therein, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do for maintaining or increas ing supply of any essential commodities or of securing their equal distribution and availability on fair price.
The Central Government issued the Notification No, GSR 800 dated June 9, 1978 delegating its powers under section 3(1) of the Act to the State Governments to make orders in respect of the matters specified in the various sub clauses of sub section (2) of section 3 in 244 relation to foodstuffs subject to certain conditions speci fied therein.
By clause (2) of the Notification the Central Government while delegating its powers under section 3 to the State Government for issuing orders in respect of mat ters specified therein, expressly placed restriction on the State Government relating to any matters specified in clauses (a), (c), (d) and (f) of sub section (2) of section 3 to the extent that while making an order pertaining to any of the matters specified in the said clauses, the State Government shall obtain prior concurrence of the Central Government.
The State Government of Andhra Pradesh in exercise of its powers under section 3(1) of the Act as delegated to it by the Notification GSR 800 dated June 9, 1978 made the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Commodities Dealers (Licensing and Distribution) Order, 1982 after obtaining prior concurrence of the Central Government.
This order sought to regulate the sale and purchase of scheduled commodities as specified in schedule I to the Order.
Edible oil seeds and edible oil were included in the said Schedule.
The State Government issued a circular order dated June 21, 1985, containing directions regulating the transport and export of groundnut seeds and oil outside the State.
The oil millers and traders were permitted to export oil and groundnut seeds only on the condition that they deliver oil to the State Government at a fixed price in proportion of one tome of oil for every three tonnes to be transported outside the State.
Similar conditions were imposed in re spect of groundnut seeds.
The oil millers and traders were required to execute undertaking for complying with the directions issued by the State Government.
The respondents who were oil millers and traders carry ing on business in the sale and purchase of groundnut seed and groundnut oil which is edible challenged the validity of the 1982 Order and the 1985 Circular in writ petitions to the High Court.
A Single Judge quashed the order of the State Government on the findings that the directions con tained therein violated Articles 19(1)(g) and 301.
On appeal by the State Government a Division Bench held that the order of the government was violative of section 3(2)(f), section 3(31 B) and section 3(5) of the as the directions contained in the order amounted to imposition of levy which could not be done without obtaining the prior concurrence of the Central Government in terms of section 3(2)(f) of Act.
It further held that the directions contained in the 245 Government Order were outside the purview of the State Government under clause 12 of the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Commodities Dealers (Licensing and Distribution) Order, 1982.
No finding was however recorded on the question wheth er the Order violated the constitutional guarantee of free trade under article 301.
In the appeals to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the directions contained in the Government Order dated 21st June, 1985 were issued by the State Government in exercise of its powers under clause 12(2) of the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Commodities Dealers (Licensing and Distribution) Order, 1982 which had been made by the State Government with the prior concurrence of the Central Government in exercise of powers conferred by sec tion 3 of the and that the directions were legal and valid.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.
The High Court has rightly struck down the directions issued by the State Government.
The directions contained in the Government Circular Order dated June 21, 1985 are illegal and void as the same have been issued in exercise of and in contravention of the power delegated to the State Government under the Notification No. GSR 800 dated June 9, 1978.
[256E; 253F] 2.
The 1982 Order which was framed by the State Govern ment in exercise of the delegated powers does not contain any provision placing any restriction on the transport or movement of edible oil or oil seeds nor it provides for imposition of compulsory levy further it does not fix any price.
[253C D] 3.
The directions issued by the State Government by its Circular Order dated June 21, 1985 placing restrictions on the movement of oil seeds and oil and imposing compulsory levy and requiring millers and traders to sell oil seeds and oil at a price fixed by it, are outside the purview of 1982 Order.
These directions have no sanction of law.
[253D E] 4.
If the State Government was facing any problem it could have made amendments to the 1982 Order regulating matters specified in clauses (d) and (f) of section 3(2) of the Act after obtaining prior concurrence of the Central Government.
No such course was followed.
[253E F] 246 5.
The State Government 's directions requiring the millers and traders to sell groundnut oil to the State Government is a matter directly specified within the terms of section 3(2)(f) of the Act.
The State Government had no authority to place any such restriction without the prior concurrence of the Central Government.
[254G H] 6.
The purpose and object for obtaining prior concur rence is to ensure availability of essential commodity throughout the country.
The State Governments are not autho rised to impose restrictions on the movement of the essen tial commodities as it would have reflection in other States both in regard to the price and in regard to the availabili ty of the commodity for distribution.
The Central Government has the responsibility of maintaining a balance between the interest of the various States and ensuring the availability of essential commodities for distribution at a fair price in other States also.
All relevant aspects are necessary to be scrutinised by the Central Government in giving or refusing its concurrence not merely from the point of view of the State imposing restrictions but bearing in mind the condi tions of trade and industry and the demand and supply of the concerned commodities in other States.
Unless the Central Government is satisfied that it would be in the interest of all concerned, it may withhold concurrence for imposing restrictions on free movement of essential commodities.
[254C E] 7.
A delegate is not entitled to exercise powers in excess or in contravention of the delegated powers.
If any order is issued or framed in excess of the powers delegated to the authorities, such order would be illegal and void.
[251B C] 8.
The power of the authorities specified in sub clause 1(1) of clause 12 of the Order to issue instructions and directions is limited to the subject matter of the 1982 Order.
Such directions and instructions cannot pertain to regulate matters which are not covered or dealt with by the 1982 Order.
Such directions and instructions cannot pertain to regulate matters which are not covered or dealt with by the 1982 Order.
[255F G] 9.
The State Government could not impose any restriction on the export of groundnut seed or oil to outside the State and further it could not issue directions for the compulsory levy at the specified price in view of the limitations placed on exercise of its powers under the notification dated June 9, 1978.
What it could not do directly could not be permitted to be done indirectly by virtue of clause 12 of the 1982 Order.
The scope and ambit of clause 12(2) of the 1982 Order did not authorise the State 247 Government to impose the restrictions in the Circular Order dated June 21, 1985.
[256B C]
