The State Government in pursuance of Section 4A of the Act formulated and published a scheme for grant of exemption from Sales Tax, to encourage capital investment and estab lishment of new industrial units which were established during the period from 1.10.1982 to 31.3.1985 and producing certain categories of goods.
Though the scheme referred to units established, it actually referred to the date of commencement of production.
The appellant, a concern engaged in the business of electric motors, pump sets and their parts, applied for the exemption.
The appellant claimed that the date of actual commencement of use of electricity for production was 4th December, 1982 and that was the actual date of commencement of production.
The same was endorsed by the General Manag ers, District Industrial Centers and the Assistant Engineer concerned, while recommending the application.
But the difficulty had arisen on account of a certificate attached to the application for exemption.
It was given by a firm which had entered into an agreement with the appellant for supply of machines and installation.
According to the cer tificate, trial production commenced on 4.12.1981.
The Division Level Committee, before which the application was filed, rejected it, saying that the date of trial production was really the date of commencement of production and it fell prior to 1.10.1982.
The appellant preferred a review claiming that trial production could not be treated as commencement of actual production.
The review application was also dismissed and it was held that the unit was estab lished before 1.10.1982 and, therefore, was not entitled to the exemption.
Thereafter, the appellant filed a writ peti tion before the High Court.
It was rejected.
274 Claiming that it is entitled to the exemption, the appellant has preferred this appeal, by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 The appellant is entitled to the exemption, in terms of the notification dated 30.9.1982.
The rejection of the application for exemption proceeds on a total misconcep tion of facts.
The conclusion that production was commenced on 4.12.1981 is not based on any evidence.
It does not affect the appellant 's claim even if there was any doubt about the trial production having taken place at all.
Wheth er trial was conducted by the other firm or the appellant itself, the fact remains that only trial production took place on 4.12.1981.
The mere fact that the certificate is disbelieved cannot lead to the conclusion that the appellant had produced the goods on 4.12.1981.
[279A D] 1.2 To go by Section 4A of the Act to determine the date of commencement of production, the date of purchase of raw material or the date on which electricity was brought into use would be relevant.
The appellant 's claim that it had manufactured goods by 30.9.1984 is not denied.
Production had, therefore, commenced before 31.3.1985.
There is no suggestion by the Department or the Committee, and there is no material to show that the appellant had purchased raw materials sufficient to carry out normal commercial produc tion at any time prior to 1.10.1982.
It is an admitted fact that the assessee was able to obtain electricity for use for commercial production only in November 1982.
This lends support to the appellant 's contention that the production could not have been effected by the assessee prior to that date.
In fact, this is a point on which emphasis is laid.
That being so, there is no iota of evidence or material on the basis of which the appellant 's claim that it had started production in December 1982 could have been rejected.
On the other hand, the recommendation and endorsement of the Gener al Manager, District Industries Centre also supports the appellant 's contention that it had started production on 4.12.1982 and this report was given after verifying the actual position on the spot.
[279D G] 2.
As regards the amount of exemption available to the appellant, it is a matter for consideration of the authori ties in respect of each of the years concerned in respect of which the claim is made for exemption.
[280B]
