The respondent had entered into contracts with Universi ties and other educational institutions for printing of question papers for them.
In the demand notes prepared the respondent gave the charges for printing, blocks, packing handling, delivery, postal and also value of paper and value of packing materials separately in the relevant assessment years.
On re examination the Assessing Officer noticed that printing charges and block making charges escaped assessment and brought them to tax.
In respect of subsequent assessment also claims for exemption towards printing charges and block making charges were disallowed.
The appeals preferred by the Respondents were dismissed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, who reached a finding that the contracts were only for supply of printed question paper as a finished product and that there was no scope to disintegrate cost of paper with separate charges for printing and block making though the bills were made out in a different way.
The respondent preferred appeals to Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that the respondent was assessa ble only on the sale value of paper and that printing and block making charges were not to be included in the assess ment.
Against the Tribunal 's Orders, the appellant preferred tax cases before the High Court.
The High Court dismissed the cases and held that the contract between the assessee and the Universities is of highly confidential nature and that the printing of question papers could be entrusted only to those in whom the institutions got the highest confi dence, and that the price paid for such confidentiality and trust is not 302 the price for the sale of goods.
The present appeals by Special Leave are against the High Court 's Orders.
In this appeal, it was argued on behalf of the appellant that printing charges and block making charges are includi ble in the assessable turnover of the Respondent.
On behalf of the Respondent it was argued that the contract entered into between her and the educational institutions was a contract of work and labour and in the performance of the contract, indicentally she had to sell paper to them and hence except to the extent of the cost of paper she was not liable to pay sales tax in respect of the other amounts receive by her.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.1 Contract for work in the execution of which goods are used may take one of three forms.
The contract may be for work to be done for remuneration and for supply of material used in the execution of works in which the use of materials is accessory or incidental to the execution of the work; or it may be a contract for work and use or supply of materials, though not accessory to the execution of the contract, is voluntary or gratuitous.
In the last class there is no sale because though property passed it did not pass for a price.
Whether a contract is of the first or the second class must depend upon the circumstances; if it is of the first, it is a composite contract for work and sale of goods; where it is of the second category, it is a contract for execution of work not involving sale of goods.
[307H; 308A B] 1.2 In each case the nature of the contract and the transaction must be found out.
And this is possible only when the intention of the parties is found out.
The fact that in the execution of a contract for work some materials are used and the property/goods so used, passes to the other party, the contractor undertaking to do the work will not necessarily be deemed, on that account, to sell the materi als.
Whether or not and which part of the job work relates to that depends on the nature of the transaction.
[316G H] 1.3 Normally, it may be that the goods prepared by the assessee which could not be exhibited for sale, would not be decisive of the matter and could in certain circumstances be sales liable to sales tax, but in all circumstances it depends upon the nature of the sale and the nature of the transaction involved.
Printing of question papers at the 303 behest of University or educational institutions is rather a delicate and confidential type of work and the price paid for supplying such printed question papers or printed mat ters entails primarily the confidence, and secondly the skill and to a very small measure the material.
If that is the position, it cannot be categorised as entailing sale of goods but it is rather a contract for works done.
[309G H; 310A] Government of A.P. vs Guntur Tobaccos Ltd., XVISTC 240 relied on.
Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. vs State of Kerala, [1984] ISCC 706 and P.T. Varghese vs State of Kerala, 37 STC 1171 approved.
Saraswati Printing Press vs CST, Eastern Division Nag put, X STC 286 and State of A.P. vs Sri Krishna Power Press, Vizianagaram, XI STC 498.
P.M. Venkatachalam Pillai vs State of Madras, XXIII STC 72; State of Orissa vs Ramnath Panda, XXVII STC 98; S.R.P. Works and Ruby Press vs State of A.P., XXX STC 195 and STO, Special Circle 11, Palghat vs I. V. Somasundaram, 33 STC 68.
A.S. Hameed Bharath Press vs State of Tamil Nadu, 54 STC 379; CST vs Uma Art Press, 56 STC 300; Chandra Bhan Gosain vs State of Orissa, XIV STC 766; CST vs M/s Sabarmati Reti Udvog Sanakari Mandali Ltd., 38 STC 203 and Marcel (Furri ers) Ltd. vs Tapper, referred to.
2.1 The primary difference between a contract for work or service and a contract for sale is that in the former there is in the person performing or rendering service no property in the thing produced as a whole, notwithstanding that a part or even the whole of the material used by him may have been his property.
Where the finished product supplied to a particular customer is not a commercial com modity in the sense that it cannot be sold in the market to any other person, the transaction is only a works contract.
[316E] 2.2 When the questions are set on a piece of paper and sent for printing, the University remains the owner until it divulges these to the intending candidates or the students.
But that is a matter which is relevant in the method of communication of the question to the candidates appearing in the examination.
The means employees for such communication entail use of mind, confidence, trust for the material, 304 paper and the technical skill of printing.
It is a combina tion of these various factors that results in printing the question papers and the payment made in the process entails a composite payment for all these.
Question papers as such, after being printed are neither available commercially nor available to any community commercial or otherwise save under specific circumstances for the candidates appearing at a particular time in an examination.
[308D E; 309C] Court Press Job Branch, Salem vs State of Tamil Nadu, 54 STC 382 and CST vs M.P.V. Ratna Fine Arts Printing Press, 56 STC 77 approved.
State of Madras vs Gannan Dunkerlay & Co. (Madras) Ltd., IX STC 353; Patnaik & Co. vs State of Orissa, XVI STC 364 and T.V. Sundaram lyengar & Sons vs State of Madras, 35 STC 24 referred to.
The contract in the present case is one, having regard to the nature of the job to be done and the confi dence reposed, for work to be done for remuneration and supply for paper was just incidental.
Hence, the entire price for the printed question papers would have been enti tled to be excluded from the taxable turnover, but since the demand notes prepared by the assessee showed the costs of paper separately, it appears that it has treated the supply of paper separately.
Except the materials supplied on the basis of such contract, the contract will continue to be a contract for work and labour and no liability to sales tax would arise in respect thereof.
[317A C]
