The appellants, were engaged in manufacture and sale of liquor, under licence granted to them under the U.P. Excise Act.
They installed vats in their Breweries ' premises for the storage of liquor.
The liquor stored in vats was bottled and sold under the supervision of officers of the Excise Department.
The Inspector of Weights and Measures issued notices to them for getting their vats verified, calibrated and stamped in accordance with the provisions of the U.P Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1959.
The appellants filed appeals against the notices issued by the Inspector on the ground that the provisions of the Act were not applica ble to the appellants ' undertaking, manufacturing alcohol.
The appeals were dismissed by the Respondent Controller of Weights and measures.
The appellants filed writ petitions before the High Court challenging the orders of the respond ents.
The High Court dismissed the petitions holding that the provisions of the Act and the Notifications issued thereun der were applicable to the manufacturers of liquor in the distillery, and the notices issued by the respondents for the calibration of the storage vats were legal and valid.
Aggrieved, the appellants filed appeals by special leave in this Court contending that the High Court committed error in holding that the storage vats were required to be cali brated under the provisions of the Act, that the provisions of the Act would apply if measures were used for transaction in trade and commerce, but keeping alcohol in storage vats did not amount to transactions in trade or commerce, and that unless the storage vats were used in transaction for trade and 376 commerce, the provisions of the Act were not attracted.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.1 Under the definition clause in section 2(jj) of the U.P. Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1959, the legislature has given an artificial extended meaning to the expression "use in transaction for trade or commerce".
Ac cording to the definition it means use for the purposes of determining or declaring the quantity of anything in terms of measurement of length or capacity or weight in or in connection with the cls.
(a) and (b) mentioned therein.
Clause (b) refers to any assessment of royalty; toll; duty or other dues.
Thus, according to the extended meaning, the provisions of the Act would be attracted if the assessment of royalty; toll; duty or dues is to be determined on the basis of the quantity of anything in terms of measurement of length, area, volume or weight.
[379C E] 1.2 There is no dispute that for the purposes of deter mining excise duty on the liquor produced by a manufacturer, the assessment is made on the basis of the volume of the liquor produced and sold.
Since volume of the liquor pro duced and stored in vats is connected with the assessment of excise duty, it is covered by the expression "use in trans action for trade or commerce".
[379E F] 1.3 Ordinarily, the storage of alcohol in vats by itself may not amount to transaction for trade or commerce but under the extended meaning of the expression under section 2(jj), even the storage of liquor in vats would be covered by the expression "use in transaction for trade or commerce" as volume of the liquor is necessary to be determined in con nection with the assessment of excise duty.
[379F G] 1.4 The alcohol stored in the storage vats is essential ly for the purpose of sale and there is no dispute that the appellants manufacture and store alcohol in storage vats for the purpose of sale, and the officers of the Excise Depart ment measure storage vats as prescribed by Rule 751 of the Excise Manual, Volume 1.
Since the volume of the storage vats is measured by the officers of the Excise Department, the provisions of the Act for the purpose of sale would be applicable to the storage vats also.
[380F G] By Notification dated 19.8.1961 the provisions of the Act were made applicable to an undertaking engaged in the manufacture and sale of alcohol with effect from October 1, 1961.
Any doubts about the 377 applicability of the provisions of the Act stood removed by the subsequent Notifications dated May 17, 1962 and July 18, 1967, making the provisions of the Act applicable to all the undertakings in so far as they relate to units of capacity in respect of those classes of undertakings to which the Act has been made applicable.
[380E, H; 381A] Therefore, having regard to the above facts the High Court was right in holding that the storage vats were cov ered by the provisions of the Act.
[381B]
