The assessee respondent in the appeals was engaged in the repairing and refilling of cotton bowls on the shafts which are used as part of calendering machine in the textile industry.
The cotton bowl is a shaft made of steel on which a thick layer of cotton is pasted and affixed.
It is used in the textile finishing industries as an essential part of the calendering machine.
In the course of its use the cotton pasted on the shaft loses its thickness and shape and after sometime it requires repairing and refilling.
The assessee moved an application under section 35 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 and the decision inter alia included the question whether the job of repairing and refilling of cotton bowl and the process involved therein amounted to "manufacture" or "sale" within the meaning of the Act.
The Commissioner of Sales Tax decided both these ques tions against the assessee, and the assessee preferred an appeal before the 422 Sales Tax Tribunal.
The Tribunal allowed the appeal in part.
It held that the process of repairing and refilling of cotton bowl of the customers did not amount to "manufacture" as defined under section 2(e i) of the Act.
It further held that such an activity of the assessee amounted to "sale" as defined under section 2(h) of the Act as amended by the U.P. Sales Tax Amendment and Validation Act, 1985.
The:Commissioner of Sales Tax preferred a revision to the High Court which went into the question whether a fur ther revision lay to the High Court.
It came to the conclu sion having regard to the scheme of the provisions contained in section 35 and the amendment made by the U.P. Act 12 of 1979, and the earlier Division Bench decision of the High Court in Indo Lube Refineries vs Sales Tax Officer, [1987] 66 S.T.C. 145 (All) that no further revision lay to the High Court from the order of the Tribunal.
The High Court accord ingly dismissed the revision.
The Commissioner appealed by special leave to this Court.
On the question: whether a revision shall lie to the High Court from the decision of the Commissioner under section 35 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act which has been the subject matter of an appeal before the Tribunal.
Dismissing the Appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The very language of section 35 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 which enjoins a decision by the Commis sioner envisages that the decision is quasi judicial or judicial and cannot be characterised as administrative.
The question is whether on the language of the section a revi sion is entertainable from the decision of the Commissioner which has been subjected to an appeal to the Tribunal.
In view of the language used specifically in the absence of a provision that such a revision will be maintainable such revision will not be.
[435C E] 2.
Sub section (5) of section 35 after the amendment states that the decision of the Commissioner of Sales Tax under this section shall, subject to an appeal to the Tribu nal, be final.
In view of the language of that section, it cannot contemplate a further revision to the High Court against a decision of the Tribunal.
[435E F] Indo Lube Refineries vs Sales Tax Officer Sector l.
Gorakhpur, [1987] 66 STC 145, approved.
423 3.
In the instant case, the right of appeal has been given under the Act not to any ordinary Court of the country under the Code of Civil Procedure but to the courts enumer ated under the Sales Tax Act, and the revision is contem plated under the provisions of the Sales Tax Act.
[436B] 4.
"Final" in section 35 means that it is final and under the Act subject to the limited procedure contemplated under the Act.
The expression 'final ' prima facie means that an order passed under the Act was conclusive and no further appeal lay.
A right to revision under the Act is a right given by the Act.
[436C D] Kydd vs Vatch Committee of City of Liverpool, , 331 32; Maung Ba Thaw vs Ma Pin, [1933 34] 61 LR Indian Appeals 158; South Asia Industries Pvt. Ltd. vs S.B. Sarup Singh, and M/s. Jetha Bai and Sons Jew and others vs M/s. Sunderdas Ratheni and others; , , referred to.
Revision to the High Court in special cases under section 11 is contemplated on the ground that the case involved a question of law.
[437B] 6.
Having regard to the scheme of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 manifested from the amendment, to make the Commis sioner 's decision final, subject to an appeal to the Tribu nal where the Tribunal is enjoined to hear such as appeal by a Bench of three members and where revision is provided only in special cases, it would be improper to interpret the spirit and reason of that law in such a way as to enjoin that a further revision lay to the High Court under section 11 of the Act.
The High Court was, therefore, right that no further revision in such a situation would lie to the High Court.
[437F G] 7.
This, however, does not eliminate correction by the High Court.
In an appropriate case by exercise of a writ of certioraris under Article 226 of the Constitution it exer cises superintendence over all Courts and Tribunals through out the territory.
[437G H] Re Gilmore 's Application, [1957] 1 All England Reports 796, referred to.
The intention of the legislature is a slippery phrase.
It is better to find out the intention of the legis lature from the words used by the natural meaning of the words and the spirit and reason of the law.
[437E] 424 Aron Salomon vs A. Salomon and Company Ltd., ; ,38; Lord Howard De Walden vs Inland Revenue Commis sioners,[1948] 2 All England Reports page 825.
referred to.
Cross Statutory Interpretation (Second Edn.) p. 21.
referred to.
