Under articles 4, 81 and 82 of the Articles of Associa tion of the respondent assessee company there was restric tion on the transfer of the shares of the company by the shareholders to the other members of the public.
These articles were deleted at an extraordinary general meeting of the Company held on 26th March, 1951 and consequently the shares of the Company acquired free transferability.
For the accounting year ending 31st March, 1951 the assessee company claimed tax benefit u/s 23A(1) on the ground that by reason of the fact that its shares had acquired free transferabili ty 'in the course of the previous year ' the company had become 'a company in which public are substantially inter ested '.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the claim of the asses see company by holding that while Explanation to Section 23A(1) requires that the shares should have been freely transferable by the shareholders to the other members of the public at every point of time during the previous year and transferability should be established by actual transfer; the Company satisfied the requirement only for four or five days of the previous year.
571 On appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner affirmed the view taken by the Income Tax Officer.
The assessee company appealed to the ,Tribunal against the decision of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
The Tribunal accepted the contention of the assessee and allowed the appeal.
A reference under Section 66(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1922 was made to the High Court at the instance of the Revenue which approved the view taken by the Appellate Tribunal, and held that the conditions required by the Explanation to Section 23A(1) were satisfied and the benefit thereunder was available to the assessee company.
In the appeal by Special leave by the Revenue to this Court on the question: whether the assessee had satisfied the requirements of the Explanation to Section 23A(1) of the Act, and was entitled to the tax benefit claimed.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, HELD: 1.
The Tribunal and the High Court went wrong in holding that the conditions required by the Explanation to Section 23A(1) were satisfied and the benefit under the said section was available to the assessee.
[575F] 2.
The assessee company could not be held to be a compa ny in which the public were substantially interested within the meaning of the Explanation to Section 23A(1) by reason of the fact that for a large part of the previous year the shares were not freely transferable, though they were so transferable at the end of the previous year.
[574G1 3.
The word 'Course ' ordinarily conveys the meaning of a continuous progress from one point to the next in time or space and conveys the idea of a period of time; duration and not a fixed point of time.
The expression 'in the course of such previous year ' would refer to the period commencing with the beginning of the previous year, and terminating with the end of the previous year.
Therefore, it would necessarily mean that free transferability of the shares by the holders to other members of the public should be present throughout the previous year.
This was not the position in the instant case, as the transferability was acquired only on the 26th of March, 1951.
[575D F] 4.
The Explanation to Section 23A(1) has reference to the point of time at two places: the first one has been stated as 'at the end of the 572 previous year ' and the second is 'in the course of such previous year '.
When the situation has been differently expressed the legislature must be taken to have intended to express a different intention.
[575B D] C.I.T.v.
Arco (P) Ltd. , referred to.
