The deceased was seen in flames on the first floor of her in laws house crying for help within five days of her marriage with the younger brother of the respondent.
While neighbours rushed to her rescue and extinguished the flames, the inmates of the house did not render any such help.
The respondent who was on the first floor was seen coming down the stairs.
The deceased succumbed to the burn injuries in the hospital on the same day.
In her dying declaration recorded by the Executive Magistrate, she stated that when she was preparing tea in the kitchen her saree caught fire accidently.
The parents of the deceased suspected foul play by her in laws and lodged a report with the police.
An investiga tion.of the case revealed that the deceased had met hostile atmosphere soon after her marriage.
The parents gave state ments that the in laws demanded unreasonable dowry which could not be complied with and that at the wedding ceremony they had behaved badly on the payment of insufficient dowry.
Her brother who had gone to bring her back home was not permitted to meet her.
The maid servant sent along with her was also sent back.
The respondent and his father were charge sheeted under section 306 read with section 34 I.P.C.
The trial court came to a prima facie conclusion that it was not a suicide but homici dal death.
Accordingly, a charge under section 302 I.P.C. was framed against the respondent.
The respondent 's father was, however, discharged.
561 The High Court dismissed the revision petition of the State against the respondent 's father.
Wile accepting the respondent 's revision it took the view that the fact that the accused was passive was of no consequence that it all depends upon the mental response and reaction of an individ ual whether he faces the risk and attempts to extinguish the flames or quietly watches the incident, that it does not show that the accused actively committed the act of burning or actively added the commission of suicide, and held that the charge under section 302 against him was not made out, and there was not even a case against him to frame charge under section 306 I.P.C.
The appellant, a social welfare organisation and the State preferred appeals to the Supreme Court.
On the question: Whether the High Court was justified in interfering with the charge framed by the trial court against the respondent, and whether it was necessary to put his father also on trial with the material on record.
Partly allowing the criminal appeals, HELD: 1.
The High Court was not justified in interfering with the charge framed by the trial court against the re spondent accused.
The trial court had considered every material on record in support of the charge framed.
It had also given reasons why a charge under section 302 I.P.C. was warranted against the respondent even though the police had charge sheeted him under section 306 I.P.C. Section 227 Cr.
P.C. which confers power to discharge an accused was designed to pre vent harassment to an innocent person by the arduous trial or the ordeal of prosecution.
The power has been entrusted to the Sessions Judge who brings to hear his knowledge and experience in criminal trials.
If he after hearing the parties frames a charge and also makes an order in support thereof, the law must be allowed to take its own course.
State of Bihar vs Ramesh Singh, ; and Union of India vs Prafulla Kumar Samal & Anr., ; at 234 35, referred to.
Self restraint on the part of the High Court should he the rule unless there is glaring injustice staring the Court in the face.
In the 562 instant case, it had discharged the respondent mainly rely ing on the dying declaration as if it has been conclusively proved to be the true and faithful version of the deceased.
It did not advert to the report of the Chemical Analyser in which he found kerosene residue on each and every garment of the deceased, and the post mortem report which indicated that besides burn injuries the deceased had sustained contu sions on the back shoulders which might have been caused with a blunt round object.
The events that preceded the death of the deceased also did not receive any considera tion.
The statements of brother, father and the maid servant of the deceased have been ignored.
The respondent was seen coming down from the staircase when the deceased was crying for help.
The manner in which he went on at that time, if true, did not bring him credit.
The approach made by the High Court, therefore, cannot be accepted.
[569C; 566H; 567A C] 4.
Although it was the moral obligation of respondent 's father as manager of the family to protect the deceased and safeguard her life and he had failed to perform that obliga tion, that by itself without anything more is not sufficient to frame a charge against him.
The discretion exercised by the trial court in discharging him was, therefore, correct.
[569E]
