The accused were convicted under section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced to death by the trial court.
The High Court con firmed their conviction and 510 sentence.
This Court dismissed their special leave peti tions/appeals and subsequent review petitions.
Their mercy petitions to the President and/ or Governor were also re jected.
Therefore, they approached this Court by way of Writ Petitions for setting aside the death sentence and substi tuting it by a sentence of life imprisonment on the ground of prolonged delay in the execution.
They contended that the dehumanising factor of prolonged delay with the mental torture in confinement in jail had rendered the execution unconstitutional.
In view of the conflicting decisions of this Court in T.V. Vaitheeswaran vs State of Tamil Nadu, and Sher Singh & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab, ; and observations in Javed Ahmed Abdul Hamid Pawala vs State of Maharashtra; , on the question of delay, the writ petitions were referred to a five judges Bench.
While a Bench of two Judges held in Vaitheeswaran 's case that two years delay in execution of the sentence after the judgment of the trial court would entitle the condemned prisoner to ask for commutation of his sentence of death to imprisonment for life, a three Judges ' Bench held, in Sher Singh 's case, that delay alone is not good enough for commu tation and two year 's rule could not be laid down in the cases of delay and that the Court in the context of the nature of the offence and delay, could consider the question of commutation of death sentence.
In Javed 's case this Court observed that where the condemned man had suffered more than two years and nine months and was repenting and there was nothing adverse against him in the jail records, this period of two years and nine months with the sentence of death heavily weighing on his mind, would entitle him for commuta tion of sentence of death into imprisonment for life.
The questions for consideration in these cases were: (a) whether prolonged delay in execution of the sentence of death rendered it inexecutable and entitled the accused to demand the alternate sentence of imprisonment for life, (b) what should be the starting point for computing this delay, (c) what were the rights of a condemned prisoner who had been sentenced to death but not executed, and (d) what could be the circumstances which should be considered along with the time that had been taken before the sentence is execut ed.
On October 11, 1988 this Court dismissed all the writ petitions, except Writ Petition No. 1566 of 1985, which was partly allowed and the sentence of death awarded to the accused was substituted by the sen 511 tence of imprisonment.
Over ruling the decision in Vaithees warans case that two years ' delay would make the sentence of death inexecutable, this Court held that undue long delay in execution of the sentence of death would entitle the condem ned person to approach this Court under Article 32 but this Court would only examine the nature of delay caused and circumstances ensued after sentence was finally confirmed by the judicial process and would have no jurisdiction to reopen the conclusions reached by the Court while finally maintaining the sentence of death, that this Court, might consider the question of inordinate delay in the light of all circumstances of the case to decide whether the execu tion of the sentence should be carried out or should be altered into imprisonment for life and that no fixed period of delay would be held to make the sentence of death inexe cutable.
Reasons for the judgment were to follow.
Giving the reasons for the Judgment, HELD: Majority: Oza, Murari Mohon Dutt, Singh and Sharma JJ.
Per Oza, J: 1.1 The delay which could be considered while consider ing the question of commutation of sentence of death into one of life imprisonment could only be from .the date the judgment by the apex Court is pronounced i.e when the judi cial process has come to an end.
[528E F] 1.2 The condemned prisoner knows that the judgment pronounced by the Sessions Court in the case of capital punishment is not final unless confirmed by the High Court.
All the delay upto the final judicial process is taken care of while the judgment is finally pronounced, and in a number of cases the time that has elapsed from the date of offence till the final decision, has weighed with the courts and lesser sentence awarded only on this account.
[526E, H; 527A] State of Uttar Pradesh vs Lalla Singh and others, ; Sadhu Singh vs State of U.P., AIR 1978 SC 1506; State of U.P.v.
Sahai, AIR 1981 SC 1442 and Joseph Peter vs State of Goa, Daman & Diu, ; , referred to.
Piare Dusadh and others vs The King Emperor, [1944] Federal Court Reports 61, referred to.
1.3 Practically, in all the High Courts a confirmation case i.e. a 512 case where the sentence of death is awarded by the Sessions Court and is pending in the High Court for confirmation in the High Court a time bound programme is provided in the rules and, except on some rare occasions, the High Court has disposed of a confirmation case between six months to one year.
At the Sessions level also, the normal procedure of the sessions trial is that it is taken up day today and it is expected that such a sessions case should be given top priority and it is expected that such trials must continue day to day till it is concluded.
Even in this Court, al though there is no specific rule, normally these matters are given top priority, and ordinarily, it is expected that these matters will be given top priority and shall be heard and disposed of as expeditiously as possible.
Therefore, as long as the matter is pending in any Court before any final adjudication, even the person who has been condemned or sentenced to death has a ray of hope.
Therefore, it could not be contended that he suffers that mental torture which a person suffers when he knows that he is to be hanged but waits for the Dooms day.
[527G H; 528C E] 1.4 After the matter is finally decided judicially, it is open to the person to approach the President or the Governor as the case may be with a mercy petition.
It is no doubt true that sometimes such mercy petition and review petitions are filed repeatedly causing delay, but a legiti mate remedy if available in law, a person is entitled to seek it and it would, therefore, be proper that if there has been undue and prolonged delay, that alone will be a matter attracting the jurisdiction of this Court, to consider the question of execution of the sentence.
However, while con sidering the question of delay after the final verdict is pronounced, the time spent on petitions for review and repeated mercy petitions at the instance of convicted person himself shall not be considered.
[528F, G; 529A] 1.5 The only delay which would be material for consider ation will be the delay in disposal of the mercy petitions or delays occurring at the instance of the Executive.
[529B] 1.6 When petitions under article 72 or 161 are received by the authorities concerned, it is expected that these peti tions shall be disposed of expeditiously.
[529C] T.V. Vaitheeswaran vs State of Tamil Nadu, , over ruled.
Sher Singh & Others vs The State of Punjab, ; , affirmed.
513 Javed Ahmed Abdul Hamid Pawala vs State of Maharashtra, ; , referred to.
2.1 A judgment of the Court can never be challenged under article 14 or 21 and, therefore, the judgment of the court awarding the sentence of death is not open to chal lenge as violating article 14 or 21.
[531G H] Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar and Ors.
vs State of Maharash tra and Anr.
; , and A.R. Antulay vs R.S. Nayak and another; , , relied on.
2.2 The only jurisdiction which could be sought to be exercised by a prisoner for infringement of his rights can be to challenge the subsequent events after the final judi cial verdict is pronounced and it is because of this that on the ground of long or inordinate delay a condemned prisoner could approach this Court.
[532A B] 2.3 It will not be open to this Court in exercise of jurisdiction under article 32 to go behind or to examine the final verdict reached by a competent court convicting and sentencing the condemned prisoner and even while considering the circumstances in order to reach a conclusion as to whether the inordinate delay coupled with subsequent circum stances could be held to be sufficient for coming to a conclusion that execution of the sentence of death will not be just and proper.
The nature of the offence, circumstances in which the offence was committed will have to be taken as found by the competent court while finally passing the verdict.
It may also be open to the court to examine or consider any circumstances after the final verdict was pronounced if it is considered relevant.
[532B D] 2.4 The question of improvement in the conduct of the prisoner after the final verdict also cannot be considered for coming to the conclusion whether the sentence could be altered on that ground also.
[532D] 3.1 Before 1955, sentence of death was the rule, the alternative sentence had to be explained by reasons.
There after, it was left to the discretion of the court to inflict either of the sentences and ultimately in the 1973 Code normal sentence is imprisonment for life except that for the special reasons to be recorded sentence of death could be passed.
This indicates a trend against sentence of death but this coupled with the decisions wherein sentence of death has been accepted as constitu 514 tional, show that although there is a shift from sentence of death to lesser sentence, there is a clear intention of maintaining this sentence to meet the ends of justice in appropriate cases.
Therefore, in spite of the divergent trends in the various parts of the world there is a consist ent thought of maintaining the sentence of death on the statute book for some offences and in certain circumstances where it may be thought necessary to award this extreme penalty.
It is awarded in the rarest of rare cases and this is the accepted position of law.
[524B D] Bachan Singh etc.
vs State of Punjab etc.
; , and Machhi Singh and others vs State of Punjab, referred to. 3.2 The circumstances in which the extreme penalty should be inflicted cannot be enumerated in view of complex situation in society and the possibilities in which the offence could be committed and the Legislature was, there fore, right in leaving it to the discretion of the judicial decision as to what should be the sentence in particular circumstances of the case.
But the Legislature has put a further rider that when the extreme penalty is inflicted it is necessary for the court to give special reasons thereof.
[525H; 526A B] 4.
The prisoner, who is sentenced and kept in jail custody under a warrant under section 366(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code is neither suffering rigorous imprisonment nor simple imprisonment.
In substance, he is in jail so that he is kept safe and protected with the purpose that he may be available for execution of the sentence which has been awarded.
Hence this will not amount to double jeopardy.
[53 1E] The life of the condemned prisoner in jail awaiting execution of sentence must be such which is not like a prisoner suffering the sentence, and it is essential that he must be kept safe.
[531F] Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration, ; re ferred to.
Per Jagannatha Shetty, J (Concurring): 5.
Article 21 demands that any procedure which takes away the life and liberty of persons must be reasonable, just and fair.
This procedural fairness is required to be observed at every stage and till the last breath of the life.
[546C] 515 Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 1 SCC 248; The State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali, ; ; Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab ; Mithu vs State of Punjab, ; and Sher Singh vs State of Punjab, [1983] 2 SCC 582, relied on.
6.1 The delay which is sought to be relied upon by the accused consists of two parts.
The first part covers the time taken in the judicial proceedings.
It is the time that the parties have spent for trial, appeal, further appeal and review.
The second part takes into fold the time utilized by the executive in the exercise of its prerogative clemency.
[547H; 548A B] 6.2 The time taken in the judicial proceedings by way of trial and appeal was for the benefit of the accused.
It was intended to ensure a fair trial to the accused and to avoid hurry up justice.
The time is spent in the public interest for proper administration of justice.
If there is inordinate delay in disposal of the case, the trial court while sen tencing or the appellate court while disposing of the appeal may consider the delay and the cause thereof along with other circumstances.
The court before sentencing is bound to hear the parties and take into account every circumstance for and against the accused.
If the court awards death sentence, notwithstanding the delay in disposal of the case, there cannot be a second look at the sentence, save by way of review.
[548F H] 6.3 There cannot be a second trial on the validity of sentence based on article 21.
The execution which is impugned is execution of a judgment and not apart from judgment.
If the judgment with the sentence awarded is valid and binding, it fails to be executed in accordance with law.
Therefore, if the delay in disposal of the case is not a mitigating circumstance for lesser sentence, it would be wholly inap propriate to fail back upon the same delay to impeach the execution.
[548H; 549A B] 6.4 If the delay in passing the sentence cannot render the execution unconstitutional, the delay subsequent thereof cannot also render it unconstitutional Much less any fixed period of delay could be held to make the sentence inexe cutable.
It would be arbitrary to fix any period of limita tion for execution on the ground that it would be a denial of fairness in procedure under Article 21.
[549B C] T.V. Vaitheeswaran vs State of Tamil Nadu, , over ruled.
516 6.5 The time taken by the executive for disposal of mercy petitions may depend upon the nature of the case and the scope of enquiry to be made.
It may also depend upon the number of mercy petitions submitted by or on behalf of the accused.
The Court, therefore, cannot prescribe a time limit for disposal of even mercy petitions.
However, Article 21 is relevant at all stages, and the principle that speedy trial is a part of one 's fundamental right to life and liberty is no less important for disposal of mercy petition.
[549E F] Hussainara Khatoon vs The State of Bihar, [1979] 3 SCR 169 and ; and Kadra Pahadiya vs State of Bihar, and relied on.
6.6 It has been universally recognised that a condemned person has to suffer a degree of mental torture even though there is no physical mistreatment and no primitive torture.
He may be provided with amenities of ordinary inmates in the prison.
But nobody could succeed in giving him peace of mind.
[549G H] Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration, ; re ferred to.
As between funeral fire and mental worry, it is the latter which is more devastating, for, funeral fire burns only the dead body while the mental worry burns the living one.
This mental torment may become acute when the judicial verdict is finally set against the accused.
Earlier to it, there was every reason for him to hope for acquittal.
That hope is extinguished after the final verdict.
If, therefore, there is inordinate delay in execution, the condemned pris oner is entitled to come to the court requesting to examine whether, it is just and fair to allow the sentence of death to be executed.
[550C] 6.7 The jurisdiction of the Court at this stage, is extremely limited.
The Court, while examining the matter, cannot take into account the time utilised in the judicial proceedings up to the final verdict.
The Court also cannot take into consideration the time taken for disposal of any petition filed by or on behalf of the accused either under article 226 or under article 32 of the Constitution after the final judgment affirming the conviction and sentence.
The Court may only consider whether there was undue long delay in disposing of mercy petition; whether the State was guilty of dilatory conduct and whether the delay was for no reason at all.
Though the inordinate delay may be a significant factor, but that by itself cannot render the execution uncon 517 stitutional.
Nor it can be divorced from the dastardly and diabolical circumstances of the crime itself.
[550D G] T.V. Vaitheeswaran vs State of Tamil Nadu, over ruled.
Sher Singh vs State of Punjab, ; affirmed.
Javed Ahmed Abdul Hamid Pawala vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Vivian Rodrick vs The State of West Bengal, ; ; State of U.P. vs Paras Nath Singh & Ors., ; Bihar vs Pashupati Singh, ; ; State of U.P. vs Suresh, at 643; State ofU. P. vs Sahai, ; Ram Adhar vs State of U.P., at 777; State of U.P. vs Lalla Singh ; Nachhittar Singh vs State of Punjab, ; Maghar Singh vs State of Punjab, ; Lajar Mashi vs State of U.P., ; Hussainara Khatoon vs The State of Bihar, [1979] 3 SCR 169 and ; and Kadra Pahadiya vs State of Bihar, and referred to.
6.8 If the Court wants to have a look at the grievance as to delay then there should not be any delay either in listing or in disposal of the matter.
The person who com plaints about the delay in the execution should not be put to further delay.
The matter, therefore, must be expedi tiously and on top priority basis, disposed of.
[550D E] 6.9 The contention that the accused should not be exe cuted if he has since improved is unavailable, since it seeks to substitute a new procedure which the Code does not provide for.
[551B] 7.
The judicial verdict pronounced by court in relation to a matter cannot be challenged on the ground that it violates one 's fundamental right.
The judgment of a court cannot be said to affect the fundamental rights of citizens.
[534A B] Naresh Sridhar Mirajkar, relied on.
It is now obligatory for the court to state reasons for the sentence awarded for the offence of murder.
The court cannot award death sentence without giving special reasons and only in exceptional cases and not in the usual run of murders.
There are just six offences carrying death penalty and that too as an alternate sentence.
[543E F] 518 9.
The criminal law always keeps pace with the develop ment of society.
The punishment which meets the unanimous approval in one generation, may rank as the most reprehensi ble form of cruelty in the next.
The representatives of the people are cognizant of the contemporary social needs.
The legislative amendments brought about from time to time are indicative of their awareness.
The penal law cannot remain isolated and untouched.
It will be profoundly influenced by philosophy prevailing.
Time may reach for the representa tives of people to consider that death penalty even as an alternate sentence for murder is uncalled for and unneces sary.
There is nothing in our Constitution to preclude them from deleting that alternate sentence.
[540C; 542H; 543H; 544A] Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, and Mithu vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to.
The practice prevailing over the years had been that a larger bench straightaway considers the correctness of and, if necessary, overrules the view of a smaller bench.
This practice has been held to be the crystallised rule of law in a recent decision by a special bench of seven judges of this Court.
This must be regarded as a final seal to the controversy, and it is now not open to any one to contend that a bench of two judges cannot be overruled by a bench of three judges.
[536H; 537E] A.R. Antulay vs
R.S. Nayak, AIR 2988 SC 1532, followed.
