Sub section (1) of section 245C of the Income Tax Act, 1961 entitles an assessee, at any stage of the case, to make an application to the Settlement Commission to have his case settled.
Sub section (1) of section 245D requires the Set tlement Commission, as and when such an application is made to call for a report from the Commissioner of Income Tax.
The first proviso thereto interdicts rejection of the appli cation under that sub section unless an opportunity has been given to the applicant of being heard.
The second proviso thereto provides that no application shall be proceeded with under that sub section if the Commissioner objects to the same on the ground that concealment of particulars of income on the part of the applicant or perpetration of fraud by him for evading any tax has been established or is likely to be established.
Sub section (IA) inserted in section 245D by the Finance Act, 1979 empowered the Settlement Commission to overrule the objections of the Commissioner.
The appellant made a composite application under section 245C of the Act for settlement of his assessments for the assessment years 1948 49 to 1975 76.
The Commissioner ob jected to the proposals under sec 336 tion 245D(1) for settlement for the years 1948 49 to 1959 60, but agreed to the settlement for the later years.
The Commission accordingly made an order an 24th August, 1977 rejecting the application for settlement for the years 1948 49 to 1959 60.
The appellant thereupon applied to the Commission to recall its order since the same had been made without furnishing him any opportunity of hearing.
That application was pending.
When sub section (IA) was inserted to section 245D, the appellant applied to the Commission to permit him to contest the objections of the Commissioner contending that these should be dealt with in accordance with the amended provisions of section 245D(IA).
On 7th August, 1987 the Settlement Commission accepted the first part of the contentions holding that the applicant was entitled to a re hearing since its order of 24th August, 1977 had been made in violation of the principles of natural justice and also express provision of section 245D(1) provi so, but rejected the second part of the submission on the view that the application for settlement would have to be disposed of in accordance with law which prevailed on 24th August, 1977.
It further held that since the Commissioner had objected only to some of the years under settlement the entire application would have to be rejected.
Allowing the appeal by Special Leave, HELD: 1.
It is necessary as a concomitant of the fulfil ment of natural justice that an applicant before the Settle ment Commission should be heard before his application under Section 245C of the Act is rejected.
The order made by the Commission on 24th August, 1977 in the instant case in violation of the principles of natural justice was, there fore, of no value.
If that is so, then the application made for settlement was still pending before the Commission when the amendment made by the Finance Act of 1979 came into effect and the said amendment being procedural, it would govern the pending proceedings and the Commission would have the power to overrule the objections of the Commissioner.
[342E; 341E, G H] Income Tax (Central), Calcutta vs B.N. Bhattachargee & Anr., [1979] Vol. ; M.S. Gill.
vs Chief Election Commissioner, ; ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 1 SCC 248; State of Orissa vs Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei & Ors., ; ; Ridge vs Baldwin, ; ; Anisminic Ltd. vs Foreign Compensation Commission, ; and Administrative Law, by H.W.R. Wade,5th Edn.
310 311 referred to.
2.1 The appellant had a right to be heard on the objections of the 337 Commissioner.
But no clear opportunity was given to him to make submissions in the sense to demonstrate that the Com missioner was not justified in making the objections and that the Commission should not accept or accede to the objections.
He should, therefore, be heard on the said objections.
[342D E].
2.2 Though for the relevant orders for the years for which the Commissioner had objected the concealment had been upheld in the appeal before the appropriate authorities, but in spite of this it may be possible for the appellant to demonstrate or to submit that in disclosure of concealed income for a spread over period settlement of the entire period should be allowed and not bifurcated in the manner sought to be suggested for the Commissioner 's objections.
This objection the appellant should have opportunity to make.
[342F G] 3.
In exercise of its power of judicial review of the decision of the Settlement Commission under Article 136 of the Constitution the Court is concerned with the legality of procedure followed and not with the validity of the order.
[342G] Chief Constable of the North Wales Police vs Evans, ; referred to.
The order dated 7th August, 1987 is set aside and the matter is remanded hack to the Settlement Commission to hear and dispose of the settlement petition in accordance with law.
[343A]
