In 1978 the State Government undertook the construction of the 'Bhavnagar City Water Supply Scheme ', and on 12th January, 1979, two contracts in respect thereof were awarded to respondent No. 1.
On 29th March, 1981, respondent No. 1 filed a civil suit with regard to measurements recorded by the Deputy Engineer and alleged underpayments.
On 14th June, 1981, he gave notice to the State Government and the peti tioner Board requesting for reference of the disputes to an arbitrator as provided for under clause 30 of the Agreement, and gave notice under section 8 of the calling upon the petitioner to concur in the appointment of one Shri G.G. Vaidhya.
On 6th August, 1981 respondent No. 1 filed a civil miscellaneous application for appointment of the said Shri G.G. Vaidhya as the sole arbitrator after withdrawing the civil suit.
The petitioner contended that the application was not maintainable.
The Civil Judge howev er appointed the said Shri G.G. Vaidhya as sole arbitrator.
The arbitrator gave an interim award holding that only two claims were not arbitrable and that the other claims were arbitrable.
The High Court having dismissed the appeal, a further appeal was filed in this Court.
This appeal was, however, disposed of by con 319 sent on 30th November, 1983 to the effect that a retired Secretary, Public Department who was at that time sitting member of the petitioner Board be appointed as the sole arbitrator to decide all the disputes between the parties.
On 8th July, 1985, this sole arbitrator made a lump sum award.
The Civil Judge directed that the decree be passed in terms of the award, rejecting the objections of the peti tioner.
The High Court by a common judgment dismissed the two appeals of the petitioner challenging the award.
In the appeals to this Court by special leave, it was contended: (1) that the arbitrator had committed an error of law in not deciding or disclosing his mind about the arbi trability of the claim or counterclaims, (2) in the award no basis or indication was given as to which claim was reject ed, and further what amount was awarded as claim and what amount towards element of interest, (3) there was an error apparent on the face of the award inasmuch as the basis on which interest had been awarded had not been disclosed and whether the interest has been awarded from the date of the institution of the proceedings, (4) that the granting of interest pendente lite was contrary to the decision of this Court and (5) that the non speaking award had resulted in great prejudice to the petitioner inasmuch as against the claim of Rs.1 lakh, Rs.57 lakhs had been awarded.
Disposing of the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1(a) There is a trend in modern times that reasons should be stated in the award though the question whether the reasons are necessary in ordinary arbitration awards is pending adjudication by the Constitution Bench of this Court.
Even if it be held that it is obligatory for the arbitrator to state reasons, it is not obligatory to give any detailed judgment.
[325E] 1(b) An award Of an arbitrator should be read reasonably as a whole to find out the implication and the meaning thereof.
Short intelligible indications of the grounds shall be discernible to find out the mind of the arbitrator for his action.
[325F] l(c) The Court does not sit in appeal over the award and review the reasons.
The Court can set aside the award only if it is apparent from the award that there is no evidence to support the conclusion or if the award is based upon any legal proposition which is erroneous.
[325G H] 320 Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. vs Indian Corbon Ltd., ; , referred to.
l(d) It is one thing to say that an award is unintelli gible and it is another thing to say that the award was bad because it was a nonspeaking award.
[326F] In the instant case, the arbitrator, in pursuance to the order of this Court had to decide which of the disputes were arbitrable and which were not.
Reading the award along with the preamble, it appears clear that the arbitrator had decided the arbitrability and the amount which he has award ed was on the points which were arbitrable.
In such circum stances it will not be in consonance with justice to refer the matter to the Constitution Bench or to await the dispos al of the point by the Constitution Bench.
[326B, G] 2.
Reasonableness as such of an award unless per se preposterous or absurd is not a matter for the Court to consider.
Appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily not a matter for the Court.
It is difficult to give an exact definition of the word 'reasonable '.
The word 'reasonable ' has in law, prima facie meaning of reasonable in regard to those circumstances of which the actor, called upon to act reasonably, knows or ought to know.
The award in the instant case cannot be condemned as unreasonable.
[327C D] Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs M/s. Jagan Nath Ashok Kumar & Anr., ; referred to.
The grant of interest pendente lite is however one infirmity in.
the award which is apparent on the face of the award which in the interest of justice should be corrected.
[327E] Executive Engineer (Irrigation) Balimela and Ors.
vs Abhaduta Jena & Ors., [1988] 1 SCC 418 and State of Orissa & Ors.
vs Construction India, [1987] Supp.
SCC 709 referred to.
In the instant case, April 2, 1984 is the date of the reference to arbitration, on August 22, 1984 the arbitrator entered upon the reference.
July 8, 1985 is the date of the award and July 19, 1985 the date of publication of the award.
The latter date should be taken as the date of the award.
Since the reference to arbitration was made after the commencement of the the arbitrator under section 3(1)(a) of the said Act was entitled to award inter est from August 6, 321 1981 till August 21, 1984.
He could not have awarded inter est for the period from August 22, 1984 till the date of publication of the award viz. July 19, 1985.
[327G H; 328A] 4.
So far as interest for the period from the date of the award (July 19, 1985) till the date of the decree is concerned, interest should be allowed for this period, on the principle that this Court can, once proceeding under sections 15 to 17 are initiated, grant interest pending the litigation before it, i.e. from the date of the award to the date of the decree.
It may be doubtful whether this can be done ln cases arising before the in view of the restricted scope of section 29 of the .
[328D E] 5.
The interest awarded by the arbitrator for the period from August 22, 1984 till the date of award is deleted; and the interest on the principal sum is confined to 9% from August 6, 1981 till August 21, 1984.
However, exercising powers under section 3 of the and section 29 of the , the Court directed that the principal sum or unpaid part thereof should carry interest at the same rate from the date of the award (July 19, 1985) till the date of actual payment.
[329A B]
