Clause (iii) of Section 14(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1922 exempts interest and dividends derived by a cooperative society from its investments with any other cooperative society, from payment of tax.
The respondent assessee, an apex body having as its members various District Co operative Societies, District, Co operative Banks and some Government and other co opera tive Societies within the State of U.P., was appointed as one of the wholesale dealers under clause (1) of the agency agreement entered into with a co operative sugar factory for distribution of sugar produced by the latter during the crushing seasons 1958 59 and 1959 60.
Simultaneously with the execution of the agreement it furnished a cash security of Rs. Two lakhs to the manufacturer under clause (20) of the said agreement for the period of two years, which was to carry interest at the rate of 4 1/2 per cent per annum.
In pursuance of a separate agreement entered into be tween it and the State Government the assessee undertook to arrange for lifting, handling, storing and distributing to the retailers the stock of sugar released by the Government of India.
In an yet another agreement entered into between the assessee and member societies the latter undertook to work as agents for the wholesale distribution of sugar in their districts.
Since they were not in a position to ar range the entire finance for the business the assessee agreed to arrange for the same.
The money thus invested in the business was to earn interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum.
587 In the accounting year in question the Income Tax Offi cer rejected the claim of the assessee for deduction, on ground of statutory exemption under section 14(3) of the Act, of the amounts of interest received respectively from the cooperative Sugar factory on the cash security deposit and from member societies on temporary loans advanced for fi nancing business.
The Assistant Appellate Commissioner rejected assessee 's contention.
The Appellate Tribunal rejecting the former claim took the view that the amount of interest received on cash security furnished by the assessee for carrying on the sugar agency business could not be said to be interest from securities or investments as understood under section 14(3)(iii) of the Act.
Rejecting the latter claim it held that the amount on which interest had been earned did not constitute investment and, therefore, was not cov ered by section 14(3)(iii) of the Act.
But the High Court accept ed the claim in regard to both the amounts.
Disposing of the appeal by the Revenue, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The Tribunal did not err in holding that the amount received as interest on the cash security from the cooperative sugar factory was not covered under section 14(3)(iii) of the Income Tax Act, 1922.
[591B] 1.2 The High Court failed to take note of the fact that the sum of Rs. Two lakhs had been given a security and the arrangement entered into between the assessee and the coop erative sugar factory stipulated payment of interest of 4 1/2 per cent per annum.
This sum was repayable to him on the expiry of the period fixed in the agreement after adjustment of accounts.
It could not, therefore, be said to be an investment.
The amount of interest earned thereon thus represented only interest on the security deposit and could not be mixed up with the other sums received by the assessee in course of carrying on its business.
It was not available to be exempted.
[589G; 590F] 2.1 The amount of interest received by the assessee on advances to its members was income from sugar business and was, therefore, exempt under section 14(3)(iii) of the Act.
[595B] 2.2 The money provided by the assessee was by way of investment with other cooperative societies.
If this money had not been made available the business as stipulated under the scheme could not have been carried out and perhaps there would have been no business.
This funding to other coopera tive societies was necessary to generate profits, and under the agreement interest has been earned.
The High Court was, 588 therefore, right in its conclusion that no tax was payable on this income from sugar business.
[594F G]
