The respondent firm manufactured patent and proprietary (P & P) medicines failing under T.I. 14E and also pharmaco poeial preparations falling under T.I. 68 of the Central Excise Tariff of an aggregate value of Rs.20,59,338.60 and cleared the same during the period 1.4.79 to 31.3.80 without payment of duty, availing the benefit of exemption of excise duty under Notification No. 80 of 1980.
The respondent also cleared, during the period from 1st April, 1980 to 29th October, 1980 (P & P) medicines failing under T.I.14E valued at Rs.4,32,050.09.
The respondent filed a declaration for exemption, under Notification No. 71 of 1978 dated 1.3.1978, and furnished particulars of only the value of P & P medicines manufac tured and cleared during the preceding financial year 1979 80 and did not furnish the particulars of the value of the goods under Tariff Item 68 during that financial year.
The manufacturer also did not file any declaration under Notifi cation No. 111 of 1978 dated 9.5.1978, claiming exemption from the licensing control.
However, on July 30, 1980 the firm filed a classification list in respect of P & P medi cines claiming exemption under Notification No. 80/80.
The appellant issued a show cause notice to the respond ent to explain as to why excise duty in respect of patent and proprietary medicines manufactured and cleared by it should not be demanded under proviso (a) to Rule 10(1) of the Central Excise Rules and why penalty should not be imposed under Rule 173Q of the Central Excise Rule, 1944 for having cleared the goods without payment of duty in contra vention of Rule 173Q(a) and (d) of the Rules.
On receipt of reply, the appellant held the respondent to be ineligible for the benefit of the 712 two notifications and demanded duty in respect of the goods cleared by them for the period 1.4.1980 to 29.10.80.
He also held that in view of the respondent 's failure to reveal correct position, the firm was liable to pay the duty, and that the time limit for the recovery of the duty under Rule 10 (Section 11A) of the Central Excise Rules would run for five years.
The respondent filed an appeal before the Tribunal contending that the demand for the period beyond six months from the receipt of the show cause notice was time barred inasmuch as there was no suppression or mis statement of facts by the appellant with a view to evade payment of duty.
The Revenue 's plea was that there was suppression and/or misdeclaration and/or wrong information furnished in the declaration itself.
Hence the appeal by the Revenue.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 In order to make the demand for duty sustain able beyond a period of six months and up to a period of 5 years, in view of the proviso to sub section
11A of the Act, it has to be established that the duty of excise had not been levied or paid or short levied or short paid, or erroneously refunded by reasons of either fraud or collusion or wilful mis statement or suppression of facts or contravention of any provision of the Act or Rules made thereunder, with intent to evade payment of duty.
Something positive other than mere inaction or failure on the part of the manufactur er or producer or conscious or deliberate withholding of information when the manufacturer knew otherwise, is re quired before it is saddled with any liability, beyond the period of six months.
[717A C] 1.2 Whether in a particular set of facts and circum stances there was any fraud or collusion or wilful mis statement or suppression or contravention of any provision of any Act, is a question of fact depending upon the facts and circumstances of a particular case.
[717C D] In the instant case the assessee declared the goods on the basis of their belief of the interpretation of the provisions of the law that the exempted goods were not required to be included and these did not include the value of the exempted goods which the assessee manufactured at the relevant time.
The Tribunal found that that the explanation was plausible, and also noted that the Department had full knowledge of the facts, about manufacture of all the goods manufactured by the respondent when the declaration was filed by the respondent.
The 713 respondent did not include the value of the product other than those falling under Tariff Item 14E manufactured by the respondent and this was in the knowledge, according to the Tribunal, of the authorities.
The findings of the Tribunal have not been challenged before this Court.
[717D F] The Tribunal also found that the facts of case did not warrant any inference of fraud.
[717D] Having regard to these, and in view of the requirements of section 11A of the Act, the claim had to he limited to a period of six months, prior to the date of issue of show cause notice.
The Tribunal was right in its conclusion.
[717G]
