The prospectus for the year 1988/89, for admission in the evening classes of the Three Year LL.B. Degree Course conducted by the Department of Laws of the Punjab Universi ty, prescribed that admission to evening classes was open only to regular employees of Government/ Semi Government institutions/affiliated Colleges/Statutory Corporations and Government Companies and that a candidate should attach No Objection/Permission letter from his employer with his application for admission.
Out of the 150 seats available in the evening classes, 64 were reserved for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, backward classes, physically handicapped persons, outstanding sportsmen and defence personnel and the remaining 86 were reserved for regular employees of Govern ment/Semi Government institutions etc.
, as mentioned in the aforesaid rule for admission.
690 The two appellants, one employed in a Limited Company, a joint venture with an Undertaking of the State Government and the other working as a temporary employee in a State Government office, applied for admission in the evening classes with 'No Objection Certificates ' from their employ ees.
Both were interviewed but were not.
selected, although their positions in the merit list were 29 and 19 respective ly, on the ground that wile one of the appellants was an employee of a Public Limited Company and did not fall within the exclusive categories as mentioned in the impugned rule, the other was only a temporary employee.
Both the appellants filed writ petitions in the High Court, challenging the validity of the impugned rule.
Peti tions were also filed by five other refused candidates.
It was contended that the impugned rule was violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
While upholding the validity of the impugned rule, the High Court held that Government employees had protection of article 311 of the Constitution which non Govern ment employees did not have and that the employees of the Semi Government institutions were also on the same footing.
Hence the two appellants filed appeals in this Court.
In the counter affidavit filed in this Court the re spondents sought to justify the exclusion of private employ ees, restricting admission to evening classes only to the Government employees and similar other institutions on the grounds of production of bogus certificates of employment from private employers and imparting of legal education to the employees of the Government/Semi Government and other institutions as in public interest.
It was also contended that a candidate should have an assured tenure of employment likely to continue for three years and that, as far as possible, there should be no possibility of wastage of a seat.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.1 Article 14 forbids legislation, but does not forbid reasonable classification.
Whether a classification is a permissible classification under article 14 or not, two conditions must be satisfied, namely, (1) that the classifi cation must be rounded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group, and (2) that the differ entia must have a rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
[697F] 691 1.2 In considering the reasonableness of classification from the point of view of article 14 of the Constitution, the Court has to consider the objective for such classification.
If the objective be illogical, unfair and unjust, necessari ly the classification will have to be held as unreasonable.
[703C D] 1.3 No doubt, a classification need not be made with mathematical precision but, if there be little or no differ ence between the persons or things which have been grouped together and those left out of the group, then the classifi cation cannot be said to be a reasonable one.
[700C] 1.4 Surrounding circumstances may be taken into consid eration in support of the constitutionality of a law which is otherwise hostile or discriminatory in nature.
But the circumstances must be such as to justify the discriminatory treatment or the classification subserving the object sought to be achieved.
[700G H] Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar, ; , relied on.
1.5 A classification by the identification of sources most not be arbitrary but should be on a reasonable basis having a nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
[704H;705A4] Chitra Ghosh vs Union of India, ; and D.N. Chanchala vs State of Mysore, [1971] Supp.
SCR 608 relied on.
1.6 In the instant case, the objective of starting the evening classes was to accommodate in the evening classes employees in general including private employees who were unable to attend morning classes because of their employ ment.
However, in framing the impugned rule, the respondents have deviated from its objective for starting the evening classes.
[699F G] The classification of the employees of Government/Semi Government institutions etc.
by the impugned rule for the purpose of admission in the evening classes of Three Year LL.B. Degree Course to the exclusion of all other employees, is unreasonable and unjust, as it does not subserve any fair and logical objective.
[703D] The Government and public sector employees cannot be equated with Government undertaking and companies.
The classification of 692 Government undertakings and companies may, in certain cir cumstances, be a reasonable classification satisfying the tests laid down but the employees of Government/Semi Govern ment institutions etc., as mentioned in the impugned rule, cannot be held to constitute a valid classification for the purpose of admission to evening classes of Three years LL.B. Degree Course.
[703F G] Hindustan Paper Corpn.
Ltd. vs Government of Kerala, ; , distinguished.
1.7 The Government employees or the employees of Semi Government and other institutions cannot stand on a differ ent footing from the employees of private concerns, insofar as the question of admission to evening classes is con cerned.
[699H] Though the service conditions of employees of Govern ment/SemiGovernment institutions etc.
are different, and they may have greater security of service, that hardly matters for the purpose of admission in the evening classes.
The test is whether both the employees of private establish ments and the employees of Government/Semi Government insti tutions etc.
are equally in a disadvantageous position in attending morning classes.
There can be no doubt that both of them stand on an equal footing and there is no difference between these two classes of employees in that regard.
To exclude the employees of private establishments will not, therefore, satisfy the test of intelligible differentia that distinguishes the employees of Government/Semi Government institutions etc., grouped together from the employees of private establishments.
[700A C] 1.8 Though an educational institution is entitled to identify sources from which admission will be made in such institution, there is no difference between identification of the sources and a classification.
If any source is speci fied, such source must also satisfy the test of reasonable classification and also that it has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
The sources must be clas sified on reasonable basis, that is to say, it cannot be classified arbitrarily and unreasonably.
The impugned rule does not satisfy the test laid down in this regard.
[704D, F] Chitra Ghosh vs Union of India, ; and D.N. Chanchala vs State of Mysore, [1971] Supp.
SCR 608, relied on.
1.9 The circumstances relied on by the respondents, namely, the 693 possibility of production by the candidates of bogus certif icates and insecurity of their services are not such circum stances as will justify the exclusion of the employees of private establishments from the evening classes.
[700H; 701A] Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice section R. Tendolkar, ; , explained.
1.10 The exclusion of employees of private establish ments cannot also be justified on administrative grounds.
The respondents have not placed any material before the High Court or in this Court as to in how many cases they had come across bogus certificates produced by private employees during the time the admission to evening classes was open also to private employees.
It may be that there were one or two cases of production of bogus certificates, but that cannot be a ground for the exclusion of all private employ ees from the benefit of getting legal education in the evening classes.
[701E F] Pannalal Binjraj vs Union of India, ; distin guished 1.11 There is no material to indicate that by the ex pression "regular employees" it is intended to include only those employees who will have an assured tenure of service for three years, that is to say, co extensive with the period of the Three Year LL.B. Degree Course.
The expression "regular employees", normally means bona fide employees.
Such bona fide employees may be permanent or temporary.
All that the University can insist is that one should be a bona fide employee and if there be materials to show that a candidate for admission in the evening classes is a bona fide employee, the University cannot further insist on an assured tenure of service of such an employee for a period of three years.
The reason for exclusion of private employ ees on the ground that there may not be an assured tenure of employment likely to continue for three years, therefore, not only does not stand scrutiny but is also unfair and unjust and cannot form the basis of such an exclusion.
[702A C] 1.12 It is difficult to understand the logic of the rule restricting admission in the evening classes to employees of Government/SemiGovernment institutions etc.
on the plea that such employees require legal education in public interest.
It may be that certain sections of Government employees require legal education hut, surely Government employees in general do not require legal education.
Certain private sector employees may also require legal education in the interest of the 694 establishments of which they are employees.
It cannot, therefore, be laid down that only Government employees require legal education and not private employees.
[703B] Jolly vs State of Kerala, AIR 1974 Kerala 178, approved.
The impugned rule, having made a classification which cannot be justified on any reasonable basis, must be held to be discriminatory and violative of article 14 of the Constitu tion.
[705B] 2.
It is not possible to bring the impugned rule in conformity with the provision of article 14 by putting a full stop after the words "regular employees" and striking down remaining part of the impugned rule, so as to read "Admis sion to evening classes is open only to regular employees".
Prima facie, the part which is sought to be retained is not severable from the remaining part of the rule.
The invalid portion is inextricably mixed up with the valid portion of the rule and, accordingly, the entire rule requires to be struck down.
[705G H] R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs Union of India, ; , relied on.
B. Prabhakar Rao vs State of Andhra Pradesh, [1985] Supp.
SCC 432, distinguished.
Article 15(4) does not contemplate to reserve all the seats or the majority of the seats in an educational insti tution at the cost of the rest of the society.
The same principle should also apply with equal force in the case of cent percent reservation of seats in educational institu tions for a certain class of persons to the exclusion of meritorious candidates.
[707A B] M.R. Balaji vs State of Mysore, [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 439; Pradeep Jain vs Union of India, ; and Nida marti Maheshkumar vs State of Maharashtra, ; , relied on.
In the instant case, the respondents have reserved 64 seats out of 150 seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, backward classes etc.
Out of the remaining 86 seats, reservation of seats for regular or bona fide employees for admission to evening classes should, in no event, exceed the limit of 50 per cent.
The admission to the remaining 43 seats will be open to the general candidates on merit basis.
Thus, while the respondents will be at liberty to reserve seats for regular or bona fide 695 employees for admission to evening classes, such reservation should not exceed SO per cent after deducting the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, backward classes etc.
[709B C] 4.
The impugned rule is discriminatory and violative of article 14 of the Constitution and is accordingly struck down as invalid.
The refusal by the respondents to admit the appellants in the evening classes of the Three Years LL.B. degree course was illegal.
The appellants are, therefore, entitled to he admitted in the evening classes.
However, the striking down of the impugned rule should not in any manner whatsoever disturb the admissions already made for the session 1988 89.
The respondents should admit the appellants in the second semester which has commenced from January, 1989 and allow them to complete the Three Year LL.B. degree course, if not otherwise ineligible an the ground of unsat isfactory academic performance.
The seats allocated to the appellants will be in addition to the normal intake of students in the college.
[710D F] Ajay Hasia vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, ; , relied on.
