The appellant contractor undertook construction of certain timebound projects.
The work, however, could not be completed within the scheduled time due to various reasons.
The contract was consequently cancelled at appellant 's risk.
The disputes arising therefrom between the parties were referred to the arbitrator named in the agreement.
He made three awards allowing claim Nos. 1(e), 2, 5, 7(a), 7(b), 7(c), 13, 14, and 15 preferred by the appellant aggregating to Rs.31.15 lakhs under the several heads mentioned therein.
Upon these awards, an application was made before the court for passing decrees in terms thereof.
Objections were also filed.
The trial court took the view that it could not adjudi cate upon the justification for the conclusions arrived at by the arbitrator unless such awards were the result of corruption, fraud or there were errors apparent on the face of the award, that it was not necessary for the arbitrator to give reasons for his award, that there was no jurisdic tion to investigate into the merits of the case and to examine the documentary and oral evidence for the purpose of finding out whether or not the arbitrator had committed an error of law or fact, that the arbitrator had not incorpo rated in the award any materials for his conclusion nor did he incorporate the terms of the contract between the par ties.
Under such circumstances the award could not be set aside, especially when there was no error apparent on the face of it and there was nothing to show that the arbitrator had misconducted the proceedings or that the award had been improperly procured.
In appeal before the High Court it was contended for the respon 666 dents that there were errors apparent on the face of the award, that the arbitrator had misconducted himself and travelled beyond the terms of the contract, and that the claims allowed were beyond and contrary to the agreement between the parties, whereas for the appellants it was contended that the award was a non speaking award and, therefore, it was not open to the court to go into the correctness or reasonableness of the award.
The High Court set out the claims, noted the rival contentious and referred to the various clauses and the conditions of the contract, though the contract itself was made no part of the award, and concluded that there were errors apparent on the face of the award that the arbitrator had misconducted himself and travelled beyond his power.
In the appeals by special leave, it was contended that the High Court had exceeded its jurisdiction in acting in the manner it did on the aforesaid aspects.
Allowing the appeals by special leave, HELD: 1.1 The High Court fell into an error in deciding the question on interpretation of the contract.
It had no jurisdiction to examine the different items awarded clause by clause by the arbitrator and to hold that under the contract these were not sustainable in the facts found by the arbitrator.
[688D,E] 1.2 Once there is no dispute as to the contract, what is the interpretation of that contract, is a matter for the arbitrator and on which the court cannot substitute its own decision.
So also, the court cannot substitute the decision of the arbitrator, as to what was meant by the contract, once a dispute under the contract is conceded to the arbi trator.
[687B,D] 1.3 In the instant case the court had examined the different claims not to find out whether these claims were within the disputes referable to the arbitrator, but to find out whether in arriving at the decision, the arbitrator had acted correctly or incorrectly.
This the court had no juris diction to do, namely, substitution of its own evaluation of the conclusion of law or fact to come to the conclusion that the arbitrator had acted contrary to the bargain between the parties.
Whether a particular amount was liable to be paid or damages liable to be sustained, was a decision within the competency of the arbitrator.
By purporting to construe the contract the court could not take upon itself 667 the burden of saying that this was contrary to the contract and, as such, beyond jurisdiction.
[686D F] 1.4 Furthermore, if on a view taken of a contract, the decision of the arbitrator on certain amounts awarded, is a possible view though perhaps not the only correct view, the award cannot be examined by the court in the manner done by the High Court in the instant case.
[688D] F.R. Absalom, Ltd. vs Great Western (London) Garden Village Society, Ltd., ; Heyman & Anr.
vs Darwins, Ltd. and Attorney General for Manito ba vs Kelly & Ors., distinguished.
State of Kerala vs Poulose, and State of Kerala vs Raveendranathan, partly over ruled.
2.1 Where there are errors apparent on the face of the award it can only be set aside if in the award there is any proposition of law which is apparent on the face of the award, namely, in the award itself or any document incorpo rated in the award.
But where a specific question is re ferred, the award is not liable to be set aside on the ground of an error on the face of the award even if the answer to the question involves an erroneous decision on a point of law.
[684D E] Champsey Bhara & Co. vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd. (L 1922 1A 324; M/s Alopi Parshad & Sons, Ltd. vs The Union of India, ; Jivarajbhai Ujamshi Sheth & Ors.
vs Chintamanrao Balaji & Ors., ; and Upper Ganges Valley Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. vs U.P. Electricity Board.
; , referred to.
2.2 An award can also be set aside if the arbitrator had misconducted himself or the proceedings.
One of the miscon ducts could be the decision by the arbitrator on a matter which is not included in the agreement or reference.
But in such a case one has to determine the distinction between an error within the jurisdiction and an error in excess of the jurisdiction.
[686C] Anisminic Ltd. vs Foreign Compensation Commission, ; ; Regina vs Noseda, Field, Knight & Fitzpat rick, and Halsoury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
para 622 referred tO. 668 2.3 An award may be remitted or set aside on the ground that the arbitrator in making it had exceeded his jurisdic tion and evidence of matters not appearing on the face of it will be admitted in order to establish whether the jurisdic tion had been exceeded or not, be because the nature of the dispute is something which has to be determined outside the award whatever might be said about it in the award or by the arbitrator.
[685H; 686A B] Christopher Brown Ltd. vs Genossenschaft Oesterreigh ischer etc.
, ; Dalmia Dairy Industries Ltd. vs National Bank of Pakistan, and Russell on The Law of Arbitration, 20th Edn.
427 referred to.
2.4 An arbitrator acting beyond his jurisdiction, howev er, is a different ground from the error apparent of the face of the award.
In the former case the court can look into the arbitration agreement but in the latter it cannot unless the agreement was incorporated or recited in the award.
In the instant case the contract in question was not incorporated or referred to in the award.
[686B C] 2.5 However, there is a distinction between disputes as to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator and the disputes as to in what way that jurisdiction should be exercised There may be a conflict as to the power of the arbitrator to grant a particular remedy.
The nature of the dispute has to be determined.
[686F G] Commercial Arbitration by Sir M.J. Mustill & Steward G. Soyd page 84, referred to.
3.1 The court look into the reasoning only in a speak ing award.
It is not open to the court to probe the mental process of the arbitrator and speculate, where no reasons are given by the arbitrator, as to what impelled the arbi trator to arrive at his conclusion.
[683G H] 3.2 Furthermore, in any event, reasonableness of the reasons given by the arbitrator, cannot be challenged.
Appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is never a matter which the court questions and considers.
If the parties have selected their own forum, the deciding forum must be conced ed the power of appraisement of the evidence.
The arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the quantity of evidence and it will not be for the court to take upon itself the task of being a judge on the evidence before the arbitrator.
[684B C] 669 3.3 In the instant case, the award was not a speaking award.
The arbitrator had merely set out the claims and given the history of the claims and then awarded certain amount.
He had not spoken his mind indicating why he had done what he had done; he had narrated only how he came to make the award.
In the absence of any reasons for making the award, it was not open to the court to interfere with the award.
[684A B] Hindustan Steel Works .Construction Ltd. vs C. Rajasek har Rao, [1987] 4 SCC 93 and Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs M/s Jagan Nath Ashok Kumar & Anr., ; referred to.
