For the assessment year 1959 60, the Income Tax Officer disallowed the loss claimed by the Respondent assessee, on the sale of certain shares, to its allied concern, on the grounds that the sale price was much below the market quota tion and that the motive behind the transactions was to set off the loss against the profits and hence the transactions were not genuine.
On appeal by the assessee the Appellate Assistant Com missioner held that the losses on both the transactions cannot be held to be business losses.
ion a further appeal by the assessee, the Tribunal observed that there was nothing to show that the transac tions in question had anything to do with the control of the companies concerned.
It also relied upon the circumstance that the sales were at the market rates or going rates and held that there was no question of making a bogus loss.
Based on these facts and circumstances, the Tribunal held that the losses in respect of the sales of the shares in question, were liable to be allowed as business losses.
639 The Commissioner of Income Tax made an application to the Tribunal for referring certain questions for the deter mination of the High Court.
The Tribunal declined to refer the questions on the ground that they were not questions of law, which deserved to be referred to the Court for determi nation.
This order of the Tribunal was confirmed by the High Court.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the said order of the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Where the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the loss incurred by the assessee in the sale of shares held by it was a trading loss and it is not the case of the Department that in arriving at its decision the Tribunal had taken into consideration any irrelevant material or failed to take into consideration any relevant material, there is no room for interference by the court.
It is well settled that the Tribunal is the final fact finding body.
The ques tions whether a particular loss is a trading loss or a capital loss and whether the loss is genuine or bogus are primarily questions which have to be determined on the appreciation of facts.
The findings of the Tribunal on these questions are not liable to be interfered with unless the Tribunal has taken into consideration any irrelevant materi al or has failed to take into consideration any relevant material or the conclusion arrived at by the Tribunal is perverse in the sense that no reasonable person on the basis of the facts before the Tribunal could have come to the conclusion to which the Tribunal has come.
[645B D] C.I.T., Bihar & Orissa vs Dalmia Jain & Co. Ltd., , relied on.
It is equally well settled that the decision of the Tribunal has not to be scrutinised sentence by sentence merely to find out whether all facts have been set out in detail by the Tribunal or whether some incidental fact which appears on record has not been noticed by the Tribunal in its judgment.
If the court, on a fair reading of the judg ment of the Tribunal, finds that it has taken into account all relevant material and has not taken into account any irrelevant or impermissible material in basing its conclu sions, the decision of the Tribunal is not liable to be interfered with, unless, of 640 course, the conclusions arrived at by the Tribunal are perverse [645DF] 3.
In the instant case, the Tribunal has taken note of all the relevant circumstances which appear on record and which were referred to by the Departmental Representatives before the Tribunal.
It has not taken into account any material which could he said to be irrelevant in arriving at its conclusions.
In considering whether the shares of Bharat Starch & Chemicals Ltd. and Greaves Cotton & Co. Ltd. were held by the assessee as stock in trade or as capital, the Tribunal has taken into account the fact that the assessee was earlier treated by the Department as a dealer in shares, that circumstances cannot he regarded as irrelevant.
The decision arrived at by the Tribunal cannot be said to he perverse.
[645F H] Karam Chand Thapar & Bros. (P) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax (Central), Calcutta, ; re ferred to. 4.
It is not necessary for the Tribunal to state in its judgment specifically or in express words that it has taken into account the cumulative effect of the circumstances or has considered the totality of facts, as if that were a magic formula; if the judgment of the Tribunal shows that it has, in fact, done so, there is no reason to interfere with the decision of the Tribunal.
[646B C]
