Under an import licence dated 3rd March, 1971 issued by the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports the respondent imported two fishing trawlers with the financial assistance of the second respondent Canara Bank.
The respondent con ducted negotiations with the appellant for a charter party agreement in respect of the said trawlers.
On 21st March, 1977, an agreement between the parties was executed 470 under which the appellant agreed to take on charter hire the said two trawlers for the purpose of deep sea fishing for a period of two years with an option to continue the hire for a further period of three years.
Under the terms of the agreement the respondent was to deliver the said trawlers to the appellant at Vishakhapatnam within seven days of the receipt of approval from the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports or no objection certificate from the Canara Bank, for making the said trawlers fully operational and to ascer tain the cost of such repairs.
The appellant charterer was then to conduct fishing trials to ascertain actual condi tions and thereafter the charter hiring was to commence from the date the fishing trials were ended.
On 18th August, 1977, the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports granted permission to the respondent to charter the said trawlers to the appellant on the conditions that the charter rent would be Rs.50,000 per month per trawler and that the charter would be for a period of three years.
On 30th September, 1977, the respondent delivered the said two trawlers for repairs to the appellant.
On 2nd February, 1978, the parties modified the agree ment revising the rate of charter hire and the date of commencement of hire, to the extent that the charter hire would commence from 15th January, 1978 and the revised rate of hire would be Rs.6,25,000 per trawler per year.
The appellant charterer raised objections alleging that the trawlers suffered from inherent and latent defects in the refrigeration system which was an essential part of such trawlers and as such the trawlers were not fully operational because even after carrying out extensive repairs the re frigeration system could not be brought to the required standard of minus 20 degree F but attained only minus 10 degree F.
On 29.9.1978, the appellant instituted a suit in the original side of the Calcutta High Court claiming (i) a decree for a sum of Rs.39,64,341 towards cost, charges, damages and compensation incurred on the said trawlers and, (ii) a declaration that the agreement was contrary to the terms of the permission granted by the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports and consequently illegal and against public policy and void; (iii) that the Parties had entered into the agreement on the basic fundamental assumption that by effecting necessary repairs the trawlers would be made fully operational but the assumption was subsequently dis covered to be mistaken because of the deficiency in the refrigeration system and it rendered the agreement void.
471 The respondent filed an application under Section 34 of the praying that the suit instituted by the appellant, and all proceedings therein be stayed because the disputes were wholly covered by the arbitration clause as contained in the modified agreement dated 2nd February, 1978 which was binding between the parties.
The Single Judge held that there was no invalidity for non compliance of the conditions of the licence granted because necessary permission was obtained in respect of the agreement from the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports and the modifications of the agreement did not impair its validity; though in a particular case if there was any doubt about facts, the matter had to be decided by trial on evi dence but in the instant case, having regard to the admitted facts and conduct of the parties it was not necessary to set down the matter for trial on evidence; there was no illegal ity or mutual mistake; that the alleged fundamental breach was wholly covered by the arbitration clause; that the arbitration clause was valid and binding between the par ties; and that all the conditions of Section 34 were satis fied.
Accordingly, the Single Judge granted stay of the suit and directed the parties to take immediate steps for initia tion of reference under the arbitration agreement.
The judgment and order of the Single Judge was confirmed by the Division Bench by dismissing the appeal.
In this appeal by special leave it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (i) the subject matter of the suit, namely, the question whether the agreement was void ab initio for mutual mistake was not arbitrable; and the courts below erred in holding so; (ii) assuming that the subject matter was arbitrable, the court should not have exercised its jurisdiction on the application under Section 34 because it involved complicated questions of fact and in exercising such jurisdiction the courts acted without jurisdiction; (iii) the court should have decided only after taking oral and documentary evidence and not merely on affidavits; (iv) the agreement was void being violative of the conditions of the permission granted by the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports; (v) the agreement itself having been void ab initio due to mutual mistake, the arbitration clause per ished with it and the courts below erred in holding that the disputes were arbitrable.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Section 34 deals with the staying of a suit where there 472 is an arbitration agreement concerning the subject matter of the suit and between the same parties.
For the Court to have power to exercise the discretion conferred upon it by this section, there must have been a valid agreement to submit to arbitration.
Where the objection is that the arbitration is a nullity, it amounts to an objection of want of jurisdic tion.
The term "arbitration agreement" includes "agreement to refer", and "submission" to Arbitrator.
A submission forming part of a void contract is itself void and cannot be enforced.
[484B C] 1.1 Whether a particular dispute arising out of a par ticular contract is referable to arbitration or not, must necessarily depend on the intention of the parties as em bodied in the arbitration clause.
If the dispute is squarely covered by the arbitration clause, the relevant provisions of the Act will be attracted.
The question whether the dispute in the suit fails within the arbitration clause really pre supposes that there is such agreement and in volves consideration of two matters, that is (i) what is the dispute in the suit, and (ii) what dispute the arbitration clause covers.
It is incumbent upon the court to decide whether there is a binding contract for arbitration between the parties.
If it is found that the dispute in the suit is not covered by the arbitration clause the application for stay may be dismissed.
[488H; 489A] 2.
Where in an application under Section 34 of the Act an issue is raised as to the validity or existence of the contract containing the arbitration clause, the court has to decide first of all whether there is a binding arbitration agreement, even though it may involve incidentally a deci sion as to the validity or existence of the parent contract.
If the arbitration clause is so wide as to have included the very validity or otherwise of the contract on the grounds of fraud, mis representations, mutual mistake or any valid reason the arbitrator will surely have jurisdiction to decide even that dispute.
The proper approach would be to examine the issue raised in the suit and to ascertain wheth er it squarely falls within the compass of the arbitration clause and take a decision before granting the stay of the suit.
If an issue is raised as to the formation, existence or validity of the contract containing the arbitration clause, the court has to exercise discretion to decide or not to decide the issue of validity or otherwise of the arbitration agreement even though it may involve incidental ly a decision as to validity or existence of the challenged contract.
Should the Court find the parent contract to be void ab initio or illegal or non existent, it will be with out jurisdiction to grant stay.
If the challenged contract is found to be valid and binding and the dispute raised in the suit covered by the arbitration clause, stay of the suit may be justified.
[491F G; 492A B, D F] 473 2.1 In the instant case, considering the issues raised, the arbitration clause and the surrounding circumstances and the part played by the parties pursuant to the charter party since execution to the modification and thereafter till objection raised by the appellant plaintiff.
it must be held that the trial court did not err in proceeding to decide the issue of validity or legality of the parent contract.
[492F G] 3.
Where the validity, existence or legality of the contract is challenged in suit on grounds de hors, independ ent of, or external to the terms or stipulations of the contract, the court in an application under Section 34 of the Act shall have no jurisdiction to go into the question, and that in a large majority of cases it would be applica ble, in appropriate cases, having regard to the nature of the dispute raised in the pleadings of the suit, the compass and scope of the arbitration clause in the contract, the surrounding facts and circumstances of the case having a bearing on the question of genuine grievance failing outside or inside the arbitration agreement and the objects and spirit of the , the Court may be justified in deciding the validity, existence or legality of the chal lenged contract containing the arbitration agreement.
[488A C] 3.1 In the instant case, the arbitration clause formed part of the agreement.
The arbitration agreement is not the same as the contract in the charter party.
It cannot, there fore, be said that the validity or otherwise of the charter party was covered by the arbitration clause.
[489D E] Jee Lae vs Lord Dalmeny, ; Heyman vs Darwins, ; Monro vs Bognor Urban District Council, ; Jawaharlal Burman vs Union of India, ; Waverly Jute Mills Co. Ltd. vs Raymon & Co. (India) Pvt. Ltd.; ,3 S.C.R. 209; ; Khardah Co. Ltd. vs Raymon & Co. India Ltd., ; ; Renusagar Co. vs General Electric Co., ; ; Anderson Wright Ltd. vs Moran and Company, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 862; Damodar Valley Corporation vs
K.K. Kar; , ; Hirji Mulji vs Cheong Yue Steamship Co., ; applied.
Banwari Lal vs Hindu College, A.I.R. 1949 East Punjab 165; Johurmull Parasram vs Louis Dreyfus Co. Ltd. 52 C.W.N. (1947 48) 137 A.I.R. 1949 Cal 179; Pramada Prasad vs Sagar Mal Aggarwal, A.I.R. 1952 Patna 352; Narsingh Prasad vs Dhanraj Mills.
I.L.R. 21 Patna 544; A.I.R. 1943 Patna 53; Birla Jute Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs Dulichand.
A.I.R. 1953 Calcutta 450; W.F. Ducat & Co. Pvt. Ltd. vs 474 Hiralal Pannalal, A.I.R. 1976 Calcutta 126; General Enter prises vs Jardine Handerson Ltd., A.I.R. 1978 Calcutta 407; Khusiram vs Hanutmal, , approved.
In the instant case, facts were admitted.
[493B C] All the relevant documents and affidavits were before the Court and were considered by it.
Therefore no illegality was committed by the trial court in not setting down the matter for trial on evidence and deciding the validity and legality of the matter without taking oral evidence.
[49211; 493B] 4.1 Even if it appears that the discretion could have also been exercised to decide the issue of invalidity in a trial on evidence adduced, this court would not substitute its view for that of the trial court, unless the ends of justice required it to be done.
This Court would not lightly interfere under Article 136 of the Constitution with the concurrent exercise of discretion of the courts below under Section 34 of the .
Before it can justly do so, the appellant must satisfy the Court, on the relevant facts referred to by the Courts below, that they exercised their discretion in a manifestly unreasonable or perverse way which was likely to defeat the ends of justice.
The appellant has failed to do so in the instant case.
[493C, E F] Ormarod vs Todmordon, ; Charles Osenton and Co. vs Johnston, ; Gardner vs Jay, ; Printers (Mysore) Pvt. Ltd. vs Pothan Joseph; , , applied.
Where the parties make mutual mistake misunderstand ing each other and are at cross purposes, there is no real correspondence of offer and acceptance and the parties are not really consensus ad idem.
There is thus no agreement at all; and the contract is void.
Section 20 is concerned with common mistake of fact and not mutual mistake.
A common mistake is there where both parties are mistaken about the same vital fact although both parties are ad idem, e.g., the subject matter of the contract has already perished.
A con tract in such a case is void.
Where each party is mistaken as to the other 's intention, though neither realises that the respective promises have been misunderstood, there is mutual mistake.
1493H; 494A B] 6.
A mistake will not affect assent unless it is the mistake of both parties, and is as to the existence of some quality which makes the thing 475 without the quality essentially different from the thing as it was believed to be.
Neither party can rely upon his own mistake to say that it was a nullity from the beginning, no matter that it was a mistake which to his mind was fundamen tal, and no matter that the other party knew that he was under a mistake.
A fortiori, if the other party did not know of the mistake but shared it.
The question is not what the parties had in their minds, but what reasonable third par ties would infer from their words or conduct.
The court has to ascertain the "sense of the promises".
[496E; 495G H] 7.
The application of the doctrine of mutual mistake depends upon the true construction of the contract made between the parties.
A mutual misunderstanding will not nullify a contract but only if the terms of contract con strued in the light of the nature of the contract and of the circumstances believed to exist at the time it was done show that it was never intended to apply to the situation which in reality existed at that time, will the contract be held void.
Thus a mistake as to an essential and integral element in the subject matter of the contract will avoid the con tract.
A mistake as to the quality of the article contracted for may not always avoid the contract.
A distinction, there fore, should be drawn between a mistake as to the substance of the thing contracted for, which will avoid the contract and mistake as to its quality which will be without effect.
According to circumstances even a mistake as to the sub stance of the thing contracted for may not necessarily render a contract void.
Thus there must be a difference so complete that, if the contract were enforced in the actual circumstances which have unexpectedly emerged, this would involve an obligation fundamentally different from that which the parties believed they were undertaking.
[496A H] 8.
From the series of steps taken for repairs and the stipulations in the charter party including the modifica tions thereof, it is not possible to hold that it was a case of mutual mistake as to a quality which made the trawlers transferred essentially different from the trawlers that the parties in their minds agreed to transfer.
Therefore, there was no mutual mistake and the contract would not be avoided on this ground.
[498C D] Cooper vs Phibbs, ; ; Ear/Beauchamp vs Winn., ; Hudders field Banking Co. vs Henry Lister & Sons, [1895] 2 Ch. 273; Bell vs Laver Brs.
Ltd.; , ; Kannedy vs Panama Royal Mail Co., ; Smith vs Hughes, [1871] L.R. 6 Q.B. 597; Solle vs Butcher, 476 Fraderick E. Rose (London) Ltd. vs William H. Pim Junior & Co. Ltd. ; Sheikh Brothers LId.
vs Arnold, ; referred to.
U.P. Government vs Nanhoo Mal, A.I.R. 1960 All. 420, approved.
It is settled law that where the subject matter of a reference is illegal, no award can be of any binding effect.
If the contract itself was illegal, the controversy as to whether it was illegal or not would not be a dispute arising out of the contract as also would be the question whether the contract was void ab initio.
When, however, it is found that a binding contract was made which was not illegal what follows from such a contract would be covered by the expres sion "dispute arising out of contract".
To stay a suit under Section 34 the Court has to see whether there was a valid agreement to have the dispute settled by arbitration and that the proceedings are in respect of a dispute so agreed to be referred.
[498E, (; H; 499A] 10.
Public policy imposes certain limitations on the freedom of contract by forbidding the making of certain contracts.
In such cases though all other requisites for formation of the contract are complied with, parties to such forbidden contracts are not allowed to enforce any rights under them.
In clear cases the law strikes at the agreement itself by making the contract illegal.
However, the effect and nature of illegality are by no means uniform and will depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Where a statute makes a contract illegal or where a certain type of contract is expressly prohibited there can be no doubt that such a contract will not be enforcible.
[499B D] 11.
A contract which was not illegal from the beginning may be rendered illegal later by the method of performance which did not comply with the statutory requirements.
The appellant 's burden was to show that the charter party was illegal to take it out of the arbitration clause for if the contract is illegal and not binding on the parties the arbitration clause would also be not binding.
Once it is shown to have been illegal it would be unenforcible as ex turpi causa non oritur actio.
[499G H] 12.
One who knowingly enters into a contract with im proper object cannot enforce his rights thereunder.
The appellant in the instant case was also a party to the agree ment of charter party in respect of the two imported trawl ers.
Though it purported to be actual user 's licence 477 there was no violation of this condition in view of the express permission granted by the Controller of Imports and Exports allowing the chartering of the two imported trawl ers.
The modifications to the contract did not make any alteration so as to make the agreement contrary to the terms and conditions of the permission inasmuch as the permission was for a period of three years.
The option to continue hire of the trawlers for a further period of three years did not ipso facto violate the permission.
There was also no viola tion as to the duration of the charter party.
[499H; 500C E] Taylor vs Barnett, ; Anderson Wright Ltd. vs Moran and Company, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 862; In Re arbi tration between Mahmoud and Isphani, ; applied. 13.
The Courts below were right in holding that the matters were arbitrable apart from the question of illegali ty, invalidity of the contract.
The question of invalidity of the contract due to the alleged mutual mistake would be de hors and independent of the contract and as such would not be referable under the arbitration clause.
In so far as the question of illegality of the charter party is concerned as the appellant has not established that the charter party was illegal or void as initio, the question whether the modification as alleged had rendered the contract illegal would be covered by the arbitration clause.
[500F G] 14.
In the instant case, the reliefs claimed in the suit other than the question of ab initio invalidity or illegali ty of the contract would be referable.
However, it will be within the jurisdiction of the arbitrator to decide the scope of his jurisdiction.
The Court cannot make a contract between the parties and its power ends with the interpreta tion of the contract between them.
The same principle also applies to the arbitration agreement unless the parties to the arbitration agreement authorises the court to make and modify the agreement.
The arbitrator shall proceed in ac cordance with law to decide the questions including that of jurisdiction, if raised.
[501C 1).
