The appellant society was temporarily allotted the property in question by way of a lease by the Custodian of Evacuee Property in March, 1949.
In the allotment letter it was described as an 'industrial establishment ' known as open compound.
The inspection report dated January 9, 1951 of the person who had delivered the possession to the society described the property as a 'plot ' on which the allottee promised to start a factory.
Sometime thereafter the society sought reduction of the assessment rent.
The order of the Deputy Custodian thereon dated March 31, 1955 granting the relief, again described the property as a 'plot ' with a self constructed shed.
Subsequently, the society through its letter dated January 21, 1957 requested that the said 'indu strial plot ' may be permanently allotted to it.
However, the Custodian chose to sell the property by auction on July 15, 1960 in favour of the predecessor in interest of the re spondent.
The society moved to have the said sale set aside and in its application dated October 15, 1960 made to the concerned authority it mentioned the property as an 'indu strial plot '.
That application was eventually rejected by the Chief Settlement Commissioner on August :25, 1961.
In its revision petition before the Government of India the contention of the society was that the plot was allotted to the society for industrial purpose and they had erected a building and installed machinery thereon.
The Government order rejecting the revision petition too started with a recital that the Custodian had allotted 'an open plot of land ' to the society for industrial purposes and that the society had erected 'a temporary structure ' on the plot and also installed some machinery.
648 On February 15, 1968 the appellant society filed an application under section 44 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 seeking permission to make repairs to the premises in ques tion.
The owners resisted the said application on a prelimi nary objection that the petitioners were not tenants of any premises within meaning of the Delhi Rent Control Act.
The Controller found that what was allotted to the petitioner society was only a plot and that the shed was self con structed.
The petitioner, therefore, being a tenant only with respect to an open site, which did not come within the definition of a 'premises ' as contemplated by the Act, the petition under section 44 was not maintainable.
The respondent instituted a suit against the society in 1977 seeking its eviction and possession stating that the property was only a plot of land and not 'premises ' within the meaning of Delhi Rent Control Act, and that the plain tiffs had terminated the tenancy of the defendants.
All the three courts below held in his favour.
In this appeal it was contended for the appellant socie ty that the property in question was a 'building ' within the meaning of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 the eviction from which could be sought by the landlord only from a Rent Controller on grounds specified in the Act and not by a suit in a civil court under the Transfer of Property Act read with the Code.of Civil Procedure; that the references in the allotment letter to 'industrial premises ', to the 'industri al establishment known as open compound ', and to the 'facto ry/workshop/industrial establishment ' clearly showed that what was allotted to the society was not a mere plot but an industrial premises.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The property allotted to the appellant society in respect of which it was a tenant initially under the Custodian and later under the plaintiff respondent was only a plot of land.
The plaintiff was, therefore, justified in attempting to recover possession thereof by a suit for possession in a civil court.
[664F G] 2.
The letters addressed by the society to the Custodian and the Settlement Commissioner as well as the application for reduction of rent and the order, thereon, are valuable pieces of evidence both because they are anterior to the litigation between the parties and also because they re flected the representations of the society to, and the findings of the very authority that allotted the said property.
The society represented that it had been ' allotted only a plot of land and that 649 the shed had been put up thereon by itself and this plea would not have been accepted by the Custodian had it not been correct.
Both in the opening sentence as well as in the body of the order there is a clear finding to this effect.
This is a very strong circumstance to show that what was allotted to the society was only a plot of land.
Further more, the findings of the Rent Controller in the application under section 44 of the Rent Control Act filed by the society, right or wrong, had attained finality as between the parties and it was not open to the society on principles analogous to res judicata to take a contrary stand in these proceed ings.
[659F H;660A] 3.
The reference to 'industrial premises ' in the allot ment letter cannot be construed as a reference to 'premises ' within the meaning of the Rent Control Act.
It was obviously a cyclostyled proforma allotting an item of evacuee property and except for the portion where it contained a description of the property in question viz., 'open compound ', it only contained terms applicable to allotment generally.
[661F H] 4.
The finding on the point of the courts below are concurrent findings on a question of fact.
This Court under Article 136 of the Constitution does not normally reappraise the evidence or interfere with such concurrent findings of fact, even if it is possible on the facts to come to a contrary conclusion.
[663G] The decree for eviction not to be executed till February 28, 1990 provided the persons in occupation of the premises file the usual undertaking.
[664G]
