Appellants 1 and 2 are the wife and daughter respective ly of the deceased who died in a road accident, while trav elling in a hired car, which collided with a truck.
He died on the spot.
At the time of his death he was 25.
Appellants filed a petition before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal claiming a compensation of Rs.1 lac.
The Tribunal 's finding was that the accident was due to rash and negligent driving of the car.
Without giving reasons, the Tribunal awarded only Rs.10,000 against the owner of the car and the truck driver, and also assessed the liability of the Insurance Company to the extent of Rs.4,000.
Against the award the appellants filed an appeal to the High Court challenging the adequacy of the compensation awarded.
The owner of the car filed a cross objection.
The High Court affirmed the award and dismissed the appeal, as also the cross objection, stating that the compensation awarded was just and proper.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the High Court 's judgment affirming the Tribunal 's award.
On behalf of the appellants, it was contended that High Court was not justified in affirming the Tribunal 's award of only Rs. 10,000 as compensation.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The appellants are entitled to a sum of Rs.l lac on account of compensation.
Out of this amount the Insurance Company, i.e., Respondent No. 4 is liable to pay Rs.4,000 and the other respondents are jointly and severally liable to pay to the appellants the remaining amount.
[766C] 762 2.
It is true that the deceased was a student at the time of his death, but he was also looking after the busi ness of his father and earning about Rs.l,O00 a month.
Even at the modest computation, the contribution of the deceased towards his family could not be less than Rs.500 per month, i.e. Rs.6,000 per year.
Taking the normal span of life to be 60 years, he would have lived for another 35 years.
It is apparent that the appellants have been deprived of more than a lac of rupees and, accordingly their Claim for Rs.l lac on account of compensation was quite reasonable.
Both the Tribunal and the High Court were not justified in assessing the amount of compensation payable to the appellants at Rs. 10,000 only.
[765B D] 3.
As the law stood at the material time, the maximum liability of the Insurance Company in such a case was only to the tune of Rs.4,000.
In the appeal before the High Court, the appellants did not challenge the finding of the Tribunal that the statutory liability of the Insurance Company was Rs.4,000 only as conceded to by the appellants themselves.
In the circumstances, it Was not incumbent upon the Insurance Company to file the policy.
[766A B] National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Jugal Kishore & Ors., , distinguished.
[This Court directed that the decretal amount should be paid within two mouths and in case of default, it will bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum till realisation.] [766D]
