The respondent Landlord filed a suit for eviction against the appellant tenant on 3 grounds, namely, (1) that the tenant had parted with possession of the roof of the shop let out to him by putting up an advertisement board, (ii) by fixing the advertisement board on the roof of the shop with iron angles, the tenant had caused material alter ation to the premises, and (iii) the tenant had defaulted in the payment of rent.
The tenant asserted that though he was carrying on optical business in the shop he was also running the business of advertisement by way of display of various advertisements (hoardings) hoards at various places in the city.
The Trial Court decreed the suit on the ground of default in payment of rent, material alteration and sub letting.
The appellant preferred an appeal and the District Judge remanded the case back to the Trial Court for trial on all issues, on the ground that the appellant had not been al lowed to cross examine the respondent or to adduce evidence in defence.
On remand, the Trial Court held that the appellant had caused material alteration by fixing the board on the roof, had parted with possession of the roof by such fixing of the board, had committed default in payment of rent, and passed a decree for eviction against the appellant for causing material alteration and for parting with the possession of the roof.
No decree was however passed on the ground of default, because the default was held to be the first de fault.
768 The appellant filed an appeal, and the District Judge allowed the appeal on the ground that by displaying the advertisement board, the appellant had not caused any mate rial alteration of the premises and that by displaying such advertisement board did not amount to parting with posses sion of the roof of the premises.
With regard to default, on an analysis of the dates of the payment, the District Judge held that there was no default in payment of rent for six months, but held that the default was the first default and consequently there could be no decree for eviction.
The respondent preferred an appeal before the High Court.
The appeal was allowed only on the issue of parting with possession, holding that the display of the advertise ment board amounted to parting with possession of the prem ises.
The High Court noted that the appellant had not dis puted that the advertisement board was installed on the roof of the shop and that he was getting the rent for this board, and the document which was tendered, viz: Exhibit 6 showed that the company Paramount Services had written a letter to the respondent landlord that they had installed the board on the terrace of the shop and the site was with them for the last six months.
The High Court accordingly concluded that there was parting with possession by the tenant, and the landlord was therefore entitled to a decree for eviction under section 13(1)(e) of the Act.
In view of this finding under section 13(1)(e) of the Act, the High Court held it was unnecessary to go into the other grounds and passed a decree for eviction.
In the appeal by the tenant to this Court on the ques tions: (1) Whether the appellant was carrying on his own advertising business? (2) Whether such an act can be termed as parting with possession of the roof or any part thereof by the appellant in favour of the advertiser because by putting up such hoarding, he was getting a return? (3) If it is found that it was not a business of the appellant to carry on the advertising, but the appellant had also an advertising agency to put up its advertising board then would such an act amount to parting with possession of the roof or any part thereof by the appellant? (4) In any event can any case or cause of action for the suit filed in 1974 on the basis of Exhibit 6 a letter dated January 20, 1977 be maintained? Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of eviction, the Court.
HELD: 1.
Under the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act.
1950 the tenant must be guilty either of an assignment or 769 sub letting or otherwise parting with possession either of the whole or any part of the business without the permission of the landlord.
[787A] 2(a) Sub letting means transfer of an exclusive right to enjoy the property in favour of the third party, [787B] 2(b) The concept of parting with possession in private contracts between the landlord and tenant was also known in India and it means parting with legal possession to the exclusion of the grantor himself.
[787H; 788A] Stening vs Abrahams, [1931] 1 L.R. Chancery Division 470, referred to.
Shalimar Tar Products vs H.C. Sharma & Others, ; ; Gundalpalli Rangamanner Chetty vs Desu Rangiah, AIR 1954 Madras 182; Jackson vs Simons, and Chaplin vs Smith, , referred to.
Gee vs Hazleton and Others, [1932] 1 King 's Bench Divi sion 179, distinguished.
Vishwa Nath vs Chaman Lal, AIR 1975 Delhi 117; Madras Bangalore Transport Co. (West vs Inder Singh and Others, ; Dr. Vijay Kumar and Others vs M/s. Raghbir Singh Anokh Singh ; B.M. Lal (dead) by L.Rs.
vs Dunlop Rubber & Co. Ltd., ; ; Rajbir Kaur vs M/s. section Chokosiri and Co., ; and Shri Dipak Banerjee vs Smt.
Lilabati Chakroborty, 4 Judgment Today , referred to.
In the instant case, on the facts found, it cannot be said or even argued that there was any assignment by the tenant.
The tenant or the sub tenant did not have any exclu sive possession or interest in the building or in any part of the building nor was that right in lieu of any payment or any compensation.
Having regard to the quality, nature and degree of the occupation of the transferee, it cannot be said that either there was any assignment or sub letting or parting with possession to such a degree by permitting the hoarding that the tenant had lost interest.
He was using this premises for his benefit.
Unless the tenant has in fracted the prohibition of the Act, he is not liable to be evicted.
1789B, G] 3.
The question whether there is a tenancy or licence or parting with possession in a particular case must depend upon the quality 770 of occupation given to the licensee or the transferee.
Mere occupation is not sufficient, to infer either sub tenancy or parting with possession.
[786A] Associated Hotel of India Ltd. Delhi vs S.B. Sardar Ranjit Singh, ; and Smt.
Krishnawati vs Shri Hans Raj, , referred to.
The case rests on the express provision of the Act and there is no scope to explore the latent purpose of the Act.
[789G] 5.
The plaintiff landlord had not subjected himself to crossexamination in spite of the order of the court on remand.
It would, therefore, not be safe to rely on the examination in chief which was not subjected to cross exami nation before the remand was made.
If that is so, it will appear that there is no evidence of the plaintiff in respect of the allegations in the plaint.
There was no question of cross examining the plaintiff travelling beyond the evidence of the plaintiff given in examination in chief and thereby giving an opportunity to make out a case in cross examina tion.
It therefore, appears from the pleadings and the evidence that the respondent did not make out any case of the appellant parting with possession by putting up the hoarding.
[779D G]
