The respondent landlord filed a suit for eviction of the appellantstenant from the house in question on the ground of failure to pay rent and for realisation of arrears of rent.
While the respondent pleaded that the rate of rent was Rs.70 per month, the appellant contended that it was only Rs.40 and not Rs.70, and that he was paying Rs.30 per month for the furniture, provided by the landlord which he returned sometime after the tenancy commenced.
The trial court dismissed the suit holding that the rate of rent was Rs.40 per month and, as such, the appellant was not defaulter.
In the revision filed by the respondent, the Revisional Court held that the rent was Rs.70 per month.
The appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court, which quashed the revisional order and remanded the case for deciding the revision petition afresh.
Thereafter, the revisional court again allowed the revision.
The appellant challenged the revisional order before the High Court which dismissed the same.
In the appeal, by special leave, it was contended on behalf of the appellant tenant that in the face of clear admission of the respondent in the receipt, the rent of the house was Rs.40 per month, and that the amount of Rs.70 per month mentioned in the rent note had been explained in the receipts, to be Rs.40 as house rent and Rs.30 for furniture.
On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that the tenancy 757 was for a furnished building and failure to pay a part of the rent, in respect of furniture, would attract the provi sions of section 20(2)(a) of the U.P. Urban Building (Regulation of Letting Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 and the appellant was liable to be ejected.
It was also contended that the tenancy being of a furnished house the tenant could not under law, unilaterally surrender part of tenancy.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: It was never the case of the respondent at any stage that furnished house was given on rent to the appel lant.
In the notice before filing the suit and in the plaint, it was specifically pleaded that rent of the house was Rs.70 per month and the tenant was in arrears.
In the written statement, appellant took a clear stand that the rent of the house was only Rs.40 and Rs.30 was for the furniture, which according to him, was returned after the commencement of the tenancy.
[760C D] In the face of clear pleadings on the record, it is impermissible to raise the plea that the landlord rented a furnished house to the tenant.
It would be contrary to the pleadings.
That apart, neither before the trial court nor before the Revisional Court and not even before the High Court this plea was raised.
[760F] The trial court relied upon the rent receipts, 39/C and 40/C, produced by the appellant.
It was clearly mentioned in the receipt 39/C that Rs.40 were towards house rent and Rs.30 towards furniture charges and Rs.3 towards water and electricity charges.
The respondent admitted the contents of the receipt but explained that Rs.30 towards furniture charges was mentioned at the request of the tenant.
[758G H] In the face of the clear admission by the .respondent in the two receipts, the finding of the Revisional Court that the monthly rent was Rs.70 is erroneous.
[759D]
