The Armed Forces Headquarters Clerical Service Rules, 1968 were brought into force with effect from March, 1968.
The rules provided that seniority in the service shall be determined on the basis of date of confirmation.
Prior to this, the seniority in the cadre of service was required to be determined on the basis of length of service, as laid down by several official memoranda of the Government or that of the Defence Ministry.
After the rules came into force, the seniority of the appellants who joined the Armed Forces Headquarters as L.D.Cs. between 1960 and 1964, on transfer/posting from the lower defence installations, in public interest, and some of whom were later promoted as U.D.Cs., was sought to be dis turbed, on the basis of confirmation as prescribed under the rules.
The appellants, therefore, moved the High Court contending that the length of service should be the basis of inter se seniority.
A Single Judge of the High Court held that ordinarily the appellants would have been governed by the general principle of seniority based on the date of confirmation as laid down in the 1959 Memorandum of the Home Ministry, but since the Ministry of Defence had preferred to continue the principle of length of service which it had been following prior to 1959, even after the 1959 Memorandum, and which had been incorporated in 1963 Memorandum and reiterated in all memoranda issued thereafter, the seniority of the appellants should be decided by length of service.
i.e., their date of joining the Army Headquarters as L.D.Cs.
On appeal by Union of India, the Division Bench held that the 792 seniority of the appellants must fail to be determined on the basis of confirmation as prescribed by the rules, and not on the length of service.
Aggrieved by this, the appel lants filed appeals before this court.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: The general rule is if seniority is to be regulat ed in a particular manner in a given period, it shall be given effect to and shall not be varied to disadvantage retrospectively.
[795F G] The Armed Forces Headquarters Clerical Service Rules, 1968 no doubt provide that all persons substantially ap pointed to a grade shall rank senior to those holding offi ciating appointments in the grade.
But the rules have no retrospective effect.
It could not impair the existing rights of officials who were appointed long prior to the Rules came into force.
[795A B] The various office memoranda clearly laid down that length of service should be the guiding principle of arrang ing inter se seniority of officials.
[795B] The appellants being governed by those memoranda had the right to have their seniority determined accordingly before the Rules came into force.
That being their right, the rules cannot take it away to their prejudice.
The Division Bench, was, therefore, clearly in error in directing that the seniority shall follow their respective confirmations.
[795B C] Union of India vs M. Ravi Varma & Anr., ; at 1002.
relied on.
