In the Lok Sabha elections held in 1984, the appellant was declared elected from the Nizamabad Parliamentary Constitu ency.
He .secured 2,51,172 votes, while Respondent No. 1 got 2,48,725 votes.
An election petition under Sections 80 and 81 of the Act was filed in the High Court, by the First Respondent; challenging the election of the appellant on grounds of illegalities and irregularities in the counting of votes, impersonation of voters and corrupt practices.
The High Court set aside the election only on one ground that is, the Additional Returning Officers in respect of the Nizamabad Parliament Constituency were not appointed and authorised by the Election Commission to perform the duties and functions of Returning Officers and every action taken by such officers, including the rejection of doubtful ballot papers, is absolutely illegal, void and forbidden by law.
The High Court gave directions to the Election Commission for recounting.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the High Court 's order setting aside the election.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that the officers were duly appointed and authorised by the Election Commission.
The First Respondent contended that the officers were not duly appointed by the Election Commission and that their purported exercise of power as Additional Assistant Returning Officers was without authority and in contraven tion of the relevant legal provisions.
Allowing the appeal, 841 HELD: 1.1.
Under Section 19A of the Act, the Secretary to the Election Commission is empowered to perform the functions of the Election Commission under the Constitution, relevant statutes and the rules.
The Secretary is, there fore, competent to approve the revised list containing the names of officers proposed by the Chief Electoral Officer.
[845H; 846A B] 1.2.
Under Secretaries are duly authorised to authenti cate all orders, notifications and other instruments on behalf of the Election Commission, as per the Gazette of India notification dated 5.4.1958.
[847C] 2.1.
In the instant case, the officers concerned were duly appointed by the competent authority, viz, Secretary, Election Commission, and were authorised to perform the duties and functions of Assistant Returning Officers for the Nizamabad Parliamentary Constituency.
The appointments were also duly notified to the Chief Electoral Officer, by commu nicating the same by an officer who was competent to authen ticate such orders.
[847E] 2.2 Publication of the notification by exhibition on the notice boards was, sufficient notice to all persons con cerned.
[847F] 3.
The High Court was not justified in setting aside the proceeding of counting of votes and the resultant declara tion and in ordering a fresh counting of votes in respect of the election from the Parliamentary Constituency in ques tion.
The order of the High Court in so far as it relates to the findings and directions in this regard is set aside.
[847G]
