After attainment of Independence, the rulers of the erstwhile princely States of Rajasthan entered into a Cove nant with the Government of India for integrating their States into one.
Article 12 of the said Covenant provided for the private properties of the rulers of the Covenanting States, and clause (i) thereof prescribed that the ruler of each of the Covenanting States; shall be entitled to full ownership, use and enjoyment of all private properties.
The immovable properties of the rulers were divided into three categories, Category 'A ', 'B ' and 'C '.
The Maharaja of Jodhpur was one such ruler who integrat ed his State in the Union.
Category 'C ' of the Covenant listed the properties of the Maharaja as his absolute property over which he had full rights of disposal, and the property known as 'Umaid Bhavan Palace ' was included in this category.
The Maharaja who was the signatory to the Covenant died in 1952, and after his death he was succeeded by his son who was a minor at that time.
Because the successor was a minor an administrator was appointed for the purpose of adminis tration of the estate.
In 1964, the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly enacted the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Land Owners Estate Act, 1963 which received the assent of the President on 6th April, 1964.
The Act was enacted to provide for the acquisi tion of the estates of land owners.
Section 7 thereof pro vided for the issuance of a Notification by the State Gov ernment appointing a date for the vesting in the State Government 849 of the estates of all land owners situated anywhere in the State.
Exercising powers under the aforesaid section, a Notification was issued on 11th August, 1964 by which the State Government appointed 1st September, 1964 as the date of vesting of all the estates of land owners.
The three petitioners in the writ petitions were parties who had purchased respective areas of land for price by registered sale deeds, two dated 4.11.71 and one dated 5.11.71 from the erstwhile ruler of Jodhpur state.
Notices under section 9A of the Act were issued on 19.11.1975 to these parties by the Collector stating that the transfers of the lands were null and void and they shall deliver possession before 28th September, 1975 or within 10 days of the receipt of the notice whichever is later to the Sub Divisional Officer.
This was followed by another notice on 8th December, 1975 by which possession of the lands were taken by affixing a notice as required by Rule 8 of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Land Owners ' Estate Rules 1964.
The petitioners contended in the courts below that their land was not liable to acquisition under the Act and sought a direction that the orders and notices be quashed.
It was contended that in the definition of 'land ' as defined in section 2F, provide for properties which shall not be in cluded within the definition of 'land ' and as the property in the instant case was excluded from the definition of 'land ' the properties of the petitioners could not be ac quired under section 7 of the Land Reforms Act.
A Single Judge of the High Court on an examination of the list of Category 'C ' to the Covenant, and the material on the record came to the conclusion that the lands fell within the property included in the Schedule of private properties in Category 'C ' and therefore it being a private property included in the Inventory according to the Covenant the acquisition under the provision of the Act was bad.
It was further held that the transfer made by the ex ruler in favour of the petitioners was not bad.
The trustees of the Major Maharaja Hari Singh Benefit of Defence Service Personnel and Charitable Trust, the appel lants in one of the appeals also filed a Writ petition which came up before the High Court.
The High Court relying on its earlier decision allowed the petition and quashed the noti fication.
850 Letters Patent Appeals were filed by the State Govern ment and the Trust and the Division Bench disposed of all the appeals and came to a different conclusion than the Single Judge 's who decided the writ petitions.
The Division Bench held that the repeal of the Rajasthan Urban Property (Restrictions of Transfers) Act, 1973 by the Rajasthan Urban Property (Restrictions of Transfers) Repeal Act, 1978, the cloud that had been cast on the title of the purchases had been removed.
In the appeals to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acqui sition of Land Owners ' Estate Act, 1963 was brought into force in 1964 and that according to the definition of 'e state ', in section 2B it could refer to either land or right, title or interest in land held by a land owner, and 'land ' was defined in section 2F which was an inclusive definition, and that it first refers to land held for the purpose of agriculture and that the lands in the instant case, were not agricultural lands they do not fail within the ambit of the definition of 'land '.
It was also contended that the Division Bench could not come to a different con clusion than that which was reached by the Single Judge.
On behalf of the State, it was contended that the suit property fails within the boundary of the Umaid Bhavan Palace according to the site plan and that it could not be conclusively held that the properties were not agricultural lands.
Allowing the appeals, and setting aside the judgment passed by the Division Bench of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
No action under the provisions of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Land Owners Estate Act, 1963 could be taken against the appellant and all notices or actions taken are thus quashed.
[864F G] 2.
It is clear that the lands in the instant case will not fall within the definition of 'land ' as described in sec.
2(g) and therefore it could not vest in the State not it would be acquired under the provisions of the Act and in that event these appellants are entitled to hold their lands and the question whether the lands are agricultural or not is not very material.
[858D E] 3.
Section 2B clearly talks of land or right, title or interest in land held by land owner and land is defined in Section 2F.
It is therefore 851 clear that if this property did not fail within the ambit of the definition of 'land ' it could not be said to be 'estate ' under Section 2B and therefore could not vest in the State under Section 7.
[861F] 4.
The lands were within the boundaries of the Umaid Bhavan Palace which is the private property in accordance with the inventory prepared and approved by Government of India, and therefore will not fail within the ambit of the definition of 'land ' as defined in Section 2F and thus will not fail within the ambit of the 'estate ' which could vest under the provisions of this Section.
[863D] 5.
Section 3(2) of the Rajasthan Urban Property (Re strictions of Transfers) Act, 1973 was enacted keeping in view the Rajasthan Urban Property Ceiling Act.
Section 3(2) did not provide that the transfer will be invalid but it only provided that in spite of the transfer the property will be deemed to be owned by such person thereby meaning the transferor so that when the Ceiling Act is brought into force the transferor may not take advantage of the transfer to defeat the provisions of the Ceiling Act.
[859C] 6.
In fact, after the Ceiling Act was brought into force a prohibition was again imposed on the transfer and admit tedly the transfers in the instant case are not after the Rajasthan Urban Property Ceiling Act 1972 which provided by section 5 that the transfers made after the commencement of the Act was null and void.
It could not, therefore, be said that the transfers in the instant case after August 16, 1971 were void.
[859G] (C.A. No. 1145/87 Naveen Grah Nirman Sahkari Samiti Ltd. vs State of Rajasthan was permitted to be withdrawn, as the appellants had chosen to come to this Court when in fact they were not parties in the judgment before the High Court.).
[864G H]
