A, the unsuccessful candidate at an election, filed an elec tion petition against B, the successful candidate, claiming a declaration ' that the election of B was void and that lie had been duly elected as he had secured the next highest number of valid votes.
On the first date of the hearing before the Election Tribunal A submitted an application under 0. 23, r. 1, of the Code of Civil Procedure abandoning the relief claiming the seat.
B objected to the abandonment and filed a notice of recrimination under section 97 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, accompanied by the statement and necessary particulars.
A contended that B was not entitled to give evidence in recrimination as the claim for the seat had been abandoned.
The Tribunal held that section 90(1) of the Act had made the procedure prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure applicable to proceedings in election petitions and as such A had a right under 0. 23, r. 1, of the Code to abandon a part of his claim and that A having abandoned his claim for the seat B was no longer entitled to recriminate Held, that the provisions of the Act constitute a self con tained code governing the trial of an election petition and in spite of section 90(1) of the Act, the provisions 0.
23, r. 1, of the Code of Civil Procedure were not applicable to the trial of an election petition by the Tribunal ; and it was not open to A to withdraw or abandon a part of his claim once an election petition had been presented to the Election Commission, particularly when such a withdrawal or abandonment of a part of the claim would have had the effect of depriving B of the right of recrimination which had accrued to him under section 97 Of the Act.
The right of recrimination accrued to B the moment the election petition was presented to the Election Commission containing the claim for 'the seat, and it was not open to A to defeat this right by withdrawing or abandoning the claim for the seat.
An election petition once filed does not mean a contest only between the parties thereto but continues for the benefit of the whole constituency and cannot come to an end merely by the withdrawal thereof by the petitioner or even by his death or 78 612 by the death or withdrawal of opposition by the respondent but is liable to be continued by any person who might have been a petitioner.
