An application for condonation of delay was filed by the petitioner Revenue alongwith statutory appeals against the judgment/order of the Customs, Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal.
The application was rejected by a Single Judge of this Court under Order VI, Rule 2(14) of the Su preme Court Rules, 1966.
The Revenue filed review petitions on the ground that the application for condonation of delay made in statutory appeals under several Acts should be heard by a bench of at least two Judges.
It was contended that the effect of the refusal of condonation of delay was dismissal of the appeal itself, that the exception in favour of Special Leave Peti tions amounted to hostile discrimination without any basis in that the Special Leave Petitions will be amenable to be dealt with by two Judges, while a Single Judge will dispose of applications for condonation of delay under statutory appeals, which was irrational and violative of article 14 of the Constitution and, therefore, the Court should either hold that as dismissal of application for condonation of delay amounted to dismissal of the appeal itself, it should be heard by not less than two Judges in terms of Order VII Rule 1 subject to other provisions or refer the matter to a larger bench for re consideration, in view of the decision 825 of this Court in Commissioner of Income Tax Bombay City versus R.H. Pandi, Managing Trustees of Trust.
Bombay, holding that the applications for condonation of filing petitions of appeal were within the Chamber business under Order VI Rule 2(14).
On the question whether a Single Judge has jurisdiction to dismiss applications for condonation of delay in statuto ry appeals.
Dismissing the review petitions, HELD: 1.1 A Single Judge in Chambers is and was always competent to dismiss all applications for condonation of delay in statutory appeals.
There is nothing repugnant in the same that it is not violative of article 14 of the Consti tution.
[836G] 1.2 Order VI, Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules provides that the powers of the court in relation to a certain mat ters may be exercised by a Single Judge sitting in Chambers.
Rule 2(14) deals with applications for enlargement or abridgement of time with some exceptions.
Reading the rule simply, it means all applications for enlargement or abridgement of time would be cognizable by the Single Judge in Chambers except those applications, time for which is fixed by the court in terms of Order VII and also applica tions for condonation of delay in filing Special Leave Petitions.
[831E F] 1.3 On a proper reading, the exception made only in favour of the time fixed by the court means court function ing judicially in terms of Order VII Rule 1 as well as time fixed by the rules of the court.
All other applications for enlargement or abridgement for time could be heard by the Single Judge.
[831F G] 1.4 If a separate and distinct provision is made for application for condonation of delay under article 136 of the Constitution, it is not violative of article 14 of the Consti tution.
Applications under article 136 are a special class and are sui juris.
These are and should legitimately be treated separately other than all other applications including applications under statutory appeals.
article 136 is the resid uary power of this Court to do justice, where the court is satisfied that there is injustice.
These are class part.
There is, therefore, no discrimination under article 14 of the Constitution or in Order VI Rule 2(14).
[836C D] 2.1 Order VI demarcates the power of the Registrar and the Single Judge and Order VII demarcates the constitution of the divi 826 sion courts, powers of a Single Judge and a Vacation Judge.
This is arranging the business of the court, this is within the power of the court.
[831G] 2.2 Different treatment in respect of different applica tions has always been within the domain of Court 's arrange ment of business.
These do not involve any violation of the fundamental rules.
[836F) P.N. Eswara Iyer etc., etc.
vs The Registrar, Supreme Court of India, relied on.
3.1 The practice of one Single Judge disposing of in Chambers applications for delay in statutory appeals is just, fair and reasonable.
There is no reason either to upset that practice or to cast doubt on the proprietory of such practice, which has been valid since 1966, and which has been sanctified by the judicial decision.
There is reason in the decision and the practice.
[836E; 831D E] Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City vs R.H. Pandi Managing Trustees of Trust, Bombay, ; affirmed.
3.2 In the facts and circumstances of the case and in the light of the provisions of the Rules, it cannot be said that the earlier decision of this Court in Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City versus R.H. Pandi was clearly erro neous and, therefore, it is not necessary to refer this question to a larger bench or to disturb the settled prac tice of this Court.
[836B] Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. vs C.I.T. Bombay North, ; and Pillani Investment Corporation Ltd. vs Income Tax Officer, "A" Ward, Calcutta, and Another, , relied on.
Promotho Nath Roy vs W.A. Lee, AIR 1921 Calcutta 415 and M/s. Mela Ram & Sons vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab, ; , distinguished.
Cooker vs Tempest, , referred to.
