The deceased and his brother P.W. 2 were sharing accom modation with P.W. 4 as a tenant on the 1st Floor of a house in Chandigarh.
The father of the appellant also occupied two rooms on the same floor as a tenant.
As a marriage was scheduled in the family of the appellant 's father a request was made to P.W 4 to permit the use of the kitchen for a few days.
The possession of the kitchen was delivered on a clear understanding that it would be returned to P.W. 4 after the marriage.
The possession of the kitchen was however not delivered to P.W. 4 and that led to the quarrel.
The de ceased and his brother P.W. 2 had an heated argument with the appellant in regard to the return of the kitchen.
P.W. 2 was alleged to have showered filthy abuses in the presence of the appellant 's sister, and taken out a pen knife from his pocket and also threatened to throw out the utensils and lock up the kitchen.
The appellant got enraged, went into the kitchen and returned with a knife with which he inflict ed one blow on the neck of P.W. 2 causing a bleeding injury and also inflicted three knife blows to the brother of P.W. 2 as a result whereof he collapsed on the floor and later died while on the way to the hospital.
The appellant was convicted by the Sessions Judge under Section 302, Indian Penal Code and his conviction having been upheld by the High Court, he preferred an appeal by special leave to this Court.
It was contended for the appel lant that there was no previous iII will between the par ties, on the contrary the relations were cordial and the appellant was not the one who had started the quarrel but he acted in the heat of passion during a sudden quarrel without any premeditation and hence Exception 4 to Section 300, I.P.C. was applicable.
On the other hand counsel for the State argued that the High Court had rightly held that the appellant had acted in a cruel and unusual manner and was not entitled to the benefit of the said Exception, and that the three injuries inflicted showed that the appellant had acted in a cruel manner.
942 Partly allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: To invoke Exception 4 to Section 300 I.P.C. four requirements must be satisfied, namely (i) it was a sudden fight; (ii) there was no premeditation; (iii) the act was done in a heat of passion, and (iv) the assailant had not taken any undue advantage or acted in a cruel manner.
The cause of the quarrel is not relevant nor is it relevant who offered the provocation or started the assault.
The number of wounds caused during the occurrence is not a decisive factor but what is important is that the occurrence must have been sudden and unpremeditated and the offender must have acted in a fit of anger.
[945B D] Where, on a sudden quarrel, a person in the heat of the moment picks up a weapon which is handy and causes injuries, one of which proves fatal, he would be entitled to the benefit of this Exception provided he has not acted cruelly.
[945D E] In the instant case, after P.W. 2 and his deceased brother entered the room of the appellant and uttered filthy abuses in the presence of the latter 's sister, tempers ran high and on P.W. 2 taking out a pen knife, the appellant picked up the knife from the kitchen, ran towards P.W. 2 and inflicted a simple injury on his neck.
It would be reasona ble to infer that the deceased must have intervened on the side of his brother P.W. 2 and in the course of the scuffle he received injuries, one of which proved fatal.
Under these circumstances, it is proper to convict the accused under Section 304, Part 1, I.P.C. and direct him to suffer rigor ous imprisonment for 7 years.
[946C E]
