Respondents 1 to 8 are Assistant Secretaries/Section Officers/ Superintendents who are working in different departments of the State of Maharashtra.
Under the Rules governing their Service conditions the Govt. had prescribed Departmental Examination for promotion to the cadre of Superintendents; the passing of the examination was a condi tion precedent for the officials for being promoted as superintendents.
The Examination in question was required to be conducted every year and the officials were required to pass the same within the stipulated period; and the offi cials who were not able to pass the said examination within the prescribed period were to lose their Seniority, but they were permitted to take the examination in any number of chances after the expiry of the stipulated period and they were to be promoted only when they qualify themselves.
The Govt.
as required under the Rules, could not hold the exami nation every year particularly in the years 1968, 1969 & 1970.
The Govt.
neither extended the period within which the officials were required to pass the examination nor promoted the seniors in the cadre of Superintendents subject to their passing the examination and instead thereof the juniors in the cadre who had qualified in the examination were promoted to the cadre of Superintendents.
The seniors in the cadre were promoted only when they qualified the examination i.e. later in point of time.
The Govt. issued a revised Seniority List relating to the cadre of Superintendents.
In the said List the Respond ents herein were shown juniors to those persons who had not only qualified the Dept. Examination later in point of time but also promoted after them.
Being aggrieved, the Respond ents herein challenged the validity of the revi 948 sion of the Seniority List as also the validity of the Rules being violative of article 14 & 16 of the Constitution by filing a Writ Petition in the Bombay High Court.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petn.
and issued the following two directives to the State Govt.
(1) To recast the Revised/Final Seniority List dated 20.12.1982 vis a vis the persons shown in the Category of "Late Passing" after considering the objections of the Writ Petitioners and Ors.
and assign them seniority strictly in accordance with Rule 2 and the other Government Orders referred to in paragraph 96 of the Judgment, and (2) The Seniority in the Superintendent 's Cadre so fixed should also be considered as seniority for further promo tions.
Being dissatisfied with the said order of the High Court, the State of Maharashtra filed appeals in this Court after obtaining Special Leave.
Allowing the appeals this Court, HELD: Under the 1951 Rules, the candidate could appear for the examination after two years of his entering into the cadre.
He had three chances and he must pass within six years of his joining Service.
Under the 1962 Rules a candi date was allowed to take the examination only after complet ing five years service in the cadre.
He had three chances for taking the examination and that must be availed of within four years.
That means he must pass the examination within 9 years ' service.
Under both the Rules, the Govt was required to hold the examination every year, but no examina tion was held in 1968, 1969 and 1970.
[953F G] Those recruited in 1961 are deprived of two chances in 1968 three chances in 1968, 1969 & 1970 and those of the year 1963 have lost two chances in 1969 & 1970.
The last batch to lose one chance in 1970 is of the year 1964.
[953H; 954A] Under the 1955 Rules, the Government preserved power to dispense with or relax the requirements of any rule regulat ing "the conditions of service of Government servants; or of any class thereof".
[954B] 949 There is no restriction as to the exercise of the power or discretion.[954C] The Circular dated January 15, 1962 is an executive instruction whereas the 1955 Rules are statutory since framed under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution.
The Government could not have restricted the operation of the Statutory Rules by issuing the executive instruction.
The executive instruction may supplement but cannot supplant the statutory rules.
[954D E] Rule 2 of the 1962 Rules no doubt states that a candi date who does not pass the examination at the end of 9 years service will lose his seniority.
But this rule cannot be read in isolation.
[955D] If examination is not held every year.
The rule cannot operate to the prejudice of a person who has not exhausted all his chances.
The person who has not exhausted the avail able chances to appear in the examination cannot he denied of his seniority.
It would be unjust, unreasonable and arbitrary to penalise a person for the default of the Gov ernment to hold the examination every year.
That does not also appear to be the intent or purpose of the 1962 Rules.
[955E F] The Govt.
instead of promoting such persons in their turn made them to wait till they passed the examination.
They are the persons failing into the category of "Late Passing".
To remove the hardship caused to them the Govt.
wisely restored their legitimate seniority in the promotion al cadre.
There is nothing improper or illegal in this action and indeed, it is in harmony with the object of 1962 Rules.
[955G H] The Court need not have to reflect upon the Rules of interpretation since they are well settled.
They are now like the habits of driving which have become ingrained.
They come for assistance by instinct.
The different rules have to be used meticulously to give effect to the scheme as the clutch, brake and accelerator are used for smooth driving.
