Pursuant to the directions of the Supreme Court in Dr. Dinesh Kumar & Ors vs Motilal Nehru Medical College Allahabad, & Ors. ; regarding uniformity in post graduate medical education, respondent No. 1 the University of Delhi, decided to adopt the three years course for the post graduate degree and a two years course for the diploma commencing from the academic session of 1988.
However, with a view to mitigating hardship to candidates/students who had already completed the house job and had become entitled to undergo the post graduate course in two years, as a transitory provision, the respondent University decided to continue the practice prevailing prior to 1988 for a year.
It evolved a scheme whereunder, the number of seats for the post graduate course and diploma course available in the previous year for a student who had completed one year 's housemanship were left untouched.
As a transitional provision, the University agreed to fix 75% quota, for the 1988 session only.
As per a Note in the scheme, candidates who had done house job/Junior Residency for period of one year were not eligible for admission to 3 years post graduate degree and 2 years post graduate diploma course.
The prospectus, however, prescribed one common selection test for both the categories.
A set of writ petitions were filed before the High Court challenging the scheme of the University mainly on the basis that when there was one selection test, merit should prevail and classification in the manner indicated by the scheme was bad.
The High Court made an interim 763 order requiring the University to have the selection completed on the basis of merit adjudged in the common selection test.
Disposing of the Writ Petitions and some cases transferred from the High Court, ^ HELD: The seniors who have already done one year 's housemanship and freshers belong to two categories and cannot be said to be equal.
The question of test of comparative merit would not have arisen if the University had not prescribed a common selection test for these two categories.
If the merit list of the selection test is followed, more seniors are entitled to admission and the scheme of reservation would not work.
[765F G] While selection in the higher course should be on the basis of merit in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, purely confined to a transitory measure, the situation has to be handled not by first principles but by a somewhat informed pragmatic adhocism especially because the situation would not reoccur.
[766D] The impasse created on account of rival claims by freshers and seniors has to have a rough and ready solution yet not arbitrary and as acceptable and satisfying as possible.
[766F] With a view to providing some more seats for seniors, the respondent University should create one seat in every speciality.
Thus, 21 additional seats will be available over and above the seats fixed by the University representing 75%.
From the reserved seats made for the freshers, 21 seats, being one from every speciality, should be taken away and made available to the seniors.
Thus, 42 seats in all will be available for the seniors in the Post Graduate course to be filled up on the basis of inter se merit, keeping the senior group apart.
[766G H; 767A B] The Central Government should make the necessary provisions for funds.
The Indian Medical Council may provide the necessary accommodation by relaxing the requirements.
[767D] Dr. Dinesh Kumar vs Motilal Nehru College, Allahabad & Ors., ; , referred to.
