The appellant was an assessee who derived income from a Trust.
For assessment years 1964 65 and 1966 67 the Income Tax Officer disallowed deduction of two mounts claimed as interest paid by the Trust for amounts withdrawn from an Estate Account for investment on the ground that a portion of the amounts withdrawn from the Estate Account had been utilized for personal expenditure by the assessee.
The appellants appeals to the Assistant Commissioner having been rejected, she preferred second appeals to the Appellate Tribunal raising an additional question in respect of the assessment year 1964 65 that she was liable to tax on the net income only received by her from the Trust and not on income determined in accordance with the provisions of the Income Tax Act in the case of the Trust.
The Tribunal dis missed the appeals but at the instance of the appellant referred the two questions of law arising therein to the High Court which answered both of them against the assessee.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: It is not the income shown in the books of account of the Trust actually paid to the assessee after deduction of the outgoings from the income received in the hands of the Trust, but the real income of the Trust has to be in cluded in the total income of the assessee after taking into consideration the different items of permissible deductions in relation to that income.
[869E F] It is apparent from section 161(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 that a representative assessee, that is to say a trus tee, as regards the income In respect of which he is a representative assessee, is subject to the same duties, responsibilities and liabilities as if the income were income received by or accruing to or in favour of him bene ficially, and he is 866 liable to assessment in his own name in respect of that income; but any such assessment is deemed to be made upon him in his representative capacity only, and the tax is levied upon and recovered from him in like manner and to the same extent as it would be leviable upon and recoverable from the person represented by him.
And section 166 of the Act clarifies that the provisions relating to the liability of a representative assessee will not prevent either the direct assessment of the person on whose behalf or for whose bene fit income is receivable, or the recovery from such person of the tax payable in respect of such income.
The Income Tax Officer has the option to proceed either against the trustee or against the beneficiary, but in either case the income to be assessed must be in the same figure.
What the trustee receives as the income pertaining to the beneficiary is received by him under an obligation to pass on that income to the beneficiary.
However, in most cases administration charges and expenses have to be met out of the Trust 's income and it is only the net income which reaches the beneficiary.
If the income had, to pass directly to the beneficiary and not under trust through a trustee, the beneficiary would have equally to meet those outgoings, leaving a net income in his hands which for the purposes of the Income Tax Act would have been computed after reducing the gross income by the deductions admissible under the Act.
[868H; 869A E] (ii) The High Court was right in deciding the question relating to the disallowance of part of the interest claimed as a deduction against the assessee.
[868F] Padmavati Jaikrishna vs Addl.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat, , referred to.
