Arishtams and Asavas are Ayurvedic preparations whi ch were originally subject to a uniform levy applicable to a ll medicinal preparations belonging to the different systems of medicine under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 195 9.
Firstly by a notification dated 4.3.1974, and later, by t he Tamil Nadu Act, No. 23 of 1974, the State Government singl ed out Arishtams and Asavas for a higher rate of levy of 3 0% while all other medicinal preparations were subjected to a levy of 7%, with a view to curb the abuse of Arishtams a nd Asavas for their alcoholic content by drink addicts and to eliminate the mushroom growth of Ayurvedic pharmacies pr e paring sub standard Arishtams and Asavas for purposes oth er than medicinal use.
The appellants filed writ petitio ns contending that Arishtams and Asavas manufactured by th em are essentially Ayurvedic medicines, that the object of controlling consumption of liquor is being served by sever al other existing statutes, that there are over 130 Allopath ic medicines containing alcohol which are potable, and th at therefore, the levy of tax at 30% on Arishtams and Asav as alone while other medicinal preparations are subjected to tax at 7% results in an invidious discrimination against t he manufacturers of those Ayurvedic preparations.
The Hi gh Court dismissed the petitions.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: The two preparations, Arishtams and Asavas, a re medicinal preparations, and even though they contain a hi gh alcohol content, so long as they continue to be identifi ed as medicinal preparations they must be treated, for t he purposes of the Sales Tax Law, in like manner as medicin al preparations generally, including those containing a low er percentage of alcohol.
The appellants are entitled to a refund of the excess paid as sales tax.
[41H; 42A, C] 38 There is no reason why Arishtams and Asavas should be treated differently from the general class of Ayurved ic medicines.
It is open to the Legislature, or the Sta te Government if it is authorised in that behalf by the Legi s lature, to select different rates of tax for differe nt commodities.
But where the commodities belong to the sa me class or category, there must be a rational basis for di s criminating between one commodity and another for the pu r pose of imposing tax.
It is commonly known that consider a tions of economic policy constitute a basis for levyi ng different rates of sales tax.
For instance, the object m ay be to encourage a certain trade or industry in the conte xt of the State policy for economic growth, and a lower ra te would be considered justified in the case of such a commod i ty.
There may be several such considerations bearing direc t ly on the choice of the rate of sales tax, and so long as there is good reason for making the distinction from oth er commodities no complaint can be made.
What the actual ra te should be is not a matter for the courts to determine gene r ally, but where a distinction is made between commoditi es failing in the same category a question arises at on ce before a Court whether there is justification for the di s crimination.
In the present case, we are not satisfied th at the reason behind the rate of 30% on the turnover of Aris h tams and Asavas constitutes good ground for taking those t wo preparations out from the general class of medicinal prep a rations to which a lower rate has been applied.
[40F H; 41A C] Adhyaksha Mathur Babu 's Sakti Oushadhalaya Dacca ( P) Ltd. and others vs Union of India, , reli ed on.
