Sub section
(1) of section 33 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 provid es that subject to the provisions of section 34 thereof developme nt rebate may be claimed as a deduction in respect of a n ew machinery or plant.
Clause (a) of sub section
(3) of section 34 stip u lates that the said deduction shall not be allowed unless an amount equal to 75 per cent of the development rebate is debited to the profit and loss account of the releva nt previous year and credited to a reserve account; and t he Explanation thereto provides that the deduction shall not be denied by reason only that the amount so credited to t he reserve account exceeded the amount of the profit of su ch previous year.
The appellant assessee which had a textile mill claim ed a sum as development rebate for the assessment year 1962 6 3.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the claim on the ground th at the assessee had not created a reserve as contemplated by sub section
(3) of section 34 and his order, on appeal, was upheld by the Assistant Commissioner.
In second appeal, the claim by the assessee found favour with the Appellate Tribunal; b ut on a reference made by it at the instance of the Revenu e, the High Court held that the assessee had failed to comp ly with the conditions of sub section
(3) of section 34.
The appella nt contended that the view taken by the High Court was erron e ous and that it was not necessary that a reserve should ha ve been created in the previous year.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: In order to claim the deduction on account of development rebate under sub section
(1) of section 33 it is obligat o ry that the debit entries in the profit and loss account a nd the credit entry in a reserve account should be made in t he relevant previous year in which the 87 machinery or plant is installed or first put to use.
T he development rebate contemplated by sub section
(1) of section 33 cannot be allowed as a deduction unless a reserve accou nt has been created in the previous year in which the install a tion or first use occurs.
Any doubt in so reading the prov i sions because of a want or insufficiency of profit in su ch previous year has been removed by the Explanation to clau se (a) of sub section
(3) of section 34.
[91D E] What is contemplated is the creation of a Reserve Fu nd in the relevant previous year irrespective of the result of the profit and loss account disclosed by the books of t he assessee.
Mere book entries will suffice for creating such a Reserve Fund.
The debit entries and the entries relating to the Reserve Fund have to be made before the profit and lo ss account is finally drawn up.
That is a condition for secu r ing the benefit of development rebate.
[89E F] West Laikdihi Coal Co. Ltd., Calcutta vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal 11, ; Commission er of Income tax, Delhi Central vs Modi Spinning & Weavi ng Mills Co. Ltd., and Indian Overseas Ba nk Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, , distinguished.
Additional Commissioner of income tax vs Vishnu Indu s trial Enterprises, and Commissioner of Income tax vs U.P. Hotel and Restaurants Ltd., [1984] 1 , overruled.
Dodballapur Spinning Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Incometax, Karnataka 2 and Anr., a nd Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. vs section Rajagopalan, Income T ax Officer, Companies Circle H(I) Bombay and Others, , referred to.
