Appellants Nos. 1 and 2 were elected on June 30, 1987 as Mayor and Deputy Mayor respectively of the Municipal Corp o ration of Bhavnagar, Gujarat for a period of one year.
On May 21, 1988 a notice was issued by them for convening a meeting of the members of the Corporation on June 1, 1988 to elect a Mayor and Deputy Mayor and for certain other bus i ness mentioned in the Agenda circulated.
Subsequently, on May 31, 1988, appellant No. 1 gave instructions by a lett er to the Deputy Secretary of the Corporation to postpone t he meeting as he had to go to Gandhinagar for urgent work of the Corporation.
The said instructions were given by appe l lant No. 1 after consulting 32 members of the Corporatio n. Pursuant to the said letter and the instructions contain ed therein, appellant No. 3, the Secretary of the Corporatio n, issued a letter addressed to all the members of the Corpor a tion informing them that the meeting scheduled for June 1, 1988 had been postponed.
In spite of the aforesaid lett er postponing the meeting, 19 members of the Corporatio n, presumably belonging to the minority party or partie s; assembled at the place indicated in the notice dated May 2 1, 1988 and elected respondent Nos. 1 and 2 as Mayor and Depu ty Mayor.
Neither the Commissioner of the Corporation nor i ts Secretary or Deputy Secretary was present at the said mee t ing, and the minutes of that meeting were not recorded.
As the appellants Nos. 1 and 2 did not hand over t he charge to respondents Nos. 1 and 2, the latter filed a wr it petition in the High Court for being declared as legal ly elected Mayor and Deputy Mayor and for an order that char ge of the said posts should be handed over to them.
111 The Single Judge dismissed the Writ Petition taking t he view that as the Mayor in exercise of the powers conferr ed upon him under subclause (c) of clause (1) of Chapter II of the Schedule (under section 453) in the Bombay Provincial Munic i pal Corporations Act, 1949 can issue a notice for conveni ng the meeting, he is also entitled to the power to cancel or rescind the notice under the provisions of section 21 of t he Bombay General Clauses Act, 1904.
Division Bench of the High Court, however, allowed t he Letters Patent Appeal filed by respondents Nos. 1 and 2 taking the view that it was bound by the view taken by th is Court in Chandrakant Khaire vs Dr. Shantaram Kale and ot h ers; , where it was observed that a proper ly convened meeting could not be postponed.
The proper cour se to adopt is to hold the meeting as originally intended a nd then and there adjourn it to a more suitable date.
In the appeal by special leave filed by the appellan ts before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appe l lants that the Division Bench had committed an error in following the observations made in Chandrakant Khaire 's ca se as that case could be distinguished on facts, that t he question raised in this appeal was practically covered on the basis of analogy, by the ratio of the decision of th is Court in Mohd. Yunus Saleem vs Shiv Kumar Shastri and ot h ers; , which dealt with analogous provisio ns of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and that in view of the provisions of Section 21 of the Bombay Gener al Clauses Act, 1904, which were applicable to the case, sin ce appellant No. 1 had the power to convene the meeting of t he members of the Corporation, it must be held that he also h ad the implied power to cancel or postpone the meeting.
Respondent No. 1 contested the appeal and submitted th at the decision in Chandrakant Khaire 's case was direct ly applicable to the case and it must be held that the appe l lant No. 1 had no power to cancel the notice convening t he meeting and hence it must be held that the meeting at whi ch the supporters of respondent No. 1 which met and elect ed respondent No. 1 as Mayor was validly held and the resol u tion appointing respondent No. 1 was validly passed.
Partly allowing the appeal and remanding the matter ba ck to the High Court, this Court, HELD: (1) Unless the object of the context or inqui ry otherwise warrants the term 'adjournment ' in connection wi th a meeting should 112 be applied only to the case of a meeting which has alrea dy been convened and which is thereafter postponed and not to a case where a notice convening a meeting is cancelled a nd subsequentiy, a notice for holding the same meeting on a later date is issued, as in the instant case.
[120E F] (2) Mayor had the implied power to cancel a meeting or postpone a meeting which was duly convened before the sa id meeting commenced and to convene the same on a subseque nt occasion.
It is needless to say that this power must be exercised by the Mayor bona fide and not for a collater al purpose.
The power must again be exercised for a prop er purpose.
If the Mayor is unable to show this, then t he postponement of the meeting must he held to he bad.
But it is not possible to say that the Mayor had no power to canc el a meeting duly convened and to direct that the same shou ld he held on a later day provided that the power was exercis ed bona fide and for a justified purpose.
[122G H; 123A] Chandrakant Khaire vs Dr. Shantaram Kale and other s; , ; , distinguished.
(3) The principles underlying section 21 of the Bomb ay General Clauses Act would he clearly applicable in conside r ing the scope of the powers of the Mayor of a Municip al Corporation set out in Clause 1 of Chapter II of the sa id Schedule in the said Act and in particular, in sub clau se (c) of the said clause.
The rules in the Schedule have be en framed under the statutory provisions of the said Act a nd section 453 of the said Act provides that the rules in t he Schedule as amended from time to time shall he deemed to he part of that Act.
The power of the Mayor conferred und er clause 1 of Chapter II of the said Schedule must be regard ed as a statutory power as distinguished from the powers of directors of a company which are derived strictly from t he Articles of Association of the Company which are contractu al in natore.
[125A C] (4) There appears to be no reason to take the view th at the principles underlying section 21 of the Bombay Gener al Clauses Act would not apply to the said powers of the Mayo r. In the instant case, appellant No. 1, the Mayor of respon d ent No. 5, Corporation, had the power to cancel the noti ce convening the meeting before the commencement of the meeti ng with a view to convene a meeting on a later date.
[125D] Smith vs Paringa Mines Ltd., [1906] 2 Ch.
103, disti n guished.
Mohd. Yunus Saleem vs Shiv Kumar Shastri and Ors .; , , relied on.
113 Babubhai Girdharbhai Patel vs Manibhai Ashabhai Patel Others, [1975] 16 Gujarat Law Reporter, 566, referred to.
R.K. Jain vs Bar Council of U.P. & Ors., AIR (1974) 61 Allahabad 211, approved.
