The appellant/tenant took on lease a building from the respondent.
In the Deed of Rent there was an express provi sion that the tenant should not sublet the premises to anyone.
However, shortly thereafter a social club came to be opened in the premises, where members played cards, chess etc.
every evening till about midnight.
The respondent thereupon filed.
a suit against the tenant seeking his eviction inter alia on the ground of sub letting the prem ises contrary to the terms of the lease deed.
The tenant admitted the factum of the opening of the club but contended that he had neither sublet the premises for rent nor other wise parted with its possession to the club.
The Trial Court held that the respondent had failed to prove that the appellant had sublet the premises to the Club for rent, and that the evidence only warranted an inference that the appellant had allowed the club to use the premises as a licencee and as such, the appellant was not liable to be evicted.
The Appellate Court held that the evidence did not establish any subletting of the premises for rent, but nevertheless there were adequate materials to hold that the appellant had parted with the possession of the premises in favour of the club and such parting of possession would amount to subletting within the meaning of section 13(1)(e) of the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent & Eviction) Act, 1950 and as such the appellant was liable to be evicted.
Consequently, the Appellate Court passed a decree for evic tion.
The High Court dismissed the second appeal of the appellant.
After the filing of the appeal in this Court the re spondent filed a civil miscellaneous petition seeking per mission to produce certain documents in the nature of the Auditor 's reports and the Managing Committee 's reports of the club as additional evidence to establish that 185 there existed a stipulation for the payment of rent by the club to the appellant, and the club was bound to pay rent to the appellant for the user of the premises, but such payment was being deferred in view of the pendency of the eviction suit between the respondent and the appellant.
Dismissing the appeal and the civil miscellaneous peti tion, the Court, HELD: (1) On a reading of sub clause (e) of Section 13(1) it is seen that a tenant will render himself liable for eviction if he has "assigned, sublet or otherwise parted with the possession of, the whole or any part of the prem ises without the permission of landlord.
" Consequently, even if a tenant parts with possession of the whole or any part of the premises without assigning or subletting the prem ises, he would still be liable to be evicted from the prem ises under the Act.
If from this perspective the user of the premises by the club is examined, it can certainly be held that the appellant had parted with the possession of the premises as envisaged in clause (e) of sub section (1) of section 13.
[188E G] (2) There is no evidence to show that the appellant had at any time exercised his right to exclusive possession and kept the premises locked and denied the members of the club entry to the premises.
[188H; 189A] (3) Section 146 of the Companies Act enjoins every company to have a registered office and certain requirements of the Companies Act have to be complied with by the club by virtue of its registered office being situated in the leased premises.
The appellant cannot prevent the club from per forming its statutory duties so long as the club has its registered office in the premises.
[189B, D] Smt.
Rajbir Kaur vs M/s. section Chokesiri & Co., JT 1988(3) SC 593, distinguished.
(4) The additional documents could have been obtained and filed before the Trial Court, the Appellate Court or the High Court and no satisfactory explanation has been offered for having failed to do so.
Hence there is no justification to allow the civil miscellaneous petition.
[191 C]
