The Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Act ,955, put a total ban on the slaughter of all categories of animal,, of the species of bovine cattle.
The U. P. Prevention of Cow Slaughter Act, 1955, put a total ban on the slaughter of cows and her progeny which included bulls, bullocks, heifers and calves.
The C. P. and Berar Animal Preservation Act, 1949, placed a total ban on the slaughter of cows, male or female calves of cow, bulls, bullocks, and heifers and the slaughter of buffaloes (male or female, adults or calves) was permitted only under a certificate granted by the proper authorities.
No exception was made in any of these Acts permitting slaughter of cattle even for bona fide religious purposes.
These three Acts were enacted in pursuance of the directive principles of State policy contained in article 48 Of the Constitution.
The petitioners, who were engaged in the butcher 's trade and its subsidiary undertakings, challenged the constitutional validity of the three Acts on the grounds that they infringed their funda mental rights guaranteed under articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 25 of the Constitution.
The respondents contended that the impugned Acts were constitutional and valid as they were made in consonance with the directive principles of Art 48 which were superior to the fundamental rights and that the impugned Acts did not offend article 14, 19(1)(g) or 25 Held, (i) that a total ban on the slaughter of cows of all ages and calves of cows and of she buffaloes, male and female, was quite reasonable and valid; (ii)that a total ban on the slaughter of she buffaloes or breeding bulls or working bullocks (cattle as well as buffaloes), as long as they were capable of being used as milch or draught cattle, was also reasonable and valid; and (iii) that a total ban on the slaughter of she buffaloes, bulls 630 and bullocks (cattle or buffalo) after they ceased to be capable of yielding milk or of breeding or working as draught animals was not in the interests of the general public and was invalid.
The directive in article 48 for taking steps for preventing the slaughter of animals is quite explicit and positive and contemplates a ban on the slaughter of the several categories of animals specified therein, namely, cows and calves and other cattle which answer the description of milch or draught cattle.
The protection is confined only to cows and calves and to those animals which are presently or potentially capable of yielding milk or of doing work as draught cattle but does not extend to cattle which at one time were milch or draught cattle but which have ceased to be such.
The directive principles of State policy set out in Part IV of the Constitution have to conform to and run as subsidiary to the fundamental rights in Part 111.
State of Madras vs Smt.
Champakam Dorairajan, [1951] S.C.R. 525, followed.
The ban on the slaughter of cows even on the slaughter day did not violate the fundamental rights of the petitioners under article 25 as it had not been established that the sacrifice of a cow on that day was an obligatory overt act for a Mussalman to exhibit his religious belief and idea.
Ratilal Panachand Gandhi vs The State of Bombay, [1954] S.C.R. 1055, applied.
The impugned Acts which affected only the butchers who slaughtered cattle and not the butchers who slaughtered sheep or goats, did not offend article 14 Of the Constitution.
The different categories of animals being susceptible of classification into separate groups on the basis of their usefulness to society, the butchers who kill each category may also be placed in distinct classes according to the effect produced on society by the carrying on of their respective occupations.
This classification is based on an intelligible differentia which places the petitioners in a well defined class and distinguishes them from those who slaughter sheep or goats and this differentia has a close connection with the object sought to be achieved by the im pugned Acts, namely, the preservation, protection and improvement of livestock.
In determining the question of the.
reasonableness of restrictions imposed on the fundamental rights conferred by article 19(1)(g) the Court cannot proceed on a general notion of what is reasonable in the abstract or even on the consideration of what is reasonable from the point of view of the person or persons on whom the restrictions are imposed.
What the Court has to do is to consider whether the restrictions imposed are reasonable in the interests of the general public.
The test of reasonableness has been laid down in State of Madras vs I. G. Row, [1952] S.C.R. 597 at 602.
It should also be remembered that the legislature 631 is the best judge of what is good for the community.
Though a constitutional question cannot be decided on the grounds of the sentiment of a section of the people, it has to be taken into consideration, though only as one of the elements, in arriving at a judicial verdict as to the reasonableness of the restrictions.
The effect of the impugned Acts on the fundamental rights of the petitioners under article 19(1)(g) is direct and instantaneous as soon as the Acts are brought into force, and it has to be determined whether they can be justified under cl.
(6) of article 19 The country is in short supply of milch cattle, breeding bulls and working bullocks, and a total ban on the slaughter of these which are essential to the national economy for the supply of milk, agricultural working power and manure is a reasonable restriction in the interests of the general public.
But a total ban on the slaughter of useless cattle, which involves a wasteful drain on the nation 's cattle feed which is itself in short supply and which would deprive the useful cattle of much needed nourishment, cannot be justified as being in the interests of the general public.
Under O. XLI r. 2, Of file Supreme Court Rules intervention is permitted only to the Attorney General of India or the Advocates General for the States.
There is no other provision for permitting a third party to intervene in the proceedings before the Supreme Court.
In practice, however, the Supreme Court, in exercise of its inherent powers, allows a third party to intervene when such third party is a party to some proceedings in the Supreme Court or in the High Courts where the same or similar questions are in issue, for the decision of the Supreme Court will conclude the case of that party.
