The appellant, a Corporation was created under the Jammu functions was to undertake the removal and disposal of trees and exploitation of the forest resources entrusted to it by the Government.
The Corporation took a decision for the extraction of timber of a total volume of 10.08 lakh c. ft. which included the work of felling and removal of trees.
The respondent an approved contractor submitted his tender and was granted the works contract initially with reference to 4 lakh c. ft., and subsequently he was entrusted with an additional work for a further quantity of 2 lakh c. ft.
The respondent completed the entire work under the contract.
Thereafter, he claimed that he was entitled to the remaining volume of the work, namely, 4.08 lakh c.ft.
as per the procedure, prac tice, custom and usage extended to him.
The appellant denied any such practice, custom or assurance and said that a decision had been taken not to work the area further till the entire timber already extracted was removed to its destination.
There was, therefore, no question of entrusting the remaining work to anybody.
Paragraph 15 of the Tender Notice stipulated that: "Extension for the additional volume in the coupe will not be claimed as a matter of right but may be considered by the Management where the achievement 381 is 100 per cent.
" The agreement provided for arbitration which was contained in clause 42, and which stipulated: "that any dispute, differences or question that may arise was to be referred for arbitration to the Managing Director of the Jammu & Kashmir Forest Corporation.
" The respondent filed an application under sections 8, 11 and 20 of the Jammu and Kashmir Arbitration Act, 2002 (Smvt) in the High Court for a direction to the Corporation to file the agreement and to refer the dispute to an arbitrator.
The High Court deprecated the attitude of the Corpora tion in not awarding the remaining work to the respondent.
It held that the trees in question had already been marked and had, therefore, to be felled 'one day or the other ', and as the contractor 's achievement was 300 per cent he had all the right to claim the remaining work as provided in para graph 15 of the Tender Notice.
The High Court also found that as there existed a dispute touching the contracts executed between the parties, it referred the matter under clause 42 of the agreement to the named arbitrator, namely, the Managing Director of the State Forest Corporation.
The High Court went further and by an interim order directed that the contractor be permitted to do the remain ing work of extraction of timber of standing marked trees and the rates be determined by the arbitrator after hearing both the parties pursuant to the said interim order.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid orders of the High Court the appellant appealed to this Court by special leave.
On the questions: (i) whether there was any subsisting arbitration agreement in respect of the matters sought to be referred, and (ii) whether the interim order of the High Court directing the respondent to do the remaining work was without jurisdiction, and whether the respondent was enti tled to any compensation for the work done.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: [R.S. Pathak.
CJ and L.M. Sharma, J. Majority Per L.M. Sharma.
J.] 1.
The claim raised by the respondent in his application before the High Court is not covered by the arbitration clause and cannot be 382 referred for a decision of the arbitrator.
The order of reference passed by the High Court has therefore to be set aside.
[390F] 2.
If the foundation of the claim of the respondent be any alleged assurance or custom or practice, it cannot be said that such claim arises out of the written agreement between the parties; and so the prayer for reference has to be rejected.
If the case pleaded is true, the appropriate forum for the respondent will be a Court of Law directly granting the relief in an appropriate legal proceeding [388A B] 3.
The language of the term contained in para 15 of the tender notice is explicit in declaring that the contractor would not be allowed to claim as a matter of right the additional volume of work.
His right extends only to a consideration of his case by the management when the ques tion of allotment of additional work is taken up.
But by the application filed before the High Court the respondent did not ask for reference of a dispute as to whether he is entitled to consideration or not; the prayer is for refer ence of a higher claim of immediately getting the additional work, and this prayer has been allowed.
This issue cannot be said to have any connection with the 15th term of the tender notice or any other provision thereof or of the agreement.
[388D E] 4.
In the absence of a repudiation by the Corporation of the respondent 's right to be considered, if and when occa sion arises, no dispute can be said to have arisen which may be referred for arbitration.
[390B] 5.
In order that there may be a reference to arbitra tion, existence of a dispute is essential, and the dispute to be referred must arise under the arbitration agreement.
[390C] Seth Thawardas Pherumal vs The Union of India, relied on.
There was no justification for the High Court in deprecating the Corporation for not awarding the remaining work 10 the contractor when it was leaving the matter to be decided by the arbitrator. [387G] 7.
A Court, while considering the question whether an alleged dispute between the parties has to be referred for arbitration or not, should refrain from expressing its opinion on the merits of the dispute which may embarrass the arbitrator.
[387G H] 383 8.
Section 18 deals with the power of the Court to pass interim orders after award is actually filed in Court.
So far as clause (a) of Section 41 is concerned, it makes only the procedural rules of the Civil Procedure Code applicable.
The source of power to grant interim relief cannot be traced to clause (a), otherwise clause (b) would become otiose.
So far as clause (b) is concerned, it circumscribes the Court 's power within the limits indicating in the second Schedule, and further qualifies it by declaring in the Proviso that it cannot be used to the prejudice of any of the powers of the arbitrator.
[391 D E] H.M. Kamaluddin vs Union of India, relied on.
Interim directions can be issued only 'for the pur pose of ' arbitration proceedings and not to frustrate the same.
[391E] 10.
The High Court in the instant case, by granting the interim relief, not in the shape of an injunction in the negative form, but by a mandatory direction clothing the respondent plaintiff with the right to do something which he could have been entitled to only after a final decision on the merits of the case in his favour committed a serious error.
[391G H] [Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J partly dissenting] 1.
There was a dispute in the instant case, whether the contractor was entitled to the grant of the additional volume of work.
Such dispute was a dispute between the parties in respect of the 'works to be executed by the contractor '.
In that view of the matter and in the light of clause 15 read with clause 17 of the Agreement the dispute was clearly referable to the arbitration of the Managing Director, Jammu & Kashmir State Forest Corporation.
[397F G] 2.
Endeavour should always be to find out the intention of the parties, and that intention has to be found out by read ing the terms broadly, clearly, without being circumscribed.
[398B C] 3.
An arbitration agreement is one which is defined in section 2(a) of the as a written agreement to submit present or future differences to arbi tration.
There was, in the instant case, an arbitration agreement that is to say, the parties had been ad idem.
The agreement was in writing.
It was not a contingent or a future contract.
It was a contract at present time to refer the dispute arising out of the present contract entered into by the parties as a result of which the 384 contractor got a right or privilege to ask for consideration of grant of the further work.
It was not a mere right to get the additional work.
The amplitude of the arbitration clause was wide enough and should be so read.
[397H; 398A B, C D] Seth Thawardas Pherumal vs The Union of India, distinguished.
A.M. Mair & Co. vs Gordhandass Sagarmull ; at 798 and Heyman vs Darwins Ltd., [1942] Appeal Cases 356 at 368 referred to.
Though under section 41(b) the Court has power to pass an interim order or injunction or appointment of re ceiver, the Section does not empower the Court to direct execution of the contract, the extent of which is in dispute and is a matter referable to be adjudicated by the arbitra tor.
If the Court does so, then the decision of the dispute becomes academic because the contract is executed.
[399D E] 5.
Where the question is whether the contract was to be executed by the respondent, if the contract is in fact executed by the respondent by virtue of the order of the Court, then nothing remains of the dispute.
There is nothing arbitrable any more land proceedings before the arbitrator cannot be forestalled by interim order by ordering execution of the contract before it is decided whether the contractor had any right to the contract for additional work in the grab of preservation of the property.
[399E F] 6.
The interim directions given by the High Court that the contractor be allowed to do the remaining work of ex traction of timber of standing marked trees was beyond the competence of the Court.
[399F G] 7.
It would be unjust to deprive any party of its dues simply because the work has been done in view of a wrong order or incorrect order of the Court of justice when there was no stay. ]400B]
