The question that arises for determination in the ap peals is whether the hydrogenated rice bran oil manufactured by the Respondents, could, as claimed by them, be classified under Tariff Item No. 12.
Respondent herein manufacture hydrogenated rice bran oil, which is used as raw material in the soap making and in other industries.
The Respondent flied a classification list classifying the said product under Tariff Item No. 12 and claimed exemption from payment of excise duty.
The Asstt.
Collector of Central Excise, who dealt with the matter held that the said Roods was a new product after manufacture, having a distinct name, Character and use and u such it fell under Tariff Item 68 CET and not Item 12.
The Respondent preferred an appeal before the Appellate Collec tor of Central Excise, Madras.
The Appellate Collector reversed the order of the Asstt.
Collector and held that hydrogenated rice bran oil is classifiable under Tariff Item 12 CET and granted the consequential relief.
The order of the Collector was confirmed by the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal.
Hence the appeal under Section 35 L of the Central Excises & Salt Act by the Department.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: Indubitably hydrogenation of rice bran 011 Is a process.
But all processes need not be manufacture.
It must be such a process which transforms the old articles Into goods and changes the identity, use and the purpose of use in the goods undergone by the process.
By 292 the process of manufacture a new identifiable goods, in the market as such must come into being.
[295E F] The melting point of the hydrogenated rice bran oil is 45degree C and it is in the nature of extra hardened vegeta ble process which is unfit for human consumption.
It was taken to be classifiable under Tariff Item 68 CET.
[295F] Rice bran oil is extracted out of rice bran by solvent extraction method.
After such extraction rice bran oil obtained is in liquid form.
The parties purchase rice bran oil from the market and process it.
The process is as fol lows.
The oil is heated to above 80degree C and the impuri ties are removed by adding oxalic acid and caustic lye.
The purified oil is then bleached by heating it to 85xC to 100xC and thereby treating with fullers earth.
The processed oil is then hardened by passing it through hydrogen gas.
During, hydrogenation, the oil absorbs two atoms of hydrogen and the unsaturated ferry acid present in the oil becomes saturated.
The oil is then in a semi solid condition and its melting point is raised to 45xC or more.
In the hardened state, the oil looks like Vanaspati (or vegetable product, to use the Central Excise terminology) but there is a difference in the degree of hydrogenation of the two.
[295H; 296A C] In order to differentiate between the edible hydrogenat ed oils (Vanaspati) and super hydrogenated vegetable oils, the latter are referred to as extra hardened oil or super hardened oil.
[296C D] This hardening of oil is necessary for soap making, otherwise, the soap, on coming into contract with water is likely to become soggy.
The Respondents use the hardened oil for soap making in their factories.
Besides its use in soap making, the extra hardened oil is also put to various other industrial uses, such as for application as greases.
[296D E] It is obvious that hydrogenated oil is nothing but hardened vegetable oil which would fail within Item 12 CET for the purpose of Central Excise duty.
[300A] Item 12 is more specific than Item 68, for all hardened technical oil not fit for human consumption and as such, would be covered under this category.
[300G ] Tungabhadara Industries Ltd. vs The Commercial Tax Officer, 293 Kurnool; , , followed.
Champaklal vs State of Gujarat, AIR 1980 SC 1889; IVP Ltd. and Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors., and Vital & Vital Oil Pvt. Ltd. vs Collector of Central Excise, Bombay, , referred to.
