The appellant was enrolled as a Constable in the BSF and was serving as such since 1966.
He was confirmed in the said post.
In 1971, he was granted leave from October :25, 1971 to October 30, 1971 on account of the death of his father.
As the Shrad ceremony could not be performed within the aforesaid time, and he was suffering from serious illness he made an application requesting for extension of leave sup ported by a medical certificate.
On December 12, 1971, the appellant received a communication from the Commandant stating that as he was absent without leave from October 31, 1971, that because of such absence without leave for a long period his further retention in service was undesirable, and that it was proposed to dismiss him from service.
He was asked to submit his explanation against the imposition of this penalty.
The appellant sent a telegram on December 21, 1971, but without any redress.
On January 5, 1972 he re ceived an order of the Commandant informing him that he had been dismissed from service.
On January 10, 1972, the appel lant again sent an application requesting that he may be permitted to join his service, but he was not allowed to do so.
The appellant preferred an appeal to the Inspector General, BSF on February 1, 1972 but no relief was granted.
The appellant after serving a notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure filed a civil suit for a decla ration that the order of dismissal from service was illegal and he was still in service.
The respondent contested the suit and pleaded that the appellant was absent from duty from October 31, 1971 without any leave at a critical time when India was at war with Pakistan, and that the Commandant by his notice dated 15 December 1971 intimated: that his retention in service was undesirable because of his absence for a long period, that he was given an opportunity to urge his defence which he did not avail of by sending 272 any reply, and that the Commandant had therefore dismissed him from service by his order dated January 5, 1972.
The Munsiff held that the appellant had been given a reasonable opportunity before the Commandant dismissed him from serv ice, and dismissed the civil suit.
The appeal filed by the appellant was allowed by the Additional District Judge and the suit was decreed.
It was held that the order of dismissal from service was illegal and bad, as the same was not made by the Security Force Court and no such court had been constituted.
The Order passed by the Commandant under section 11(2) of the Border Security Force Act and read with rule 177 of the Rules could not therefore be upheld.
It was further held that the order was bad as it was contrary to the constitutional mandate embodied in Article 311 of the Constitution, as no opportu nity of hearing was given, and the procedural safeguards contained in Chapters VII to XI of the Border Security Rules were not followed.
The High Court decreed the second appeal preferred by the respondents, reversed the judgment and decree of the lower appellate court, and dismissed the suit.
It was held that the order of dismissal of the appellant from service had been made in accordance with the powers conferred on the Commandant, BSF under the provisions of section 11(2) and (4) of the read with rule 177 of the Border Security Forces Rules, 1969.
It was fur ther held that this was an independent power conferred upon the Commandant apart from the power conferred upon the Security Force Court under section 28 for imposition of the punishment for dismissal from service in respect of offences specified in section 19 of the Act.
In the appellant 's appeal to this Court, it was contend ed that unless and until the offence of absence without leave or overstaying leave granted to a member of the serv ice, without sufficient cause is tried by the Security Force Court and punishment is awarded therefor as provided in sections 48 and 50 of the Act, the order of dismissal from service by the Commandant is illegal and as such it is liable to be quashed and set aside.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: 1.
The Prescribed Authority i.e. the Commandant is competent to exercise the power under section 11(2) of the BSF Act and to dismiss any person under his command as prescribed under Rule 177 of the BSF Rules.
[281E F] 273 2.
The has been enacted with a view to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for ensuring the security of the borders of India and for matters connected therewith.
The services of the enrolled persons under the Act are governed by the provisions of the Act as well as the Rules framed thereunder.
[276D E] 3.
All the offences mentioned under sections 14 and 19 of the Act are to be tried by the Security Force Court, which will punish the offenders with sentences as provided in the Act.
A procedure has been provided by the BSF Rules for trial of the offences by the Security Force Court and for awarding of punishment.
[279E; 280B] 4.
The power under Section 11(2) empowering the Comman dant who is the Prescribed Authority to dismiss or remove from service any person under his command other than an officer or a subordinate officer read with rule 177 of the Rules is an independent power which can be validly exercised by the Commandant as a Prescribed Officer, and it has noth ing to do with the power of the Security Force Court for dealing with the offences, such as absence from duty without leave or overstaying leave granted to a member of the Force without sufficient cause and to award punishment for the same.
[281B D] 5.
Rule 6 of the Rules has specifically provided that in regard to matters not specifically provided in the Rules it shall be lawful for the Competent Authority to do such thing or take such action as may be just and proper in the circum stances of the case.
[281F] In the instant case, though any procedure has not been prescribed by the Rules, still the Commandant duly gave an opportunity to the appellant to submit his explanation against the proposed punishment for dismissal from service for his absence from duty without any leave and overstaying leave without sufficient cause.
The appellant did not avail of this opportunity and he did not file any show cause to the said notice.
Thus the principle of natural justice was not violated as has been rightly held by the High Court.
[281G H]
