The appellant Co operative Society has filed this appeal by special leave against the High Court 's order passed in a writ petition filed by it whereby the High Court set aside the award of the Industrial Tribunal.
The High Court in the impugned order held that the appellant is liable to pay to its employees bonus at the rate of 20 per cent of its total annual earnings for the years 1975 76, 1976 77 and 1977 78.
The appellant contends that the High Court went wrong in directing the appellant to pay bonus with regard to various amounts invested by it as permitted by the relevant provi sions of the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act 1960, and the amounts carried forward to its reserve fund.
According to the appellant, the High Court neither read the provisions of Sec.
6(d) of the Bonus Act 1965 correctly nor was it justified in relying on the Explanation to the 3rd Schedule to the Bonus Act.
Dismissing the appeal subject to the modification indi cated in the judgment hereinbelow, this Court, HELD: The expression "capital" is not defined under the Bonus Act.
It must therefore be understood in the sense in which that expression is generally understood.
That means all amounts which are classified as capital in contrast to revenue must qualify for deduction subject to the limit of 8.5 per cent, provided such capital is invested by the Society in its establishment as evidenced by its books of accounts at the commencement of the accounting year.
Any such capital upto 8.S per cent is thus deductible.
Further more, all sums which have been carried forward in respect of the relevant accounting year to a reserve fund as required under any law applicable to Co operative Societies for the time being in force are also deductible from gross profits.
[269B D] 267 Accordingly all such amounts held by the Society as reserve fund in terms of Sec. 66 of the Co operative Socie ties Act must qualify for deduction.
[269H] If larger amounts are carried forward to the reserve fund in terms of Sec. 66, all such amounts will come within the ambit of item (4) of the 3rd Schedule to the Bonus Act and qualify for deduction.
[270A B]
