The appellant was detained pursuant to an order of detention passed against him under Section 3(1) of the , with a view to prevent him from in dulging in activities prejudicial to the augmentation of country 's foreign exchange resources.
The detaining authori ty on consideration of the material placed before him came to the conclusion that the appellant was indulging in re ceiving and making payments in India unauthorisedly under instructions from a person residing abroad in violation of the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, 1973 and that the said unauthorised and illegal transactions carried on by him and affected adversely the foreign ex change resources Of the country and as such his detention was necessary.
The appellant assailed his detention before the High Court and being unsuccessful filed this appeal.
Before this Court Counsel for the appellant confined his arguments only to the ground of undue delay caused by the Central Government in disposing of the representation made by the detenu which was calculated to be of 40 days.
The Respondents explained the delay in the counter affidavit filed by it but still according to the appellant 's counsel there has been undue and unexplained delay of 11 days be tween the date of submission of the representation by the detenu to the Superintendent of the Central Prison, Bombay for transmission to the Central Government and the date of receipt of the representation by the Ministry of Finance and, he argued, that this unexplained delay has vitiated the order of detention.
416 Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: It is neither possible nor advisable to lay down any rigid period of time uniformly applicable to all cases within which period the representation of the detenu has to be disposed of within reasonable expedition but it must necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
[419F] Rashid S.K.v.
State of West Bengal, Sabir Ahmed vs Union of India, ; ; Vijay Kumar vs State of Jammu and Kashmir and Others, ; and Raisuddin alias Babu Tamchi vs State of U.P. and Anr.
, ; ; When it is emphasised and re emphasised by a series of decisions of this Court that a representation should be considered with reasonable expedition, it is imperative on the part of every authority, whether in merely transmitting or dealing with it, to discharge that obligation with all reasonable promptness and diligence without giving room for any complaint of remissness, indifference or avoidable delay, because the delay caused by slackness on the part of any authority will ultimately result in the delay of the disposal of the representation which in turn may invalidate the order of detention as having infringed the mandate of Article 22(5) of the Constitution.
[420A B] In the instant case, the supine indifference, slackness and callous attitude on the part of the jail Superintendent who had unreasonably delayed in transmitting the representa tion as an intermediary, had ultimately caused undue delay in the disposal of the appellant 's representation by the Government which received the representation 11 days after it was handed over to the Jail Superintendent by the detenu.
This avoidable and unexplained delay has resulted in render ing the continued detention of the appellant illegal and constitutionally impermissible.
[421D E] Abdul Karim and Others vs State of West Bengal, ; referred to.
