The Haryana Public Service Commission advertised the filling up of 4 posts of District Food and Supplies Officers by direct recruitment, and prescribed "five/three years ' experience as an executive officer" as one of the essential qualifications.
The appellant who was working as Inspector/Sub Inspector in the Food and Supplies Department, applied for the post.
Some other Inspectors/Sub Inspectors also applied.
Subsequently, the Special Secretary to the Haryana Government in the Food and Supplies Department wrote to the Commission affirming, inter alia, that the work of Inspectors/Sub Inspectors of his Department was of executive nature though they were not officers.
The Commission, howev er, required the appellants to produce a certificate from the State Government to the effect that they had the requi site experience of executive officer.
The State Government did not issue such a certificate, and in its absence the Commission did not consider the Inspector and Sub Inspector candidates as having the requisite qualification.
Thereupon, the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court claiming that he had the requisite qualifica tion.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition and the Division Bench dismissed the appeal therefrom.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the post of Inspectors and Sub inspectors belonged to the category of executive office, and that in earlier years certain similarly situated Inspectors and Sub Inspectors of the Department had been appointed on that basis.
438 Allowing the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) It was conceded in the Department 's letter to the Commission that 'the Inspectors/Sub Inspectors held executive posts.
[440B] (2) None of the parties has placed any definition of the term 'Officer ' from any Haryana Statute.
It is also not the contention of any of the parties that the administrative orders gave a definition to the term.
In such a situation, the common parlance meaning of 'officer ' has to be accepted for the purpose of finding out whether Inspectors and Sub inspectors held the pest of officer.
[440F] (3) In service jurisprudence even ministerial employees have been referred to as officers.
The terms 'Officer ' and 'employee ' put together obviously signify the grade of the establishment or post held, the officer being higher in grade to employee.
[441G] (4) A person invested with the authority of an office has been treated as an officer.
[441C D] (5) Keeping in view the nature and duty assigned to the Inspector or the Sub Inspector working in the Department to whom powers have been delegated, it cannot be doubted that the holders of pests of Inspector and Sub Inspector are officers.
[441G H] G.A. Monterio vs The State of Ajmer, ; and Bajrang Lal & Anr.
vs State of Rajasthan, ; , referred to.
(6) The appellant was entitled to be considered for recruit ment in 1980 and since his claim had been over looked with out justification, the State and the Haryana Public Service Commission are bound to consider his case now on the basis that he was entitled to recruitment in 1980.
In case the appellant is found qualified, be shall be selected for the post and duly appointed.
[442E]
