The respondent firm was assessed to income tax for the assessment years 1947 48, 1948 49 and 1949 50 under section 23(3).
The Income tax Officer renewed the registration of the firm under section 26A of the Income tax Act and passed an order under section 23(6) allocating the shares of the various partners.
The respondent preferred appeals against the orders of assessment to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
Oil November 4, 1950, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner partly accepted the appeals in respect of the assessment years 1947 48 and 1948 49 but the appeal in respect of the assessment year 1949 50 was still pending.
Meanwhile after issuing notice to the parties and hearing them the Commissioner, acting under section 33B(1), passed an order on June 5, 1952, cancelling the registration granted under section 26A on the ground that one of the partners of the firm was a minor, and directed the Income tax Officer to make fresh assessments for the three years.
The respondent preferred appeals to the Appellate Tribunal which were allowed.
On the application of the appellant the Tribunal referred, under section 66(1) of the Act, three questions to the High Court of Bombay.
In regard to the assessment years 1947 48 and 1948 49 the High Court held that the orders of the Income tax Officer granting registration had merged in the appellate orders of the Assistant Appellate Commissioner and the revisional power of the Commissioner under section 33B(1) could not be exercised in respect of them.
With regard to the renewal of registration for the year 1949 50 the High Court held that the Commissioner could not exercise his revisional power as the propriety of this order was open to consideration by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner in the respondent 's appeal pending before him.
The appellant obtained special leave and appealed: Held, that the Commissioner had the authority under section 33B(1) to set aside the orders of registration made by the Income tax Officer.
An order of the Income tax Officer granting registration was not appealable before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
Such an order could be cancelled by the Commissioner in exercise of his revisional powers under section 33B(1) ; but it could not be cancelled by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner even in the exercise of his appellate jurisdiction when dealing with an appeal by an assessee.
The theory that the order of a tribunal merges in the order of the appellate authority did not apply to the order of registration passed by the Incometax Officer.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay North vs Tejaji Farasram Kharawala, , referred to.
Durgabati and Narmadabala Gupta vs Commissioner of Income tax, , disapproved.
But the Commissioner has no power while exercising his revisional jurisdiction under section 33B(1) of the Act to set aside the assessment orders.
The Commissioner, in the present case, did 715 not really intend to set aside the assessment orders but merely to direct the Income tax Officer to make suitable consequential amendments in regard to the machinery or procedure.
to be adopted to recover the tax payable by the respondent.
The registration or non registration of a firm does not at all affect the computation of taxable income; it merely governs the procedure to be adopted in recovering the tax found due.
Shapurji Pallonji vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, , referred to.
