The petitioners in the writ petition are building contractors engaged in the business of constructing build ings, factories, bridges etc.
They have challenged the levy of sales tax, by the concerned State Governments under the sales tax laws passed by them, on the turnover .
of the works contracts entered into by them.
The petitions raised two questions for the considera tion of the Court; the first question relates to the consti tutional validity of the 46th Amendment Act by which the State legislatures have been empowered to levy sales tax on certain transactions described in sub clauses (a) to (f) of clause (29 A) of Article 366 of the Constitution, and the second question is whether the power of the State legisla ture to levy tax on the transfer of property in goods in volved in the execution of works contracts referred to in sub clause (b) of clause (29A) of article 366 of the Constitu tion is subject to the restrictions and conditions in article 286 of the Constitution.
On the passing of the 46th Amendment, the State Govern ments after making necessary amendments in their laws com menced to levy sales tax on the turn over of the works entered into by the building contractors for constructing houses, factories, bridges etc.
In some States taxable turnover was determined by deducting the money spent on labour engaged in connection with the execution of the works con 321 tracts.
In some other States a certain fixed percentage of the total turnover was deducted from the total turnover as labour charges before arriving at the taxable turnover.
Each State adopted its own method of determining taxable turnover either by framing rules under its sales tax law or by issu ing administrative directions.
Affected and aggrieved by the levy of sales tax so imposed, the petitioners filed the writ petitions under article 32 of the Constitution challenging inter alia the Constitu tional validity of the 46th Amendment Act.
Civil appeals were also filed by some other building contractors against the orders of the High Court for similar relief.
The petitioners and the appellants have raised two contentions; viz (1) that the 46th Amendment Act is uncon stitutional because it had not been ratified by the legisla tures of not less than one half of the states by Resolutions passed to that effect by these legislatures before the Bill which led to the amendment in question was presented to the President for assent; and (2) that it was not open to the States to ignore the provisions contained in article 286 of the Constitution and the provisions of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1966 while making assessment under the Sales Tax laws passed by the legislatures of the States.
Notices were issued to the Attorney General for India and the Advocates General for the concerned States, some of which contested the Issues.
The main contention of the States on the second point was that sub clause (b) of Article 326(29 A) bestowed on them a power to levy tax on works contract independent of Entry 54 of List IL Disposing of the Writ Petitions and directing that the appeals be now placed before the Bench hearing Tax matters, this Court, HELD.
There has been in the instant case due compliance of the provisions contained in the proviso to article 368(2) of the Constitution.
[344E] Sales tax laws passed by the legislatures of States levying taxes on the transfer of property in goods whether as goods or in some other form involved in the execution of a works contract are subject to the restrictions and condi tions mentioned in each clause of sub clauses of article 286 of the Constitution.
[355B] 322 All transfers, deliveries and supplies of goods referred to in clauses (a) to (f) of clause (29 A) of article 366 of the Constitution are subject to the restrictions and conditions mentioned in clause (1), clause (2) and sub clause (a) of clause (3) of article 286 of the Constitution and the transfers and deliveries that take place under sub clauses (h), (c) and (d) of clause (29 A) of article 366 of the Constitution are subject to an additional restriction mentioned in sub clause (b) of article 286 (3) of the Constitution.
[349C] The power to levy sales tax was conferred on the legis latures of States by the Constitution by Entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India.
[329B] State of Bombay and Another vs The United Motors (India) Ltd. and Others, ; and Bengal Immunity Company Limited vs The State of Bihar & Others, , referred to.
Ordinarily unless there is a contract to the contrary in the case of a works contract, the property in the goods used in the construction of a building passes to the owner as the materials used are incorporated in the buildings.
The con tractor becomes liable to pay the sales tax ordinarily when the goods or materials are so used in the construction of the building and it is not necessary to wait till final bill is prepared for the entire work.
[3S2C] Hudson 's Building Contracts (8th Edition) at page 362 and Benjamin 's Sale of Goods (3rd Edition) in para 43 at page 36.
The constitutional Amendment in article 366 (29 A) read with the relevant taxation entries has enabled the States to exert its taxing power in an important area of social and economic life of the community.
In exercising this power particularly in relation to transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of "works contracts" in building activity, in so far as it affects the housing projects of the under privileged and weaker sections of society, the State might perhaps, be pushing its taxation power to the peripheries of the social limits of that power and perhaps even of the constitutional limits of that power, in dealing with unequals.
In such class of cases 'building Activity ' really relates to a basic subsistential necessity.
It would he wise and appropriate for the State to consider whether the requisite and appropriate classifications should not he made of such building activity attendant with such social purposes for appropriate separate treatment.
[355E G] 323 Whatever might be the situational differences of indi vidual cases, the constitutional limitations on the taxing power of the State as are applicable to "works contracts" represented by "building contracts" in the context of the expanded concept of "tax on the sale or purchase of goods" as constitutionally defined under article 366 (29 A) would equally apply to other species of "works contracts" with the requisite situational modifications.
[355C D] At the commencement of the Act it should have been stated that the bill in question had been presented to the President for his assent after it had been fury ratified by the required number of legislatures of the States.
This suggestion should be followed by the Central Secretariat hereafter since it was found that even the Attorney General was not quite aware till the case was taken up for hearing that the bill which had become the 46th Amendment had been duly ratified by the required number of States.
[344F] Gannon Dunkerley and Co. (Madras) Ltd. vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1954 Mad. 1130; Gannon Dunkereley & Co. Madras (Pvt.) Ltd. vs Sales Tax Officer, Matrancher, A.I.R. 1957 Kerala 146; Mohamed Khasim vs State of Mysore, [1955] VI Sales Tax Cases 211; Pandit Banarsi Das vs State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors., [1955] VI Sales Tax Cases 93; Jubilee Engineering Co. Ltd. vs Sales Tax Officer, Hyderabad City & Ors., ; Bhuramal and Ors.
vs State of Rajasthan, A.I.R. ; State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co. (Madras) Ltd., ; M/s. New India Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner Of Sales Tax, Bihar, [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 459; Oil and Natural Gas Commission vs State of Bihar & Ors., ; ; Vishnu Agencies (Pvt.) Ltd. etc.
vs Commercial Tax Officer & Ors.
; , ; Northern India Caterers (India) Ltd. vs Lt. Governor of Delhi, ; ; Sydney Hydraulic and Central Engineering Co. vs Blackwood & Son, and M.R. Bornbrook (Pvt.) Ltd. vs Federal Commis sioner of Taxation; ,
