Prem Chand, accused respondent, had married Veena Rani, deceased, in the year 1973.
Veena Rani was then employed in the State Bank of Patiala.
Soon after their marriage the accused resigned his job as Prosecuting Sub inspector and started his practice at Sangrut.
Veena Rani got herself transferred to Sangrur and the couple set up house there.
From the very beginning Veena Rani had an unhappy married life because the accused constantly tormented her to get more money from her parents.
The accused was also given to heating her frequently.
Veena Rani gave birth to a male child.
Even after child birth the accused did not stop iII treating her.
Unable to bear the iII treatment, Veena Rani took leave on loss of pay and went away to her parents.
She later filed an application under section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act in the Court at Patiala for restitution of conjugal rights.
At this stage, a compromise was brought about between the parties and Veena Rani came back to live with the accused at San grur.
But nothing changed, and the accused continued to torment her for money.
The immediate provocation for the accused stepping up his illtreatment of Veena Rani was his demand of Rs. 1,000 to pay the balance amount of the scooter price which he had purchased.
Veena Rani had no funds of her own.
She, there fore, wrote to her brother and mother narrating her woes and requesting them to send Rs. 1,000.
In spite of Veena Rani writing to her brother and mother, the accused did not relent in the immediate compliance of his demand.
On 15.9.1975, the day of the tragedy, the accused and Veena Rani had a quarrel and thereupon both of them went to the house of Shri Hari Om, Advocate, who advised the accused not to torment Veena Rani.
613 There, in the presence of Hari Om, the accused went to the extent of saying that Veena Rani may go to hell but he should get the money forthwith.
Veena Rani reacted by saying that she preferred death to such life.
The accused, far from expressing regret for his conduct, drove her to despair by further saying that she can provide him relief quicker by dying on the very day.
Thereafter, the accused left Veena Rani at their house and went to court at about 9.00 a.m.
At 10.15 a.m. shrieks were heard from their house, and when people rushed in, they found Veena Rani lying on the ground with extensive burn injuries.
Before her death in the hospi tal, Veena Rani told the doctor that she had been tortured at home and that she wanted to die as early as possible.
The Additional Sessions Judge found the accused guilty under section 306, I.P.C., and sentenced him to undergo R.I. for four years.
The Judge held that the accused had been tormenting and also physically assaulting Veena Rani, and that Veena Rani had committed suicide by reason of the accused 's instigation.
The High Court, on appeal, acquitted the accused holding that even though Veena Rani had committed suicide on account of her unhappy married life, there was nothing on the record to show that the appellant in any manner instigated the deceased to commit suicide.
In this Court, two special leave petitions have been filed, one by the father of Veena Rani and the other by the State of Punjab.
On behalf of the appellants it was contend ed that the High Court had completely erred in its apprecia tion of the evidence and in its application of the law.
On behalf of the accused it was contended that even if the prosecution evidence was accepted in full, there was no material to show that the suicidal death of Veena Rani was abetted in any manner by the accused.
Allowing the appeals and restoring the conviction of the accused under section 306, this Court, HELD: (1) Veena Rani 's death was undoubtedly due to suicide and not due to any accident or homicide.
[621A] (2) There is overwhelming evidence in the case to estab lish that Veena Rani 's life was made intolerable by the accused by constantly demanding her to get him money and also beating her frequently.
[620G] 614 (3) Viewed in the background of Veena Rani 's plight during the few days preceding her death and the events that took place on the morning of the tragedy, the utterances by the accused to the effect that she can provide him relief quicker by dying on the very same day would have certainly been seen by Veena Rani as an instigation to her to commit suicide.
[621D; 622B] (4) No mother, however distressed and frustrated, would easily make up her mind to leave her young child in the lurch and commit suicide unless she had been goaded to do so by someone close to her [622B C] (5) When the evidence is of so compulsive and telling in nature against the accused, the High Court, it is regretted to say, has dealt with the matter in a somewhat superficial manner and acquitted the accused on the basis of imaginary premises.
The High Court has failed to comprehend the evi dence in its full conspectus and instead has whittled down the evidence by specious reasoning.
[624E F] (6) As to what constitutes instigation would depend upon the facts of each case.
Therefore, in order to decide wheth er a person has abetted by instigation the commission of an offence or not, the act of abetment has to be judged in the conspectus of the entire evidence in the case.
The act of abetment attributed to an accused is not to be viewed or tested in isolation.
[627A B] (7) Such being the case, the instigative effect of the words used by the accused must be judged on the basis of the distraught condition to which the accused had driven Veena Rani.
[627B C] (8) In the instant case, the abetment of the commission of suicide by Veena Rani is clearly due to instigation and would therefore fail under the first clause of section 107, IPC.
[626E F] (9) The degradation of society due to the pernicious system of dowry and the unconscionable demands made by greedy and unscrupulous husbands and their parents and relatives resulting in an alarming number of suicidal and dowry deaths of women has shocked the Legislative conscience to such an extent that the Legislature has deemed it neces sary to provide additional provisions of law, procedural as well as substantive, to combat the evil and has consequently introduced Sections 113A and 113B in the Indian Evidence Act, and section 498A and 304B in the Indian Penal Code.
[627E G] 615 (10) It is not a case where Veena Rani had wanted to commit suicide for reasons of her own and the accused had facilitated her in the commission of suicide, as would attract Explanation II to Section 107 IPC.
[626A] Sri Ram vs State of U.P., ; distin guished.
(11) Taking all factors into consideration including the fact that more than 11 years have elapsed since the High Court acquitted the accused and the accused is now leading a settled life, the Court considered the plea of leniency, and while restoring the conviction of the accused under section 306 modified the sentence to the period already undergone and enhanced the fine to Rs.20,000, out of which Rs. 18,000 were to be given to the father of the deceased for being utilised for the maintenance of Veena Rani 's son.
[628E]
