The respondent was a Deputy Registrar of the appellant University.
As the Controller of Examinations had proceeded on leave the respondent was discharging the duties of Con troller of Examinations.
A complaint alleging that the respondent had delayed the payment of the bills of an out station party who had printed the question papers for the annual examination was received by the University.
The Executive Council of the University appointed an Enquiry Officer to hold an enquiry to find out whether the bills were deliberately kept pending with any ulterior motive.
The Enquiry Officer gave a clean chit to the respondent as to his conduct in discharging the duties as Controller of Examinations.
The Executive Council of the University did not take any decision on the report of the Enquiry Officer, but entrusted the question to the Vice Chancellor who was present at the meeting.
The Vice Chancellor directed a departmental enquiry against the respondent and appointed an advocate as the Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer by his report held the respondent guilty of all the charges levelled against him.
The Vice Chancellor after giving a show cause notice and considering the reply of the respondent, dismissed him from service.
The respondent moved the High Court under Article 226 chal 455 lenging his dismissal.
When the writ petition was taken up for hearing the High Court directed the entire matter to be placed before the Executive Council for an appropriate decision.
The Executive Council considered the matter at its meeting and passed a resolution ratifying the action taken by the Vice Chancellor, and confirming the dismissal of the respondent.
At the final disposal of the writ petition, the High Court examined the matter on merits and held that the action taken by the Vice Chancellor being without any au thority or power, these defects could not be cured by rati fication by the Executive Council in its subsequent resolu tion.
The High Court accordingly quashed the departmental proceedings taken against the respondent, and also the order of termination of his services.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the University: (i)That on a true construction of the several provisions of the Marathwada University Act, 1974, the termination of services of the respondent cannot be assailed for want of power or jurisdiction on the part of the Vice Chancellor, and (2) that if the order was defective or without authority, the ratification by the Executive Council had rendered it immune from any challenge.
Dismissing the Appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The Vice Chancellor in every university is the conscious keeper of the University and the constitutional ruler.
He is the principal executive and academic officer of the University.
He is entrusted with the responsibility of overall administration of academic as well as non academic affairs.
[464A B] 2.
As the principal executive officer the Vice Chancel lor also carries with him an implied power, the magisterial power.
This power is essential for him to maintain domestic discipline in the academic and non academic affairs.
In a wide variety of situations in the relationship of tutor and pupil, he has to act firmly and promptly to put down indis cipline and malpractice.
It may not be illegitimate if he could call to aid his implied powers and also emergency powers to deal with all such situations.
[464D E] 3.
The Marathwada University Act, 1974 confers both express and implied powers on the Vice Chancellor.
The express powers include among others, the duty to ensure that the provisions of the Act, Statutes, Ordinances and Regula tions are observed by all concerned.
[Section 11(3)] He has a right to regulate the work and conduct of 456 Officers and teaching and other employees of the University [Sec. 11(b)(a)].
He has also emergency powers to deal with any untoward situation [Section 11(4)] a very significant power.
If he believes that a situation calls for immediate action, he can take such action as he thinks necessary, though in the normal course he is not competent to do so.
However he must report to the concerned authority or body, who would, in the ordinary course, have dealt with the matter.
[464B C] 4.
The power 'to regulate the work and conduct of the officers ' cannot include the power to take disciplinary action for their removal.
[464F] 5.
When a statute prescribes a particular body to exercise a power, it must be exercised only by that body.
[464G] Halsbury 's Laws of England Vol. 1, 4th Edn.
page 32, re ferred to.
The Marathwada University Act confers power to appoint officers on the Executive Council and it generally includes the power to remove.
This power is located under Section 24(1) (XXIX) of the Act.
[464F G] 7.
The resolution of the Executive Council at a meet ing, at which the Vice Chancellor was also present, gave full power to the Vice Chancellor 'to take a decision on this question '.
By the power delegated under the resolution, the Vice Chancellor could either accept or reject the report with intimation to the Executive Council.
He could not have taken any other action and indeed, he was not authorised to take any other action.
[465F G] : 8.
The resolution was also not in harmony with the statutory requirement.
Approval of the Chancellor to the delegation of power by the Executive Council to the Vice Chancellor was mandatory under section 24(1)(xii) read with section/84 of the Marathwada University Act.
The resolution not being in conformity with the statutory requirement could not confer power on the Vice Chancellor to take action j against the respondent.
[465H; 466A C] 9.
Ratification is generally an act of principal with regard to a contract or an act done by his agent.
The prin ciples of ratification in the context of the law of agency apparently do not have any application with regard to exer cise of power conferred under statutory provisions.
The statutory authority cannot travel beyond the power conferred and 457 any action without power has no legal validity.
It is ab initio void and cannot be ratified.
[468A B] Friedman 's Law of Agency (5th Edn.) Chapter 5at page 73, Bowstead on Agency (14th Ed.) at page 39, Parmeshwari Prasad Gupta vs Union of India, ; and Bernard vs National Dock Labour Board, [1953] 1 All Eng.
Law Reports 1113.
In the instant case, there was no prior delegation of power to the Vice Chancellor to take disciplinary action against the respondent.
There was no subsequent delegation either.
Therefore, neither the action taken by the Vice Chancellor, nor the ratification by the Executive Council could be sustained.
[469F]
