The respondent Company took over, with the consent of the State Government, the licence granted to a private firm under the for supply and dis tribution of electricity in the areas covered by the li cence, and became entitled to the benefits and privileges of the licence.
Under cl.
(11) of the licence, Government had the option to purchase the undertaking on the expiry of the period of licence.
The licence was to expire on 21st September, 1977.
The State Electricity Board, in .exercise of its option, issued a notice to the Company on 26th August, 1976 and required it to sell and deliver the undertaking to the Board on the midnight between 21st and 22nd September, 1977.
Under the provisions of the , as they stood at the time of option, the Company was entitled to be paid the 519 market value of the undertaking.
But, by the Amending Act, 1976 the Bill for which had been introduced in the State legislature on 13.7.1976 the principle of market value in the relevant provisions of the 1910 Act was substituted by the concept of "Amount" legislatively fixed as a sum equal to the depreciated Book Value of the assets of the undertak ing to be taken over.
The amended provisions were to govern cases where notices had been issued prior to the amendment.
The respondent Company filed writ petitions before the High Court challenging the validity of sections 4, 5 and 6 of the Indian Electricity (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 1976 and section 2 of the Indian Electricity (Maharashtra Amendment and Validity) Act, 1974 as violative of articles 14, 19(1)(f) and (g) and 31 of the Constitution.
The appellants, the State and the Electricity Board, claimed protection of article 31 C to the Amending Act, 1976 and the consequent immunity from attack on the ground of violation of articles 14, 19 and 31.
The High Court held that in the absence of a declaration in the Amending Act of 1976 that ,the law was one intended to give effect to the objects of article 39(b) and (c) of the Constitution, the Amending Act cannot have the protection of article 31 C. Declaring section 4 of the Amending Act as violative of article 19(1)(f) and article 14, it held that the State could not unilaterally reduce, even by legislation, its liability to pay the purchase price under a consensual transaction and that conferment on Government of power to fix instalments was grossly unreasonable and arbitrary and that provision for payment of interest at the Reserve Bank rate pins one per cent made more unreasonable the provisions of the Amend ing Act.
The High Court also rejected the respondent Company 's claim as to the Constitutional infirmity attributed to section 2 of the 1974 Act and sections 5 and 6 of the Amending Act, 1976.
It further rejected the Company 's contention that, upon the service of the notice exercising the option to purchase, the Company 's right to be paid the market value under the law as it then stood, was crystallised into an "actionable claim" or "A chose in action" and that What was sought to be ac quired was not the undertaking itself but a chose in action, and that the law was bad for excluding the service lines from computation of the amount.
The appellants filed appeal in this Court assailing the correctness of the High Court 's view that section 4 of the Amend ing Act.
was bad.
The respondent Company, also filed a cross appeal, questioning the correct 520 ness of the judgment on the points held against it.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the law was entitled to the protection of article 31C and that the High Court was in error in postulating that the absence of the express legislative declaration in the law that it was enacted for giving effect to the directive principles of State Policy in article 39(b) and (c), was itself conclusive against the attraction of article 31 C.
It was urged that the presence of such a declaration merely furnished evidence of a reasonable and direct nexus between the legislation and the objects of article 39(b) and (c) but the declaration was by itself not conclusive either way, and the court was entitled to go behind the facade of the declaration and scrutinise whether there was really such a direct and reasonable nexus, and that the absence of such an express declaration did not preclude the State from showing the existence of the requi site nexus, and that apart altogether from the protection of article 31 C, the Amending Act of 1976 was justifiable as a reasonable restriction on the freedom under article 19(1)(f) and (g).
On behalf of the Company, it was contended that any appeal to and reliance upon article 31 C was wholly misplaced, as the option to purchase the undertaking was in effectua tion of a purely consensual transaction and that the scheme of the Electricity Act, 1910, and the covenants in the license enabling the Government or the Board, as the case may be, to exercise the option to purchase did not amount to a compulsory acquisition of the undertaking, and that the provisions of the Amending Act, 1976, which had the effect Of bringing down the purchase price payable under a mutual agreement, could not be justified on any nexus with or for the effectuation of the objects of article 39(b).
The point for consideration was whether Indian Electric ity (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 1976, which statutorily modified the principles for the determination of the pur chase price for the undertaking from the principle of market value contained in the unamended section 7A of 1910 Act to the concept of "Amount" equal to the depreciated book value of the assets under section 7A as amended the Amending Act of 1976, could be said to be a law enacted for the acquisition of the undertaking with a reasonable and direct nexus with the object of article 39(b) of the Constitution and, therefore, had the protection of article 31 C. Allowing the appeals preferred by the appellants Maha rashtra State Electricity Board and dismissing the cross appeal of the 521 respondent Company, this Cpurt, HELD: The provisions of the Amending Act of 1976 have a direct and substantial relationship with the objects of article 39(b) and, therefore, are entitled to the protection of article 31 C.
Therefore, all challenge to the law on the ground of violation of Articles 14, 19 and 31 must necessarily fail.
That apart, there is no merit in the grievance that service lines had been omitted from computation of the amount.
Similarly, there is no merit in the contention that the value of the "goodwill" has been omitted from computa tion of the amount.
[542D F] The nexus between the law and the objects of article 39(b) could be shown independently of an express declaration by the legislature in the law that it was enacted for giving effect to the directive principles of State Policy contained in article 39(b).
The absence of evidence of nexus, in the form of such an express declaration, was not by itself evidence of absence of such nexus.
[534F G] State of Maharashtra vs Basantibai, ; at 1475 and Fazilka Electric Supply Co. Ltd. vs The Commis sioner of Income Tax, Delhi 1962 Supp. 3 S.C.R. 496, re ferred to.
The business of an electricity supply undertaking, a public utility service, in pursuance of a license granted under the Electricity Act, 1910 is comprehensively con trolled by the terms of that Statute.
The terms on which a franchise is created and conferred are amenable to unilater al modification by Statute, and include the term pertaining to the quantification of the price payable for the take over.
The proposition that the right to the payment of the price gets crystallised into a 'chose in action ' independ ently of or even before the actual transfer of ownership of the undertaking, cannot be accepted.
[539C D] Fazilka Electric Supply Company 's case, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 496 and Gujarat Electricity Board vs Girdharilal Motilal, ; , referred to.
Even if the provisions of the Electricity Act, 1910 are held and understood to provide for take over by the State of a privately owned undertaking only by the adoption of the expedient of a consensual sale, that circumstance, by it self, would not be decisive of whether the amending Act of 1976 had no direct and reasonable nexus with the objects of Art 39(b).
[539F] 522 The effect of the relevant provisions of the 1910 Act, as amended by the amending Act of 1976, is the transfer of the ownership and control of material resources of the community for purposes of ensuring that they are so distrib uted as best to subserve the common good.
In effect, the provisions bring about nationalisation in the larger sense of that term.
The Amending Act of 1976 sought to limit the economic burden of this reform.
[540C D] The expression "nationalisation" means 'the acquisition and control of privately owned business by Government. ' [540D E] The idea of nationalisation of a material resource of the community cannot he divorced from the idea of distribu tion of that resource in the community in a manner which advanced common good.
[540G] No doubt, the protection of article 31 C is accorded only to those provisions which are basically and essentially necessary for giving effect to the objects of article 39(b).
[540H] But, the High Court, was in error in taking the view that, while the provision for the take over in the Principal Act might amount to a power to acquire, the objects the.
Amending Act of 1976, which merely sought to beat down the price, could not be said to be part of that power and was.
therefore, incapable of establishing any nexus with article 39(b).
1541A B] The amending Act of 1976, renders the cost of this economic reform brought about with the objects of article 39(b) in view an affordable one in terms of money.
This can not he held to have no direct or reasonable nexus with the objects of Act.
39(b)? When a legislative enactment is challenged as not conforming to the constitutional mandate the judicial branch of the Government has only one duty to lay the Arti cle of the Constitution which is invoked beside the Statute which is challenged and to decide whether the latter squares with the former. [541B C] The community 's economic burden for social and economic reforms is an integral part of the exercise involved in social and economic change in the ushering in of an egali tarian and eclectic social and economic order in tune with the ethos of the Constitution.
The cost in terms of monetary expenditure of economic change is a factor integrated with the objects of article 39(b).
The Court must, on matters of economic policy, defer to legislative judgment as con 523 ditioned by time and circumstances.
The wisdom of social change, is, dependant, in some degree, upon trial and error, on the left needs of the time.
[542A C]
