One Darbar Harsurvala by virtue of a declaratory decree made in 1884 had the hereditary right of collecting grass, firewood, timber etc.
from Gir Forest in the erstwhile state of Junagarh.
This right devolved on his son Jiva Vala.
The State by an agreement dated 10th August 1914 agreed to pay Rs.3,500 every year to Jiva Vala and on his demise to his heirs, in lieu of the right to collect grass, firewood etc.
In January 1965 the revenue authorities issued a notice to the Respondents successors in interest of Harsurvala that the right to receive the aforesaid amount had come to an end on the coming into force of the Gujarat Surviving Alienations Abolition Act, 1963 and asked them to refund the amount paid to them for the year 1963 64.
The respondents filed a de claratory suit for a declaration that they continued to enjoy the right to receive Rs.3,500 hereditarily and for an injunction restraining the State from recovering the amount already paid to them.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit.
On appeal the District Judge allowed the appeal holding that the right to receive the amount annually had not come to end.
The High Court confirmed the decree passed by the District Judge.
The State came up in appeal by special leave against that judgment of the High Court.
Allowing the ap peal, this Court.
HELD: The Gujarat Surviving Alienations Abolition Act, 1963 was passed with the object of abolishing certain alien ations which were not affected by the earlier enactments which had been enacted for the abolition of various kinds of alienations in the State of Gujarat.
[690G] 688 The Act is included in the Ninth Schedule to the Consti tution as Item No. 33.
[692F] Sub clause (d) of clause (3) of section.
2 of the Act having been specifically excluded, the said clause does not receive the protection of Article 31 B of the Constitution of India.
[692G] The 1963 Act should be construed as having the effect of bringing about the extinguishment of the right in an estate for the purpose of better management of the forest area keeping in view the interests of the people of the State in general, and of the people living in or around the Gir Forest, in particular.
[696C] In order to treat a particular law as a part of an agrarian reform contemplated under article 31 A(1) it is not necessary that on the land which is the subject matter of the said law actual cultivation should be carried on.
[695E] In the instant case, the right which the family of the respondents possessed was the right to collect grass, fire wood and timber etc.
from the Gir Forest and that right had already been surrendered under the agreement dated 10 8 1914 by the said family in lieu of the annual payment of Rs.3,500.
The right which was being enjoyed by the predeces sor in interest of the respondents was a pasture.
[693C D] The extinguishment of the right to receive a certain amount in lieu of the right to remove timber, grass, etc.
from a forest area, therefore, formed part of the process of agrarian reform contemplated under article 31 A(1) as there was clear nexus between the agreement to pay the amount and the rights arising out of the forest area.
[695H; 696A] The respondents are entitled to the payment of whatever compensation is payable under the Act notwithstanding the provisions of Article 14 and 19 and Articles 31 of the Constitution of India.
[696E F] State of Kerala & Anr.
vs The Gwalior Rayon Silk Manu facturing (Wvg.) Co. Ltd. etc.
; , referred to.
