The respondent assessee was one of the partners In a firm in which the five other partners were his wife, mother, grand father, brother, and a stranger.
His wife had contrib uted Rs.51,000 as capital in the firm, which amount came out of two gifts made to her by the assessee.
in the course of assessment proceedings for the assessment year 1962 63 in respect of the assessee, the Income Tax Officer included the profits of the assessee 's wife from the firm, under section 64(1)(iii) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The.assessee 's appeal was dismissed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner who observed that the wife would not have become a partner of the firm unless he had contributed capital which was provided by the husband.
The Appellate Tribunal, while dismissing the second appeal of the assessee, found that the admission of the assessee 's wife as a partner in the firm was solely on account of her contribution of capital to the firm.
It was conceded by the assessee before the Tribunal that the interest received by the assessee 's wife on her capital contribution to the firm was includible in the total income of the assessee.
The High Court, while answering the question referred to it in favour of the assessee, took the view that the income arose from the share of profits only because the other partners agreed to take the assessee 's wife as partner and she was allowed to contribute to the partnership firm, and that the admission of the assessee 's wife to the partnership was not in consequence of the gift.
Dismissing the Revenue 's appeal, it was HELD: (1) The income may arise directly or indirectly, but for application of the provisions of section 64(1)(iii) of the Income Tax Act, 738 1961 there must be a proximate connection between the accru al of the income and the assets transferred by the assessee.
[741D] Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal 111 vs Prem Bhai Parekh, followed.
(2) The mere contribution of the capital by the wife into the firm would not automatically have entitled her to partnership in the firm.
The partnership was based on agree ment, and it is the event of agreement between the partners that brought the assessee 's wife into the firm as partner.
[742E] Commissioner of Income tax, Bangalore vs J.H. Gotla, ; Commissioner of Income tax, Assam, Tripura and Manipur vs Jwalaprasad Agarwala, ; V.D. Dhanwatey vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur and Bhandara, ; Smt.
Mohini Thapar vs Commissioner of Income tax (Central), Calcutta, ; Potti Veerayya Sresty vs Commissioner of Income tax, A.P., distinguished.
