Accused Nos. 1 to 6, constituting an unlawful assembly the common intention of which Was to kill Baharan Mian, came to his house armed with deadly weapons.
Baharan Mian, appre hending trouble, ran inside Co arm himself but his wife prevented him from coming out again.
At that time, Baharan Mian 's two infant daughters, Sahana Khatoon aged about seven years and Chand Tara aged about seven months, were playing in the 'dalan ' of his house.
Failing in their object to kill Baharan Mlan, accused No. 1 gave farsa blows on the head, abdomen and left thumb of Sahana Khatoon causing serious injuries, and accused No. 2 gave one farsa blow on the head of infant Chand Tara.
As a result of these injuries, Sahana Khatoon died the same day while Chand Tara died after 28 days.
Accused Nos.1 and 2 were charged under sections 302, 452 and 148 I.P.C., whereas accused Nos.
3 to 6 were sought to be held vicariously liable under section 302/149 I.P.C. Accused Nos. 3 and 4 were further charged under sections 447 and 148, I.P.C. and accused Nos. 5 & 6 were charged under sections 447 and 147, I.P.C. The Trial Court convicted accused Nos. 1 and 2 on all the three counts and awarded the sentence of death to both of them for the commission of the offence punishable under section 302, I.P.C. Accused Nos. 3 and 4 were convicted under sections 302/149, 447 and 148, I.P.C. and for the offence under section 302/149, each of them was directed to suffer imprison 499 ment for life.
Accused Nos. 5 and 6 were convicted under sections 302/149, 447 and 147, I.P.C.
For the offence under sections 302/149, I.P.C., they were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life.
The High Court dismissed the appeal of accused Nos. 1 and 2 and, while accepting the reference, confirmed the sentence of death awarded to them for the murder of the two infant girls.
The conviction of the remaining four accused under section 302/149 was, however, altered to sections 326/149 and the sentence of imprisonment for life given to each of them was substituted by a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for seven years.
Their convictions and sen tences on the other counts were, however, maintained: Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (1) the evidence adduced by the prosecution was not reliable; (2) Even on the facts found proved by the courts below, accused Nos.
1 to 6 could not be held guilty of murder with the aid of section 149, I.P.C. as the kill ings of the two girls was outside the common object of the unlawful assembly; (3) the facts of the case did not warrant a death penalty in the case of accused Nos. 1 and 2, more so because the procedural requirement of section 235(2) of the Cr.
P.C. was not followed in letter and spirit; and (4) section 302, I.P.C., and section 354(3), Cr.
P.C., insofar as they permit the imposition of the death penalty were viola tive of Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
While partly allowing the appeals by converting the sentence of death in the case of accused nos.
1 and 2 to imprisonment for life under section 302, I.P.C., and setting aside the conviction of accused nos.
3 to 6 under section 326/149 I.P.C., the Court, HELD: (1) There is no substance in the contention that the prosecution evidence is unreliable and should not be acted upon for confirming the conviction of the accused persons.
[508B C] (2) If the prosecution did not examine some persons who were admittedly present at the scene of occurrence, on learning that they were won over, it cannot be said that the prosecution was unfair to the accused persons.
The non examination of these persons cannot affect the probative value of the evidence of other prosecution witnesses.
[508F] (3) Section 149.
I.P.C., creates a. specific offence.
Since this section imposes a constructive penal liability, it must be strictly construed.
[509G] 500 (4) It is not the intention of the legislature in enact ing section 149 to render every member of an unlawful assem bly liable to punishment for every offence committed by one or more of its members.
In order to invoke section 149 it must be shown that the incriminating act was done to accom plish the common object of the unlawful assembly.
Even if an act incidental to the common object is committed to accom plish the common object of the unlawful assembly, it must be within the knowledge of other members as one likely to be committed in prosecution of the common object.
If the mem bers of the assembly knew or were aware of the likelihood of a particular offence being committed in.
prosecution of the common object they would be liable for the same under sec tion 149.
I.P.C. [510F H] (5) What is important in each case is to find out if the offence was committed to accomplish the common object of the assembly or was one which the members knew to be likely to be committed.
There must be a nexus between the common object and the offence committed, and if it is found that the same was committed to accomplish the common object, every member of the assembly will become liable for the same.
[509H; 510A B] (6) In the instant case, the common object of the unlaw ful assembly, as alleged in the charge, was to kill Baharan Mian.
When accused Nos. 1 and 2 realised that Baharan Mian was beyond their reach.
frustrated at their failure to accomplish their mission, wielded their weapons on the innocent girls, which was no part of the common object of the unlawful assembly.
For accomplishing their common object it was not necessary to kill the two girls who were not a hinderance to accused Nos. 1 and 2 accomplishing their common object.
Accused Nos.
3 to 6 cannot, therefore, be convicted for the injuries caused to the two minor girls by accused Nos. 1 and 2, with the aid of section 149.
[511A B] (7) Section 302, I.P.C, casts a heavy duty on the Court to choose between death and imprisonment for life.
When the Court is called upon to choose between the convict 's cry 'I want to live ' and the prosecutor 's demand 'he deserves to die ', it goes without saying that the Court must show a high degree of concern and sensitiveness in the choice of sen tence.
[511D E] (8) In our justice delivery system several difficult decisions are left to the presiding officer, sometimes without providing the scales or the weights for the same.
In cases of murder, however, since the choice 501 is between capital punishment and life imprisonment, the legislature has provided a guideline in the form of sub section (3) of section 354 of the Code of Criminal Proce dure, 1973.
[511E F] (9) When the law casts a duty on the Judge to state reasons it follows that he is under a legal obligation to explain his choice of the sentence.
It may seem trite to say so but the existence of the 'special reason clause ' in the above provision implies that the Court can in fit cases impose the extreme penalty of death which negatives the contention that there never can be a valid reason to visit an offender with the death penalty, no matter how cruel, gruesome or shocking the crime may be.
[512A C] (10) Where a sentence of severity is imposed, it is imperative that the Judge should indicate the basis upon which he considers a sentence of that magnitude justified.
Unless there are special reasons, special to the facts of the particular case, which can be cataloged as justifying a severe punishment, the Judge would not award the death sentence.
If a Judge finds that he is unable to explain with reasonable accuracy the basis for selecting the higher of the two sentences, his choice should fail on the lower sentence.
[512D E] (11) The choice of the sentence has to be made after following the procedure set out in sub section (2) of sec tion 235 of the Code.
Since the provision is intended to give the accused an opportunity to place before the Court all the relevant material having a bearing on the question of sentence, there can be no doubt that the provision is salutary and must be strictly followed.
[513D, H; 514A] (12) The requirement of hearing the accused is intended to satisfy the rule of natural justice.
In the case of life or death, the presiding officer must show a high degree of concern for the statutory right of the accused and should not treat it as a mere formality to be crossed before making the choice of the sentence.
If the choice is made without giving the accused an effective and real opportunity to place his antecedents, social and economic background, mitigating and extenuating circumstances, etc.
before the Court, the Court 's decision on the sentence would be vulner able.
[514C] (13) A sentencing decision taken without following the requirements of sub section (2) of section 235 of the Code in letter and spirit may have to be replaced by an appropri ate order.
In the instant case, the Trial Court actually treated it as a mere formality as is evident from 502 the fact that it recorded the finding of guilt on 31st March, 1987, and on the same day before the accused could absorb and overcome the shock of conviction they were asked if they had anything to say on the question of sentence.
Immediately thereafter the decision imposing the death penalty on the two accused was pronounced.
[514B, E] (14) As a general rule, the Trial Courts should after recording the conviction adjourn the matter to a future date and call upon both the prosecution as well as the defence to place the relevant material bearing on the question of sentence before it and thereafter pronounce the sentence to be imposed on the offender.
[514F G] (15) In the instant case, the Trial Court did not attach sufficient importance to the mandatory requirement of sub section (2) of section 235 of the Code.
The High Court also had before it only the scanty material placed before the Sessions Judge when it confirmed the death penalty.
Absence of particulars of ancedents of accused, their socio economic conditions, the impact of their crime on the community, etc. makes the choice of punishment difficult.
[514G H] (16) It is necessary that the maximum sentence pre scribed by law should be reserved for 'the rarest of rare ' cases which are of an exceptional nature.
Sentences of severity are imposed t9 reflect the seriousness of the crime, to promote respect for the law, to provide just punishment for the offence, to afford adequate deterrent to criminal conduct and to protect the community from further similar conduct.
[515G] (17) In the instant case, unfortunately the material for choice of sentence is scanty.
The motive for the crime is obscure, the one stated.
namely, the quarrel between two infants of both sides, does not seem to be correct.
The killings were not for gain.
The change shows that the target was Baharan Mian, the father, and not the two infants.
The killing of the two infants was not in the contemplation of any of the accused.
Both the girls were the victims of the offenders ' ire resulting from frustration at the escape of their target.
There is nothing so uncommon about the crime as to make the case an exceptional one.
The mere fact that infants are killed, without more, is not sufficient to bring the case within the category of 'the rarest of rare ' cases.
[516C E] Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, ; and Machhi Singh vs State of Punjab, , referred to.
