The assessee, a co operative society, was rendering the service of ginning and pressing raw cotton received from its members and marketing the finished product on their behalf.
The assessee charged the members a certain amount by way of ginning and pressing charges and further charged commission for the sale of the finished product.
For the assessment years 1961 62 to 1963 64, the assessee claimed that the receipts from the ginning and pressing activities were exempt under section 81(i)(c) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (as it stood then) which provided that income tax shall not be payable by a co operative society in respect of the profits and gains of business carried on by it, if it was a society engaged in the marketing of the agricultural produce of its members.
The Income Tax Officer declined to accept the claim on the ground that the assessee had been carrying out the process of ginning and pressing with the aid of power.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the orders of the Income Tax Officer.
The Appellate Tribunal allowed the second appeal of the assessee holding that the ginning and pressing activities were to be regarded as an integral part of the marketing activity.
The High Court, while deciding the reference in favour of the Revenue, observed that the assessee carried on ginning and pressing of cotton with the aid of power, and even if those activities were regarded as ancillary or incidental to its marketing .activity, they would not come within the category of exempted activities in view of the proviso to the section.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: (1) Ginning and pressing was part of the integral process of marketing.
It was an activity incidental or ancillary to marketing, 721 which included the ginning and pressing of raw cotton and was not confined to selling activity alone.
The members did not take back the cotton after it was ginned and pressed.
All the raw cotton so treated was marketed by the assessee on behalf of its members to the outside world and not to its members.
[723G H; 724A] Addl.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Karnataka vs Ryots Agricultural Produce Co operative Society Ltd., ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat IV vs Karjan Co op.
Cotton Sale, Ginning & Pressing Society Ltd., , referred to.
(2) The object of section 81(i) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 was to encourage and promote the growth of co operative societies, and consequently a liberal construction must be given to the operation of that provision.
[724A B] (3) The proviso to section 81(i) operates to exclude from the exemption those activities which can be regarded as separate and distinct from the activities enumerated in clauses (a) to (f) of section 81(i).
If the activity in question is inciden tal or ancillary to one of the activities mentioned in those clauses, the proviso will not apply.
[724B] (4) The assessee is entitled to the exemption of the profits and gains derived from the activity of the entire business of ginning and pressing of cotton and marketing it by virtue of cl.
(c) of section 81(i) of the Incometax Act, and the High Court erred in holding to the contrary.
[724F G]
