The appellant bank instituted a suit against respond ent 's husband for recovery of a large amount advanced as loan.
The defendant contested the suit.
issues were flamed and evidence was being recorded.
He, however, died before the next hearing on 4th November, 1970 when the court was informed by his pleader orally about his demise.
The appel lant on inquiry learnt on 7th November that the defendant had died on 4th August.
The 8th November being Sunday, an application under Order XXII Rule 4 of CPC was filed on 9th November for bringing on record the widow as his legal representative.
Another application for condoning delay in making the application was also made.
The appellant later made another application requesting to treat the latter application as an application under Order XXII Rule 9 for setting aside the abatement of the suit.
These applications were contested by the respondent on the ground that the news regarding the death of her husband had been published in the local newspapers and the plaintiffs had knowledge of his death, and that the suit had abated as no application for setting aside abatement had been filed within time.
In the meanwhile, the appellant made another application for adding the names of four sons and two daughters of the deceased defendant on the ground that earlier it had no knowledge about that.
On behalf of the respondent, it was asserted that the application for 811 substitution was not maintainable as it was filed beyond time, and in the alternative she was not the legal heir of the deceased defendant but only his "Meeira" and as other legal heirs of the deceased defendant were not brought on record within time the application was not maintainable.
The trial court found that the application under Order XXII Rule 4 was not barred by time since it had been filed within four days of coming to know of defendant 's death.
It further held that since the widow, one of the legal repre sentatives of the deceased defendant, was brought on record within time the sons and daughters could also be impleaded as defendants along with her.
It, therefore, set aside the abatement of the suit.
The Judicial Commissioner, however, took the view that the widow was not a legal representative of the deceased as under the Portugees Law she had acquired Meeira rights and her status was not that of 'Cabeca De Casal ' (Head of the family and administrator) of the other heirs of the de ceased.
Since all the heirs of the deceased defendant had not been brought on record alongwith the widow within time, the suit had abated as she alone could not represent the estate of the deceased defendant.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.1 The trial court committed no error in law in allowing the substitution application.
[815EF] 1.2 A 'legal representative ' as defined in Civil Proce dure Code means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person, and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues or is sued in representative character the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so suing or sued.
The definition is inclusive in character and its scope is wide, it is not confined to legal heirs only instead it stipulates a person who may or may not be heir, competent to inherit the property of the deceased but he should represent the estate of the deceased person.
It includes heirs as well as persons who represent the estate even without rifle either as executors or administrators in possession of the estate of the deceased.
All such persons would be covered by the expression 'legal representative '.
If there are any heirs, those in possession bona fide, without there being any fraud or collusion, are also entitled to represent the estate of the deceased.
The Civil Procedure Code was ap plicable to the proceedings in the instant case.
[814G 815A] 812 1.3 The respondent had acquired 'Meeira ' rights under the Portugees Law of Inheritance, which was applicable to Goa at the relevant time, according to which she had ac quired half share in the estate left by her husband and the remaining half share was inherited by sons and daughters of the deceased.
As she was brought on record within time, she represented the estate of the deceased defendant and the suit could proceed on merits.
The impleadment of other legal representatives at a subsequent stage could not affect validity of the proceedings.
[815B, 816C] Daya Ram & Ors.
vs Shyam Sundari, ; and N.K. Mohd. Sulaiman vs N.C. Mohd. Ismail, [1966] 1 S.C.R. 937, referred to.
Mannem Venkataramaih vs M. Munnemma & Ors., AIR 1963 A.P. 406, approved.
