The assessee South Eastern Railway, a registered dealer under the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941, disposing of unclaimed and unconnected goods for money consideration under Section 56 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, applied to the Commercial Tax Officer for cancellation of registra tion as a "dealer".
The Commercial Tax Officer rejected the application on the ground that the disposal of unclaimed goods for valuable consideration was a regular feature of the assessee 's activ ities, and, therefore, the assessee fell within the scope of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941.
Assessee 's revision application was rejected by the Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes on the ground that the sales effected by the assessee were sales under the Act and that the assessee was a "dealer".
A second revision of the assessee was also dismissed by the Additional Commis sioner of Sales Tax.
On a further revision the Board of Revenue also con firmed the status of the assessee as a "dealer", holding that in the systematic and organised character of business of auctioning by the assessee, a transfer of property was involved and therefore a sale of goods took place.
At the instance of the assessee a reference was made to the High Court.
The High Court answered the question in favour of the assessee by holding that the disposal of the goods did not indicate that the 778 Railway was carrying on business as a dealer liable to assessment under the Act.
The assessee in the connected appeal, Eastern Railway, was engaged in selling scrap and unserviceable material, and a similar order was passed by the High Court in its favour.
Hence these appeals by the Revenue.
Allowing the appeals and setting aside the judgments of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
The assessee South Eastern Railway was a carri er of the goods and if at the stage of delivery, goods remained unclaimed for a period, the Railway was entitled to dispose them of.
The activity of so disposing of the goods was adjunctive to the principal activity of the carriage of goods by the Railway.
It is an activity which may be regard ed as necessarily incidental or ancillary to its business as carrier of the goods.
Therefore, the assessee South Eastern Railway was a "dealer" for the purposes of the Bengal Fi nance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941.
[780G H] 2.
The assessee in the connected appeal, Eastern Rail way, who was disposing scrap and unserviceable material was also a "dealer" for the purposes of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941.
[780H; 781A] District Controller of Stores, Northern Rly, Jodhpur vs The Assistant Commercial Taxation Officer & Anr., [1976] 37 S.T.C. 423 applied.
