The assessee Company had a glass factory besides other business.
Since the glass factory business had been suffer ing losses for several years, resulting in increasing debt, the assessee took loans from the State Government and mort gaged the land, buildings and machinery.
Later, under a deed executed by it the assessee allowed the State Government to take over running of the glass factory for a period of 20 years and permitted it to have a share of the business, if and when they exceeded a prescribed limit, as conditions for guaranteeing repayment of a loan of Rs.20 lakhs granted by the Industrial Finance Corporation.
During assessment proceedings for the assessment year 1962 63, the assessee contended that the profits earned by the glass factory business during that period were not assessable in its hands, but in the hands of the State Government, which had taken over the factory and was running the business, and that, in any event, only half of the profit could be included in its assessment as the State Government was entitled to 50 per cent of profits under the deed.
Rejecting the contentions, the Income tax officer held that the assessee was liable to be assessed in respect of the entire profits earned by the glass factory.
The assessee 's appeals were dismissed by both the Appel late Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal.
On a reference made at assessee 's instance, the High Court af firmed the Tribunal 's finding that the entire profits of the factory, and not half of them accrued to the assessee.
It also rejected assessee 's contention that the income was diverted through an overriding title before it reached the assessee.
Dismissing the appeal of the assessee, this Court, 798 HELD: The present case is one where the income accrued to the assessee directly and was merely, upon such accrual, applied to discharge an obligation of the assessee.
[.801B] Although the Deed executed by the assessee is described as a lease deed and provides that the glass factory is demised to the State Government, in substance possession of the factory was transferred to the State Government only for the purpose of enabling it to manage and run the business.
[800F] The entire income earned during the year under consider ation was the income of the assesee and was merely applied by the managing State Government for the payment of the assessee 's debt, and there was no over riding title.
The profits earned during the year under consideration were not sufficient for the State Government to enjoy a share in the profits in accordance with the terms of the Deed, and there fore, no part of the profits could be regarded as assessable in the hands of the State Government.
In point of fact, no part of the profits was actually taken by the State Govern ment.
[801C D] Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City H vs Sitaldas Tirathdas, , relied on.
