The appellant Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh, repre sented to the Tara Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd. (TELCO) demanding that all convoy drivers should be given permanent status and facilities that are available to the permanent employees of TELCO.
The Deputy Labour Commissioner refused to make a reference under section 10(1) of the because of the opinion of the Law Depart ment that there was no relationship of master and servant between TELCO and the convoy drivers.
The appellant Sangh flied a writ petition in the High Court praying for a writ of mandamus commanding the State of Bihar to refer the dispute under section 10(1) of the Act.
The High Court dismissed the petition but granted liberty to the appellant Sangh to reagitate the matter before the appropriate Government.
On a further representation also the Deputy Labour Commissioner refused to make a reference under section 10(1) of the Act.
Again, the appellant Sangh moved a writ petition in the High Court which summarily dismissed the petition holding that the appellants had failed to satisfy that they were employed by the TELCO.
Hence this appeal by Special leave.
After the conclusion of the hearing, the Court being of the view that the Government should be given one more chance to consider the question of making a reference, kept the appeal pending and directed the Government to reconsider the question of referring the dispute.
Upon reconsideration also the Government refused to make a reference under sec tion 10(1) of the Act.
On the question: whether an appropri ate Government exercising power to make a reference under section 10(1) of the can delve into the 803 merits of the dispute and adjudicate upon the dispute it self.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, HELD: 1.
In considering the question of making a refer ence under section 10(1), the Government is entitled to form an opinion as to whether an industrial dispute "exists or is apprehended".
The formation of opinion as to whether an industrial dispute "exists or is apprehended" is not the same thing as to adjudicate the dispute itself on its mer its.
[807A] 2.
While exercising power under section 10(1) of the Act, the function of the appropriate Government is an admin istrative function and not a judicial or quasi judicial function, and in performing this administrative function the Government cannot delve into the merits of the dispute and take upon itself the determination of the lis, which would certainly be in excess of the power conferred on it by section 10 of the Act.
[807F] Ram Avtar Sharma vs State of Haryana, [1985] 3 S.C.R. 686; M.P. Irrigation Karamchari Sangh vs The State of M.P., ; and Shambhu Nath Goyal vs Bank of Baroda, Jullundhur, ; applied.
2.1 In the instant case, the dispute is as to whether the convoy drivers are employees or workmen, of TELCO, that is to say, whether there is relationship of employer and employees between TELCO and the convoy drivers, the same cannot be decided by the Government in exercise of its administrative function under section 10(1) of the Act.
Therefore, the State Government was not justified in adjudi cating the said dispute.
[807B, 807H, 808A] 3.
There may be exceptional cases in which the State Government may come to a conclusion that the demands are either perverse or frivolous and do not merit a reference.
But the Government should be very slow to attempt an exami nation of the demand with a view to declining reference and Courts will always be vigilant whenever the Government attempts to usurp the powers of the Tribunal for adjudica tion of valid disputes, and that to allow the Government to do so would be to render section 10 and section 12(5) of the Act nugatory.
[808A C] 804 M.P. Irrigation Karamchari Sangh vs The State of M.P., ; applied.
In the instant case, in view of the fact that the Government has persistently declined to make a reference and even after reconsideration has adjudicated the dispute itself, the dispute should be adjudicated by the Industrial Tribunal.
[808E] The State of Bihar is directed to make a reference of the dispute raised by the Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh to an appropriate Industrial Tribunal under section 10(1) of the Act.
[808H, 809A] Sankari Cement Alai Thozhilalar Munnetra Sangam vs Government of Tamilnadu, ; Ram Avtar Sharma vs State of Haryana, ; ; M.P. Irri gation Karamchari Sangh vs The State of M.P., ; and Nirmal Singh vs State of Punjab, ; applied.
