The petitioner filed a writ petition and a special leave petition challenging the detention order passed under the .
It was contended on behalf of the respondents that the period of detention intended by the detention order was not a fixed one but could be correspond ingly extended if the detenu absconded before he could be apprehended and detained or the period of detention was interrupted by an erroneous judgment of a High Court and the detenu was set free.
Referring the cases to a larger Bench, this Court, HELD: By the Court. ' As the matter is of great public importance, these cases are referred to a Bench of five Judges of this Court.
[870C] Per Pathak, C J: Preventive detention invariably, runs from the date specified in the detention order, and the period of deten tion is determined by the detaining authority, applying its subjective judgment to material before it.
[869G H] In the case of grant of parole, one possible view can be that the period of parole should be counted within the total period of detention and not outside it.
As regards the problem raised by release of a detenu pursuant to an errone ous decision of the High Court, and the subsequent reversal of the decision by the Supreme Court the remedy probably lies in the enactment of legislation analogous to section 5(1) and section 15(4) of the 868 Administration of Justice Act, 1960 in the United Kingdom.
[870A B] As the question is of great public importance affecting, on the one hand, the need for affective measures of preven tive detention and, on the other, the liberty of the subject and his right to freedom from detention beyond the period intended by the statute, and since most cases of preventive detention are bound to be affected, these cases are referred to a five Judge Bench for reconsideration of the law on the point.
[870B C] State of Gujarat vs Adam Kasam Bhaya, ; ; State of Gujarat vs Ismail Juma & Ors., ; ; Smt.
Poonam Lata vs M.L. Wadhawan and Others, AIR 1987 SC 1383 and Pushpadevi M. Jatia vs M.L. Wadhavan, ; ; dissented from.
Per Sharma, J (Concurring): In view of the great public importance involved, these cases may be heard by a five Judge Bench.
[870E] State of Gujarat vs Adam Kasam Bhaya, ; ; State of Gujarat vs Ismail Juma & Ors., ; ; Smt.
Poonam Lata vs M.L. Wadhawan and Others, AIR 1987 SC 1383 and Pushpadevi M. Jatia vs M.L. Wadhavan, ; ; affirmed.
