The appellants were operating launch services for joy rides, film shooting, etc.
from Appollo Pier or Gateway of India to Elephanta Island in Bombay.
Respondent 7 was a cooperative association of launch owners also engaged in the same activities.
The members belonging to the associations were operating launch services turn by turn on voluntary roster system to avoid unhealthy competition.
When efforts were made by the police and the Port Trust Authorities to resolve the difference in the operation of launch services between the association and the appellants failed, a roster system was chalked out on the direction of the Deputy Conservator of Bombay Port Trust which was sought to be enforced by the police.
When some employees working in the launches were arrested for failure to act according to the roster system, the appellants filed writ petitions claiming that the police and the Port Trust Authorities had no authority to compel them to follow the roster system.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions holding that the Bombay Port Trust Rules conferred powers upon the Deputy Conservator to give directions for berthing and for mooring and unmooring the vessels in the Port, and that apart the police and the Port Trust Authority had adequate powers under the Port of Bombay Passenger Boat Rules, 1962 and section 67 of the Bombay Police Act to regulate the manner in which the launches carried Passengers.
In the appeals to this Court, it was contended On behalf of the appellants that: (1) the Deputy Conservator of Bombay Port Trust, respondent No. 3 was not empowered in law to devise an order of the 826 imposition of a roster, and that this action was beyond the powers conferred by the , the Bombay Port Rules and the Port of Bombay Passengers Rules 1962.
(2) Respondent No. 3 had purported to act under Rules 4 and 19 of the Bombay Port Rules, Rule 4 of the Port of Bombay Passenger Boat Rules, and section 7 of the Bombay Police Act in having the roster system enforced by the Inspector of Police.
(3) The roster has tendency to prohibit trade and the power to regulate Is being misused as a power to prohib it.
(4) The imposition of the roster is too severe a measure to deal with the simple problem of overcrowding and chaos and touting for passengers, (5) The provocation for devising and imposing a roster was the complaint made by the appel lant 's trade rivals.
and (6) The roster has been prepared and is being enforced without recourse to any statutory provision enabling respondent No. 3 to devise it and impose it.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The roster system provides for the regulation of traffic, so that each launch obtains an opportunity of access to the landing place.
This is not a distribution of business, but a distribution of the time for which the landing place can be used, and therefore, a regulation of the use of the landing place.
The roster is intended to give effect to Rule 4 of the Port of Bombay Passenger Boats Rules, 1962.
There is no reason why recourse to a roster system should be considered as unreasonable.
[830C.F] 2.
The dominant purpose of the regulation of the use of the landing place by the launches is to prevent congestion and a possible breach of peace.
The real purpose that the roster is intended to serve, is to ensure the even flow of traffic at landing places.
[830H; 831A] Smt.
S.R. Venkataraman vs Union of India & Anr.
, ; ; Brownelis Limited vs The Ironmongers ' Wages Board Brownells Limited vs The Drapers ' Wages Board, ; and Hanson vs Radcliffe Urban District Coun cil, inapplicable.
All the launches owners have equitable access to the landing place and if the other conditions for plying the launches, such as holding of a proper licence, are satis fied, there is no reason why the launches, turn by turn, cannot avail of the facility of an equitable opportunity to use the landing place.
[831C D] 827 4(a) There is no excessive invasion of the appellants Fundamental Right to carry on business.
[831E] 4(b) What should be the duration for which the appel lants may be allowed to use the landing place, and what should be the turn in which such user may be permitted is essentially a matter for the judgment of the authorities concerned.
It is not possible for the Court to adjudicate on this point.
[831E F] 5.
The disputes between the parties in relation to the application of the roster is not a matter on which this Court will readily enter.
[831G] 6.
The imposition of a roster is reasonable and the power to impose a roster can be spelt out from the powers conferred on the authorities under the relevant statutory provisions.
The roster is only one method of regulation.
[831H; 832A]
