The respondent company was engaged in the manufacture of wireless receiving sets, tape recorders, tape players.
These products were assessable under Tariff Items 33A and 37AA of the Central Excise Tariff.
In the classification list and price lists filed by the respondentassessee company these goods were shown as unbranded goods.
Subsequentiy it was found that the respondent assessee company was manufacturing their products in the brand name of "Bush" and were selling the same exclusively to M/s Bush India Ltd. or its autho rised wholesale dealers only.
The appellants Revenue alleged that there was wilful suppression of facts by the respondent company with intention to evade excise duty because this fact was not mentioned by the company in the price list or classification list, filed.
A show Cause Notice was issued requiring the respondent company to show cause as to why, (i) M/s Bush India Limited should not be treated as .a 'related person ' and a favoured buyer of the respondent company for the purpose of determi nation of wholesale cash price, (ii) the concessional rate of duty under notification No. 358/77 CE should 1024 not be denied to the respondent and, (iii) the differential duty in respect of the goods cleared should not be recov ered.
Instead of executing the surety bond the respondent assessee company filed a writ petition in the High Court praying for quashing of the Show Cause Notice and for a mandamus to allow it to clear the goods on the basis of the price at which the goods were sold by it to Bush India Limited allowing the benefit of the relevant notification.
The High Court following its earlier decision held that for the purpose of payment of excise duty the market value of the goods of the respondent assessee company was the price charged by it from M/s Bush India Ltd., and not the market value at which price M/s Bush India Ltd. sold the goods.
It further held that there was no misdeclaration of the value by the assessee company, and it accordingly quashed the Show Cause Notice and the Demand Notice for recovery.
In this appeal by the Revenue it was contended that in the facts and circumstances of the case the High Court committed an error in not realising that M/s Bush India Ltd. was a related person and as such the price charged by the respondent company from M/s Bush India could not represent the correct assessable value for the purpose of excise duty.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Tax planning may be legitimate provided it is within the ' framework of the law.
But colourable devices cannot be part of tax planning and it is wrong to encourage or entertain the belief that it is honourable to avoid the payment of tax by dubious methods.
It is the obligation of every citizen to pay the taxes honestly without resorting to subterfuges.
In order to create the atmosphere of tax com pliance, taxes must be reasonably collected and when col lected, should be utilised in proper expenditure and not wasted.
It is too much to expect the legislature to inter vene and take care of every device and scheme to avoid taxation and it is up to the court sometimes to take stock to determine the nature of the new sophisticated legal devices to avoid tax and to expose the devices for what they really are and to refuse to give judicial benediction.
[1034A B, D] 2.
One must find out the true nature of the transaction.
Even though the corporation might be a legal personality distinct from its members, the court is entitled to lift the mask of corporate entity if the conception is used for tax evasion, or to circumvent tax obligation perpetrate a fraud.
[1034E, 1033G] 1025 3.
It is unsafe to make bad laws out of hard facts and one should avoid subverting the rule of law.
In the instant case, facts have not been found with such an approach by the lower authorities, and the High Court had no alternative on the facts as found but to quash the Show Cause and Demand Notices.
It appears that the brand name "Bush" was affixed to the goods produced by the respondent.
For the purpose of excise duty, the market value of such goods was the price charged from M/s Bush India Ltd. and not the market value at which price M/s Bush India sold the same.
[1034E, 1033C, E] Juggi Lal Kamlapat vs Commissioner of Income tax, U.P., ; Mc Dowell and Co. Ltd. vs Commercial Tax Officer, ; Commissioner of Wealth Tax vs Arvind Narottam, ; Sherdeley vs Sherdeley, and Greenberg vs IRC.
referred to.
Union of India vs Bombay Tyre International, ; ; Union of India & Ors., vs Atic Industries Ltd., ; ; Union of India & Ors.
vs Cibatul Limited, [1985] Supp.
3 SCR 95; Joint Secretary to the Government of India & Ors.
vs Food Specialities Ltd., [1985] Supp.
3 SCR 165 and M/s Sidhosons & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors, [1987] 1 SCC 25 relied on.
