The MRTP Commission respondent in the appeal issued a show cause notice under Section 36 B of the to the appellant company informing that a proceeding had been instituted for making an inquiry whether the said Company was indulging in certain unfair trade practices prejudicial to the public interest within the meaning of section 36 A of the Act.
It was alleged in the notice that although the appellant company was manufacturing 'Novino ' Batteries in collaboration with M/s Mitsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd. and not with National Panasonic of Japan, it was issuing advertisements announcing that 'Novino ' Batteries were manufactured in collaboration with National Panasonic of Japan using Nation al Panasonic techniques, and that the said representation was false and misleading and thereby causing loss or injury to the consumers.
The Company in its reply to the said notice denied having made any wrong representation in its advertisement, and asserted that the company had actually entered into a collaboration agreement with M/s Mitsushita Electric Indus trial Ltd. for the manufacture of dry ceil batteries, and was adopting the process employed by Mitsushita Ltd. for manufacturing 'Novino ' Batteries.
The Company further stated that Mitsushita Ltd. of Japan was better known by its products described by the names 'National ' and 'Panasonic ' and that there was therefore no question of misleading anybody by the description of the Japanese Company by its products.
Rejecting the Company 's explanation the Commission held that bearing in mind the Indian conditions the use of 'N ational ' and 'Panasonic ' to signify collaboration will have a misleading effect on the minds 980 of common class of customers particularly when Novino Bat teries is projected and advertised side by side with Nation al, Panasonic and Technics Batteries in advertisements.
The Commission also refused to accept the plea of the Company that the advertisements have mentioned the brand names instead of the manufacturing company since 'National ' and 'Panasonic ' were well known names in India while the manu facturing company Mitsushita Ltd. was not as a plea of good defence.
On the question whether the appellant company indulged in unfair trade practice under clauses (i) and (v) of section 36 A(1) of the M.R.T.P. Act, 1962.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: l.(a) The M.R.T.P. Act as it originally stood did not contain any provision for protection of consumers against false or misleading advertisements or other similar and unfair trade practices.
By providing for measures against restrictive and monopolistic trade practices, it was perhaps assumed that the consumers also, as a result, will get a fair deal.
However, experience indicated otherwise, and following the recommendations of a Committee, it was considered necessary to amend the Act.
Accordingly, sections 36 A to 36 E in part B were inserted in Chapter V of the Act by an amendment in 1984.
[984E F; G] 2.
It would be more proper for the appellant Company to give the full facts by referring to Mitsushita Ltd. by its correct name and further stating that its products are known by the name "National" and "Panasonic".
[986C] 3.
An advertisement mentioning merely Mitsushita Ltd. may, therefore, fail to convey anything to an ordinary buyer unless he is also told that it is the same Company which manufactures products known to him by the names "National" and "Panasonic".
If such were the position there would not have been any scope for objection.
However, the same effect is produced by the impugned advertisements.
There is no other company with the name of 'National ' and 'Panasonic ', and there is no scope for any confusion on that score.
[985G H; 986A] 4.
Where the reference is being made to the standard of the quality, it is not material whether the manufacturing company is indicated by its actually correct name or by its description with reference to its products.
[986B] 981 5.
The definition of 'unfair trade practice ' in section 36 A is not inclusive or flexible, but specific and limited in its contents.
The object is to bring honesty and truth in relationship between the manufacturer and consumer.
When a problem arises as to whether a particular act can be condem ned as an unfair trade practice or not, the key to the solution would be to examine whether it contains a false statement and is misleading and further what is the effect of such a representation made by the manufacturer on the common man? Does it lead a reasonable person in the position of a buyer to a wrong conclusion? The issue cannot be re solved by merely examining whether the representation is correct or incorrect in the literal sense.
The position will have to be viewed with objectivity in an impersonal manner.
[985A D] Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn. paras 1044 and 1045; relied on.
The erroneous description of the manufacturing Compa ny in the advertisements in question does not attract section 36 A of the M.R.T.P. Act.
[986B]
