Clause (a) of section 2 of the Gujarat Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) Act, 1977, defines "charges for lodging" to include charges for airconditioning, telephone, television, radio, music and extra beds, and the like.
The Explanation appended thereto makes the decision of the State Government on any dispute in that behalf final.
Clause (e) defines 'luxury provided in a hotel ' to mean accommodation the charges for which, including charges for airconditioning etc.
but excluding charges for food and other amenities, is not less than thirty five rupees per person per day.
Section 3 prescribes the rates of tax at certain percentage of the lodging charges per person per day recovered by proprietors of hotels and lodging houses from persons lodging therein.
Sub section (3) of section 4 provides that where luxury provided in a hotel to any person, not being an employee of the hotel, is not charged at all, or is charged at concessional rate, then also there shall be levied and collected the tax on such luxury, as if full charges for such luxury were paid to the proprietor of the hotel.
894 It was contended for the appellants that Entry 62 of List II of Schedule VII to the Constitution providing for taxes on luxuries contemplates and takes within its sweep a tax on goods and articles in their aspect and character as 'luxuries ', which does not include services and activities, the levy on the services for lodging provided at the hotels was, therefore, ultra vires the State power under the said entry; that the 'leaf criterion distinguishing luxury being a special attribute or quality of the commodity Or the services, as the case may be, and not the quantitative difference in the price, the impost has no relation to the concept of luxuries in the legislative entry; that the scheme of the Act in so far as it makes no distinction between the components of the services, which include both necessities and comforts, as distinguishable from luxuries, the levy on such composite subject matter was bad; that the expression "and the like" in the definition of "charges for lodging" in section 2(a) was vague and irrational and read with the explanation thereto, which renders the decision of the State Government on what constitutes "lodging charges" final, was an unreasonable restriction.
violative of Article 19(1)(g), that section 4(3), which provides that the luxury provided free or at concessional rates be taxed as if the full charges were deemed to have been received was unreason able and offends Article 19(1)(g), and that the luxury tax imposed on the charges for lodging has the direct and imme diate effect of restricting the freedom under Article 301 of the Constitution as it directly impedes the right of inter course throughout the territories of India.
Similar contentions were raised in the writ peti tions 'challenging the analogous provisions of the Tamil Nadu Tax on Luxuries in Hotels and Lodging Houses Act, 1981 and the Karnataka Tax on luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) Act, 1979.
In the writ petition challenging section 4 of the West Bengal Entertainments and Luxuries (Hotels and Restaurants) Tax Act, 1972 which fixes the liability to pay tax on the pro prietor of the hotel anti restaurant on the basis of the floor area as well, it was contended that the means of providing luxury by itself does not provide the nexus be tween the taxing power and the subject of tax, and that the power to levy a tax on the mere existence of the provision for luxury without its actual and not merely a notional or potential consumption or utilisation was beyond the scope of the legislative entry and also violative of the fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g).
Dismissing the appeals and writ petitions, 895 HELD: 1.1 The entries in the Legislative List should not be read in a narrow or pedantic sense but must be given their fullest meaning and the widest amplitude and be held to extend to all ancillary and subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be said to be comprehended in them.
[906F] 1.2 So read, the concept of a tax on 'luxuries ' in Entry 62, List II cannot be limited merely to tax things tangible and corporeal in their aspect as 'luxuries '.
The entry encompasses all the manifestations or emanations, the notion of 'luxuries ' can fairly and reasonably be said to compre hend.
The element of extravagance or indulgence that differ entiates 'luxury ' from 'necessity ' cannot be confined to goods and articles.
It can also be found in the quality of services and activities.
An airconditioned space, whether in a hotel or in a restaurant, is a luxury by itself.
People enter into these spaces with a view to enjoy, amuse or entertain themselves.
[908CE, 906C] A.B. Abdul Kadir & Ors.
vs State of Kerala, ; ; Western India Theatres Ltd. vs The Cantonment Board, Poona Cantonment, [1959] 2 Supp.
SCR 63 and State of Bombay vs R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalia ; , referred to.
Spences Hotel Private Ltd. & Anr.
vs State of West Bengal, , approved.
A.S. Bava vs State of Kerala, , overruled.
2.1 The ideas of luxury or necessity are necessarily relative ideas and require to be understood in the context of contemporary standards of living.
What might have been a luxury some decades ago might cease to partake of that character now.
What is luxury today might be considered a necessity a decade or so later.
A number of factors have to be taken into account in adjudging a luxury.
[911H, 912C] A.B. Abdul Kadir & Ors.
vs State of Kerala, ; , referred to.
2.2 In the instant case, legislature has chosen to identify the luxury by the statutory standards prescribed by it.
According to the legislative assumption, price does become evidence of the special quality on the basis of which luxuries could be distinguished and that some special quali ty is attributable to goods and services through the means of the price.
Quality and price, in the legislative assess ment can thus be 896 assumed to have a logical interrelationship.
This cannot be held to suffer from the vice of irrationality.
[912DE] 2.3 In the context of lodging accommodation and the services that go with it, the concept of luxury would neces sarily be a comprehensive idea taking into account the various components of the services.
Differences of degree can at particular stage become differences of kind.
The composite elements of lodging accommodation and services associated with it cannot be broken into components so as to distinguish some components as necessities, some others as comforts and yet others as luxuries.
Even necessities and comforts which have to them the additional element of undue elegance to a point of extravagance and indulgence might become luxuries.
[912G 913A] It cannot, therefore, be said that there is nothing in the law which identifies or distinguishes luxury on the basis of any special attribute apart from the price factor.
[913B] 3.1 The mere absence of a corrective machinery by way of appeal or revision, to rectify an adverse order made by an authority on whom power is conferred or the existence of a provision imparting finality in a statute by themselves would not be conclusive so as to render the conferment of power per se unreasonable and arbitrary rendering the provi sion unconstitutional.
[913F] Babu Bhai vs State of Gujarat, , referred to.
Corporation of Calcutta vs Calcutta Tramways Co., ; , distinguished.
3.2 In the instant case, there are in built checks on the power under Explanation to section 2(a).
The expression "and the like" occurring in the section when construed ejusdem generis indicates that the class of items envisaged by the preceding words was not exhaustive of the genus.
The Legis lature, therefore, has supplied these words so as to bring in any other item of the same class of genus.
This, by itself, is a clear guide for the exercise of the power.
[914B] 3.3 Another relevant consideration is the identity and status of the repository of the power.
The power in the instant case is given to a high authority like the State Government.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the power is an uncanalised power and is an arbitrary or unreasonable one so as to fall under Article 19(1)(g).
There are statutory guides 897 governing its exercise and the guidelines are covered by well settled principles of interpretation.
[914C] 4.
The deeming provision in section 4(3) of the Act does not apply to cases where accommodation is provided free or at concessional rates to the employees of the hotel.
This provision, which merely states that where the usual lodging charges are not collected for providing the lodging accommo dation, tax shah be payable as if the usual charges had been collected is a provision against evasion.
It cannot, there fore, be said to he unreasonable.
[914EF] 5.1 Freedom under Article 301 is a great freedom, one of the utmost significance to economic unity of the nation.
However, taxes can and do sometimes constitute restrictions on the said freedom.
But such restrictions must stem from the provisions of the law imposing the tax which could be said to have a direct and immediate effect of restricting the free flow of trade, commerce and intercourse.
[916F, E] 5.2 In the instant case, it has not been shown how a tax on luxuries enjoyed by a person in a hotel was either dis criminatory or has the direct and immediate effect of imped ing the freedom of intercourse.
It cannot thus be said to offend Article 301 of the Constitution.
[916G] Atiabari Tea Co. vs State of Assam, ; ; Firm A.T.B. Mehtab Majid & Co. vs State of Madras, [1963] Supp.
2 SCR 435; Gratwick vs Johnson, ; ; Baldwin vs GAF Inc., and Grannall vs Marrick ville Margarine Pty. Ltd.; , , referred to.
6.1 Section 4 of the West Bengal Act cannot be said to be beyond the legislative entry.
The taxable event need not necessarily be the actual utilisation or the actual consump tion, as the case may be, of the luxury.
So long as the legislation has reasonable nexus with the concept of "lux uries" in the broad and general sense in which the expres sions in legislative tests are comprehended, the legislative competence extends to all matters with respect to that field of topic of legislation.
In the instant case, provision for 'luxury ' in a hotel or restaurant amenable to a potential consumption does provide the nexus.
[909C, 910F, E, H] Bhagwan Dass Jain vs Union of India, ; , re ferred to.
Ramesh Waman Toke & Ors.
vs The State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 Bombay 345, overruled.
898 6.2 If the provider of the luxury is also independently amenable to the tax, the further restriction on the power would tend to cut into the plenitude of the field of legis lation.
If the idea of 'luxuries ' is required to be .so wide as to comprehend in it every aspect which can fairly and reasonably be said to be embraced by it, then the said taxing power under the Entry cannot be limited or condi tioned in any manner whatsoever.
[911A] 6.3 Once the legislative competence and the nexus be tween the taxing power and the subject of taxation is estab lished the other incidents are matters of fiscal policy behind the taxing law.
The actual measure of the tax, which is a matter of legislative policy and convenience, is not the same thing as, and must be kept distinguished from, the subject of the tax.
[911B] 6.4 The mere excessiveness of a tax or the fact that it affects the earnings cannot pre se be held to violate Arti cle 19(1)(g).
[911 C]
