The appellant assessee is a company carrying on the business of manufacturing and selling Textile at Porbunder (formerly a princely State) in Saurashtra in the State of Gujarat.
No income tax was levied by the former Porbunder State prior to 1948.
In 1949 the princely State of, Porbund er integrated into newly formed Saurashtra State.
In 1949 the State of Saurashtra promulgated the Saurashtra Income Tax Ordinance wherein provision for grant of depreciation based on written down value was made.
On 26.1.1950, State of Saurashtra became a part of the Union of India as a Part 'B ' State and thus the Income Tax Act, 1922 became applicable to the State of Saurashtra from 1st April 1950 under the Fi nance Act, 1950.
The said Saurashtra Income Tax Ordinance was repealed under Sec. 13 of the Finance Act, 1950.
Section 12 of that Act provided for removal of difficulties, if any, arising in giving effect to the Income Tax Act.
The Central Govt.
on 2.12.50 issued an order known as "Taxation Laws (Part B States) Removal of Difficulties) Order 1950".
Clause 2 of the said order provided the manner in which the aggre gate depreciation allowance and written down value were to be computed.
On March 9, 1953, the Central Government in the exercise of its powers under Sec.
60A of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922, added an Explanation to the said clause (2).
The vires of the said Explanation was challenged before the Andhra Pradesh High Court which held that the Explanation referred to above was ultra vires the powers of the Central Government under Sec.
60A of the Income Tax Act.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Hyderabad vs D.B.R. Mills Ltd., Thereupon, the Central Government issued another notifi cation dated the 8th May, 1956 in exercise of its powers under Section 12 of the Finance Act 1950, whereby an Expla nation in identical terms as the earlier Explanation was added to Clause (2) of the Removal of Difficulties Order, 1950.
The validity of the said Explanation added by the notification dated 8th May, 1956 was upheld by this Court in The Commissioner of Income tax, Hyderabad vs Dewan Bahadur Ramgopal Mills Ltd., ; On the appeal from the said decision of the High Court 2 of the Andhra Pradesh in Commissioner of Income tax, Hydera bad vs D.B.R. Mills, The assessee was assessed under the Indian Income Tax Act from 1940 41 in respect of the income arising or deemed to arise in British India from 1940 41 onwards.
For these years its income was assessed on receipt basis but in calcu lating the world income depreciation was taken into consid eration for arriving at the income outside British India.
The assessee was also assessed for the assessment year 1949 50 under the Saurashtra Income Tax Ordinance, 1949.
From 1950 51 it was assessed under the Income Tax Act.
The assessment years concerned in this case are 1957 58, 1958 59 and 1959 60, the corresponding previous years being the Calender years 1956, 1957 and 1958 respectively.
The case of the assessee is that during the course of the assessment of its income, depreciation was allowed for the assessment year 1950 51 and thereafter on the original cost of the assets as reduced by the depreciation allowance given under the Sau rashtra Income Tax Ordinance 1949.
The respective written down values for the assessment years 1951 52 and 1952 53 were fixed on the basis of the written down value for the assessment year 1950 51.
But later the concerned Income Tax Officer rectified the calculations of depreciation allowance by further reducing the written down value of the assets of the assessee.
The Income Tax Officer took the written down value for the assessment years 1940 41 as the starting point.
The assessee was not satisfied with this rectification.
Its contention was that the depreciation for the previous years should have been calculated only on the basis of Clause (2) of the Taxation Laws (Part B States) (Removal of Difficulties) Order 1950, which provided for computation of the aggregate depreciation allowance on the basis of the deduction which was actually allowed under the Saurashtra Income Tax Ordinance, 1949.
Regarding the explanation, the assessee contended that it was ultra rites the powers of the Central Government as it was not necessary for the removal of any difficulty.
The contentions of the assessee were rejected by the Income Tax authorities as well as by Income Tax Appellate Tribunal.
It was contended by the assessee before the Tribu nal that the decision of this Court in Commissioner of Income Tax Hyderabad vs Dewan Bahadur Ramgopal Mills Ltd., ; was no longer good law in view of the later decision of this Court in Straw Products Ltd. vs Income Tax Officer "A" Ward, Bhopal and Ors., The Tribunal having rejected the said contentions, at the in stance of the assessee a reference was made to the Gujarat High Court in which the following question was raised: 3 "Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case.
the Tribunal was justified in holding that the depreciation allowable and not 'actually allowed ' under the Saurashtra Income tax Ordinance, 1949, should be taken into account in computing the aggregate depre ciation allowance and written down value under Sec.
10(2)(vi) of the Income Tax Act 1922.
" The High Court held that in its advisory jurisdiction under the Income Tax Act, it could not go into the question of the vires of the said Explanation and therefore answered the question against the assessee.
Therefore, the appellant filed Special Civil Application 1797 of 1972 in the High Court.
The Division Bench of the High Court in its judgment disposing of the said special Civil Application pointed out that the decision of this Court in the Commissioner of Income Tax, Hyderabad vs Dewan Bahadur Ramgopal Mills, case, referred to above had upheld the validity of the Explanation in question.
The High Court further opined that some of the arguments which did not find favour with this court in the said case were accepted by a Bench of 7 Learned Judges in the Straw Products Ltd. vs Income Tax Officer, "A" Ward, Bhopal and Ors., The High Court fur ther pointed out that in its decision in the said case of Straw Products this court had considered the decision in Dewan Bahadur Ramgopal Mills Ltd. and explained that on the facts of that case a difficulty had arisen and it was for removing that difficulty that the Order of 1956 was issued.
For the said reason the High Court considered that decision was good law and following the same, it dismissed the Spe cial Civil Application.
Hence this appeal by the assessee.
In this appeal the Explanation added by the Central Government by its notification dated May 8, 1956 as well as the assessments made on the assessee for the assessment year 1957 58 to 1959 60 have been assailed.
It was inter alia contended on behalf of the assessee that there was no diffi culty which had arisen in giving effect to the provisions of the Indian Income Tax Act in the State of Saurashtra and hence the pre condition on which the Central Government was authorised to make an Order under the Removal of Difficul ties Order and add the Explanation in question had never come into existence and as such the Explanation was without the authority of Law, invalid and of no legal effect.
It was further contended by the assessee that under the scheme of the Income Tax Act, generally speaking, almost the entire cost of a capital asset used for purposes of business or profession should 4 be allowed to be written off by way of depreciation, whether worked on the basis of straight line method or written down value.
The assessee disputed the mode of assessment and the applicability of the Explanation.
Following this Court 's decision in Dewan Bahadur Ramgo pal Mills ' Ltd. ; this Court dismissing the appeal, HELD: The Saurashtra Income Tax Ordinance was repealed by Section 13 of the Finance Act 1950 and not by any provi sion in the Indian Income Tax Act.
The basic and normal scheme of depreciation under the Indian Income Tax Act is that it decreases every year, being a percentage of the written down value which in the first year is the actual cost and in succeeding years actual cost less all deprecia tion actually allowed under the Income Tax Act or any Act repealed thereby etc.
[18D E] Commissioner of Income Tax Hyderabad vs Dewan Bahadur Ramgopal Mills Ltd., ; The Saurashtra Income Tax Ordinance having been repealed not by the Indian Income Tax Act but by Sec. 13 of the Finance Act 1950, a difficulty had come into existence, and hence it could not be said that the Government had no good basis to come to the conclusion that a difficulty had, in fact, arisen.
[18F G] Madeva Upendra Sinai vs Union of India & Ors., [1975] 98 I.T.R. 209.
