The common question arising in the instant cases which was referred to this larger Bench is whether an award passed under the provisions of the is liable either to be remitted under section 16(1)(c) of the Act or liable to be set aside under section 30(c) thereof merely on the ground that no reasons have been given by the arbitrator or umpire, as the case may be, in support of the award.
It was urged that (i) subsequent to 1976 there has been a qualitative change in the law of arbitration and that it has become necessary to insist upon the arbitrator or the umpire to give reasons in support of the award passed by him unless the parties to the dispute have agreed that no rea sons need be given by the arbitrator or umpire for his decision; (ii) since under section 16(1)(c) of the Act the legality of an award can be questioned in Court on the basis of an error apparent on the face of an award, the only way of ensuring that an award is in accordance with law is by insisting upon the arbitrator or umpire to give reasons for the award and (iii) an arbitrator or an umpire discharges a judicial function while functioning as an arbitrator or an umpire under the Act, and, therefore, is under an obligation to observe rules of natural justice while discharging his duties, (iv) that the concept of natural justice had under gone a great deal of change in recent years, and the re quirement of giving 145 reasons for a decision should be treated as a new rule of natural justice.
While answering the question in the negative and remit ting the cases to the Division Bench for disposal in accord ance with law, this Court, HELD: (1) The arbitrator or umpire is under no obliga tion to give reasons in support of the decision reached by him unless under the arbitration agreement or in the deed of submission he is required to give such reasons, and if the arbitrator or umpire chooses to give reasons in support of his decision it is open to the Court to set aside the award if it finds that an error of law has been committed by the arbitrator or umpire on the face of the record on going through such reasons.
[161C D] (2) The arbitrator or umpire shall have to give reasons also where the court has directed in any order such as the one made under section 20 or section 21 or section 34 of the Act that reasons should be given or where the statute which governs an arbitration requires him to do so.
[161D E] (1) University of New South Wales vs Max Cooper & Sons Pty. Ltd. 35 Australian Law Reports p. 219; (2) Hodgkinson vs Fernie & Anr.
, ; English Reports p. 712; (3) Champsey Bhara & Company vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company Ltd., A.I.R. 1923 Privy Council 66, (4); Seth Thawardas Pherumal vs The Union of India, (5) Jivarajbhai Ujamshi Sheth & Ors.
vs Chintamanrao Balaji & Ors., ; (6) Bungo Steel Furniture Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , (7) State of Rajasthan vs M/s. R.S. Sharma & Co., ; , referred to.
(3) The people in India as in other parts of the world such as England, U.S.A. and Australia have become accustomed to the system of settlement of disputes by private arbitra tion and have accepted awards made against them as binding even though no reasons have been given in support of the awards for a long time.
They have attached more importance to the element of finality of the awards than their legali ty.
[178D] (4) Courts should be slow in taking decisions which will have the effect of shaking rights and titles which have been rounded through a long time upon the conviction that a particular interpretation of law is the legal and proper one and is one which will not be departed from.
[179C D] Brownsea Havel Properties vs Pooje Corporation, , referred to.
146 (5) Even after the passing of the English Arbitration Act, 1979 unless a court requires the arbitrator to give reasons for the award, an award is not liable to be set aside merely on the ground that no reasons have been given in support of it.
[180A B] (6) The foundation of any arbitration proceeding is the existence of an arbitration agreement between the persons who are parties to the dispute.
It is not as if people are without any remedy at all in cases where they find that it is in their interest to require the arbitrator to give reasons for the award.
In cases where reasons are required, it is open to the parties to the dispute to introduce a term either in the arbitration agreement or in the deed of sub mission requiring the arbitrators to give reasons in support of the award.
But there may be many transactions in which parties to the dispute may not relish the disclosure of the reasons for the award.
[151 E] Firm Madanlal Roshanlal Mahajan vs Hukumchand Mills Ltd. lndore; , ; N. Chelapan vs Secretary, Kerala State Electricity Board & Anr., ; , referred to.
(7) The two well recognised principles of natural jus tice are (i) that a Judge or an arbitrator who is entrusted with the duty to decide a dispute should be disinterested and unbiased (nemo judex in cause sua); and (ii) that the parties to dispute should be given adequate notice and opportunity to be heard by the authority (audi alteram partem).
Giving reasons in support of a decision was not considered to be a rule of natural justice either under the law of arbitration or under administrative law.
[171C] (10) Payyavula Vengamma vs Payyavule Kasanna & Ors., ; ; (11) Harvey vs Shelton, [1844] 7 Bear.
455 at p. 462; (12) Haigh vs Haigh.
; ; (13) Som Datt Datta vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; (14) Bhagat Payyavula vs The Union of India & Ors., ; ; (15) Siemens Engineering & Manu facturing Co. of India Ltd. vs Union of India & Anr., [1976] Supp.
S.C.R. 489; (16) Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs
P.N. Sharma & Anr., ; ; (16) A.K. Kraipak ferred to.
(8) A distinction has to be made between statutory arbitrations and private arbitrations.
What applies general ly to settlement of disputes by authorities governed by public law need not be extended to a11 cases arising under private law such as those arising under the law of 147 arbitration which is intended for settlement of private disputes.
[178A B] Rohtas Industries Ltd. & Anr.
vs Rohtas Industries Staff Union & Ors., ; , referred to.
(9) It is no doubt true that in the decisions pertaining to Administrative Law, this Court in cases has observed that the giving of reasons in an administrative decisions is a rule of natural justice by an extension of the prevailing rule.
It would be in the interest of the world of commerce that the said rule is confined to the area of Administrative Law.
[179D E] (10) The trappings of a body which discharges judicial functions and required to act In accordance with law with their concomitant obligations for reasoned decisions, are not attracted to a private adjudication of the nature of arbitration as the latter is not supposed to exert the State 's sovereign judicial power.
[180F G] (11) It will not be justifiable for Governments or their instrumentalities to enter into arbitration agreements which do not expressly stipulate the rendering of reasoned and speaking awards.
Governments and their instrumentalities should, as a matter of policy and public and private inter est if not as a compulsion of law ensure that wherever they enter into agreements for resolution of disputes by resort to private arbitration, the requirement of speaking awards is expressly stipulated and ensured.
It is for Governments and their instrumentalities to ensure in future this re quirement as a matter of policy in the larger public inter est.
Any lapse in that behalf might lend itself to or per haps justify the legitimate criticism that Government failed to provide against possible prejudice to public interest.
[181B D] (12) A decision on the question involves a question of legislative policy which should be left to the decision of Parliament.
It is significant that although nearly a decade ago the Indian Law Commission submitted its report on the law of arbitration specifically mentioning therein that there was no necessity to amend the law of arbitration requiring the arbitrator to give reasons, Parliament has not chosen to take any step in the direction of the amendment of the law of arbitration.
[178H; 179G H] (13) In the circumstances and particularly having regard to the various reasons given by the Indian Law Commission for not recommending to the Government to introduce an amendment in the Act requiring the arbitrators to give reasons for their awards, it may not be 148 appropriate to take the view that all awards which do not contain reasons should either be remitted or set aside.
