Reliance Industries Ltd. (RIL) and Reliance Petrochemi cals Industries Ltd. (RPL) are inter connected and repre sented Companies in the large industrial house known as Reliance Group.
RIL had promoted RPL.
RPL was incorporated on 11.1.1988 and has been a cent percent subsidiary of RIL.
It was claimed that RPL would set up the largest petrochemi cal complex in India with foreign collaboration.
RPL pro posed to issue convertible debentures for raising capital for the project.
The Controller of Capital Issues (CCI), who functions under the had, on 15th September, 1984 by way of press release issued certain non statutory guidelines for approval of issue of secured con vertible and non convertible debentures.
These guidelines were subsequently amended on 8.3.1985.
Guidelines were also given by the CCI for issue of convertible cumulative prefer ence shares, and for employees stock option scheme.
RPL had, on 4.5.1988, made an application to CCI for issue of debentures of the face value of Rs.200 crores fully convertible into equity shares on the following terms: A sum of Rs. 10 being 5% of the face value of each deben tures by 44 way of first conversion immediately into one equity share at par on allotment; (ii) A sum of Rs.40 being the 20% of the face value of each debenture by way of second conversion after three years but before four years from the date of allotment at a premi um to be fixed by the Controller of Capital Issues; (iii) The balance of Rs. 150 representing 75% of the face value of each debenture as third conversion after five years but not later than seven years from the date of allot ment at a premium to be fixed by the Controller of Capital Issues.
The CCI accorded his sanction for the issue of deben tures on 4.7.1988.
However, the sanction was amended on 19th July, 1988.
The amendment put a non transferability condi tion on the preferential share holders of RPL.
It was limit ed to the corporate shareholders of RIL and relaxed for individual share holders of RIL.
The amendment also stipu lated that the Company should obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India, Exchange Control Department, for the allotment of debentures to the non residents as required under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973.
On 26th July 1988, there was another amendment which restricted the transfer of shares allotted to the employees of RPL and RIL.
The consent orders issued by the CCI were challenged in various High Courts, by way of writ petitions and a suit.
Some High Courts issued injunctions restraining the issue of the debentures.
This Court, on 19th August, 1988, restrained the afore said issuance of injunctions by the High Courts, and issued directions for the issue of debentures.
The cases pending in various High Courts were transferred to this Court.
In these transferred cases the consent orders of the CCI were challenged mainly on the grounds that: Despite the fact that RPL did not fulfil the require ments of a proper application and the necessary consent and approval, RPL 's application was.
entertained and processed by the CCI with undue expedition and without application of mind; The guidelines issued by the CCI himself were deviated from; 45 The CCI had processed the application of RPL in a hurry, within two months; The CCI did not take into account the fact that RIL had earlier issued debentures for manufacture of identical products; The CCI failed to note that RPL did not have the neces sary licences, consents and approvals, from the relevant departments of the Government of India; The CCI failed to consider the financial soundness and feasibility of the project of RPL; The CCI did not take adequate care to examine the terms of the issue and had blindly accepted the terms as proposed by RPL; RPL in its brochures has misled the public by describing the debentures as fully secured convertible debentures; The security for the debentures was inadequate; RPL has been permitted to create securities which would have priority over the securities available to the present debenture holders and without their consent; RPL has misled the public in that in its prospectus it had stated that security would be provided to the satisfac tion of the trustees; The CCI had failed to examine whether RIL had misused the funds raised on its debentures; There has been a discrimination in favour of RIL in that RIL would be entitled to allotment of shares of the face value of Rs.57.50 crores, whereas only 5% of the investment of the debenture holders could be converted; Whereas RIL 's loan of Rs.50 crores would be converted into shares at par, the debenture holders would have to pay premium to be fixed by the CCI at the time of second conver sion of 20% of the debentures; and In the application filed by RPL, no shares were ear marked for the employees of RIL and RPL, but ultimately it was done.
46 On behalf of the petitioners, it was contended inter alia that the issue of the debentures in question was detri mental to public interest, and that public interest had been ignored.
On behalf of Respondents it was argued that the sanction issued by the CCI had been genuine and valid, and that no irregularity had been committed.
It was submitted that it was a misconception that the CCI had not followed his own guidelines relating to sanction of the issue of the deben tures, and it was incorrect to say that there had not been proper security.
Dismissing the writ petitions and the suit, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
The CCI functions under the , an Act to provide for control over the issue of capital.
The purpose of the Act must be found from the language used.
The scheme and the language used, strict ly speaking, do not indicate any positive role for the CCI in discharging his functions in respect of grant of sanc tion.
But it has to be borne in mind that he is a part of State instrumentalities committed to the endeavours of the constitutional aspiration to secure justice social and economic and also under Article 39(b) & {c) of the Consti tution to ensure that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as to best subserve the common good and that the operation of the economic system does not result in concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.
Yet, every instrumentality and functionary of the State must fulfil its own role and should not trespass or encroach/entrench upon the field of others.
Progress is ensured and development helped if each performs his role in the common endeavour.
[90B; 124F H; 125A] 1.2.
In the changed socio economic conditions of the country one who is charged to ensure capital investment has to perform a social role in capital formation and to protect the interest of the capital market, and to oversee the growth of industrialisation and investment in such a manner as to ensure employment and demand in the national economy, to prevent wasteful investment and to promote sound methods of corporate finance.
In recent years, there has been a vast increase in the number of members of public who have surplus money to invest.
The size of the issues has assumed macro proportions and the type of investments are also more so phisticated.
Entrepreneurs with expert legal assistance could easily trap unwary investors and the development of a public interest lobby that can scrutinise issues carefully and advise prospective investors may be desirable.
[125A, B, F, G] 47 1.3.
The guidelines are only a guide and nothing more.
The application of mind by the CCI before sanction must be in the perspective for which he is enjoined by the Act.
He must endeavour to secure a balanced investment of the coun try 's resources in industry, agriculture and social serv ices.
The Controller should perform the role of social control and fulfil the social purpose in conjunction with other authorities and functionaries.
It is necessary for him in the discharge of his functions to ensure that there is not too much concentration of particular industries in particular areas, and that there is a scientific development and proper investment in key and core projects.
[125C D] 1.4.
The duties of the CCI have to be construed in the context of the above, particularly when there is no clear cut delineation of their scope in the enactment.
This is also reinforced by the expanding scope of the guidelines issued under the Act from time to time and the increasing range of financial instruments that enter the market.
The responsilbilities of the CCI in this direction should not be widened beyond the range of expeditious implementation of the scheme of the Act and should, atleast be restricted and limited to ensuring that the issue to which he is granting consent is not, patently and to his knowledge, so manifestly impracticable or financially risky as to amount to a fraud on the public.
While it is true that some procedure may have to be evolved to ensure that the CCI gets the benefit of the comments, suggestions and objections from the public before arriving at his decision whether to grant consent or not, and if so, on what terms and conditions, it will be too cumbersome to have a provision that the details of every proposed application for consent should be publicised to the maximum extent by the CCI, that objections and comments from the public should be called for, that there should be public hearing by the CCI and that he should pass a reasoned order granting or withholding consent.
That would delay the whole process of approvals which should be as expeditious as possible.
[93C E; 125G H; 126A B] 1.5.
The CCI has also a role to play in ensuring that public interest does not suffer as a consequence of the consent granted by him.
To go beyond this and require that the CCI should probe in depth into the technical feasibili ties and financial soundness of the proposed projects or the sufficiency or otherwise of the security offered and such other details may be to burden him with duties for the discharge of which he is as yet ill equipped.
[93D F] 1.6.
Being non statutory in character, the guidelines are not judicially enforceable.
A policy is not law.
A statement of policy is not a 48 prescription of binding criterion.
The competent authority might depart from these guidelines where the proper exercise of his discretion so warrants.
In the instant case, the statute provided that rules can be made by the Central Government only.
And according to section 6(2) of the Act, the competent authority has the power and jurisdiction to con done any deviation from even the statutory requirements prescribed, under sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
The CCI applied his mind to the facts of this case and the factors in general.
The CCI did not act malafide or on extraneous consideration.
[122D F; 124B D] Fernandez vs State of Mysore, ; ; R. Abdullah Rowther vs State of Tansport, etc., AIR 1959 SC 896; Dy.
Iron & Steel Controller vs Manekchand Pro prietor; , ; Andhra Industrial Work vs CCI & E, ; ; K.M. Shanmugham vs S.R.V.S. Pvt. Ltd., ; ; Sagnata Investments Ltd. vs Norwich Corpn., ; British Oxygen Co. vs Board of Trade, ; , relied on.
Ramanna Dayaram Shetty vs International Airport Authori ty; , ; Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills vs Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Ex P. Khan, [1981] 1 All.
E.R. 40; IRC vs National Federation, ; ; Reqina vs Preston Supplementary, ; Council of Civil Service Unions & Others vs Minister for the Civil Service, , referred to.
Foulkes ' Administrative Law, 6th Edn.
pp 181 to 184, re ferred to. 2.
As regards the contention that the sanction of the CCI was accorded with undue haste and favouritism, in the first place, an application of this type is intended to be disposed of with great expedition.
In a project of the type proposed to be launched by the petitioner, passage of time may prejudicially affect the applicant and it is not only desirable but also necessary that the application should be disposed of within as short a time as possible.
It is, therefore, difficult to say that the period of two months taken in granting consent in the present case is so short that an inference of haste must follow.
Secondly, on behalf of the Union of India, a list of various applications re ceived and disposed of by the office of the CCI between September, 1987 and September, 1988 has been produced to show that, generally speaking, these applications are dis posed of within a month or two.
It is true that none of these issues is of the same colossal magnitude as the present issue.
Nevertheless, the CCI could hardly keep the application pending merely because the amount involved is heavy.
It is not possible therefore to say merely from the 49 short span of time that there was a hasty grant of consent in the present case.
[73G H;74A C] 3.1.
The consent of the CCI was not accorded in igno rance of the facts pertaining to the G series of RIL deben tures.
The application for consent makes it clear that the petitioner company is a new company promoted by RIL and that RIL was promoting this company to manufacture High Density Polyethylene (HDPE), Poly Vinyl Chloride PVC and Mono Ethyl ene Glycol (MEG).
The application refers to the fact that the total cost of the project was expected to be Rs.650 crores and that this cost had been approved earlier in 1985.
Considering that RPL had come into existence only on 11.1.1988, this was a clear indication that the projects for which the debenture issue was being proposed were projects which had been mooted even by the RIL as early as 1985.
Again in the detailed application form submitted by the RPL it has been mentioned that the RIL had already obtained approval of the Central Government for implementation of the aforesaid projects under the MRTP Act.
In part C of the application form it has been mentioned that the promoter company had made necessary applications for endorsement in favour of the company of the Letter of Intent/Industrial Licences already issued by the Central Government under the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951, in the name of the holding company, viz., RIL.
It is, therefore, ex tremely difficult to agree that the fact of issue of the earlier series of debentures by the RIL or the purposes thereof could have escaped the notice of the CCI, particu larly, when it is remembered that the issue of G series of debentures by the RIL was quite recent and had also attract ed a lot of publicity.
[74D H; 75C D] 3.2.
The CCI was not performing the role of a social mentor taking into account the purpose of RIL.
If RIL has misutilised any of its funds or the funds had not been utilised for G series, then RIL would be responsible to its shareholders or to authorities in accordance with the rele vant provisions of the .
This aspect does not enter into sanctioning the capital issue for the new project in accordance with the guidelines.
Even if RIL and RPL have to be treated as one for this purpose and the grant of consent for earlier debenture issues in favour of RIL are to be taken into account in judging the necessity of the issues, there is no illegality or irregularity in the grant of consent to RPL.
RIL had not been able to utilise any part of the 'G ' series of debentures on the MEG project as there had been a cost overrun and it was decided to have a wholly owned subsidiary.
Hence the projects are those of the RIL to be implemented by RPL.
The additional finances were needed for the extension, expansion and diversification of 50 the projects originally envisaged.
This is one of the ob jects for which a debenture issue is permissible under the guidelines.
[101F H; 102A, B] 4.1.
So far as HDPE is concerned, it appears that there was a valid licence; and it may be mentioned that on 24th August, 1985 pursuant to an application made by RIL under section 22(3)(a) of the MRTP Act, the Govt.
granted approval for the establishment of a new undertaking for manufacture of HDPE.
[77F] 4.2.
Regarding foreign collaboration, an application was made by RIL in 1984 for approval of foreign collaboration with M/s Du Pont Inc. Canada, for manufacture of HDPE.
The approval was given and the validity was extended and the foreign collaboration approval was endorsed in favour of RPL on 12th October, 1988.
Similar other consents were there.
Finally, capital goods clearance was endorsed in favour of RPL for the PVC project on 12th August, 1988.
Capital goods clearance was also endorsed in favour of RPL for HDPE project on 23rd August, 1988.
Thus, it will be seen that all the basic groundwork had already been done by the RIL.
[77G, H; 78A] 4.3.
On 16th June, 1987 by a Press Note issued by the Deptt.
of Industrial Development in the Ministry of Industry of the Govt.
of India declared that where a transferee Company is a fully owned subsidiary of the Company holding the Letter of Intent or licence, the change of the Company implementing the project would be approved.
It is in the light of this that the Board of RIL on 30th December, 1987 passed a resolution to incorporate a 100% subsidiary Company whose main objects were to implement the licences/Letters of Intent received by RIL and to carry on the activities relat ing to production and distribution.
The resolution approved the name of the Company as RPL.
On 11th January, 1988 the RPL was incorporated and the Certificate of Incorporation was issued.
Thereafter, on 12th January, 1988 letters were written by RIL for endorsement of licences/Letters of Intent in favour of RPL.
The certificate of commencement of busi ness was thereafter issued.
[78B E] 4.4.
The Press Note is clear that the transfers from one company to an allied company were considered unexceptionable except where trafficking in licences is intended.
In this situation the change of name from RIL to RPL, of the li cences, letter of intent and other approvals was only a matter of course and much importance cannot be attached to the fact that CCI did not insist upon these endorsements being obtained even before the letter of consent is granted.
In any event the letter of 51 consent is very clear.
Clause (h) of the conditions attached to the consent letter makes it clear that the consent should not be construed as exempting the company from the operation of the provisions of the Monopolies & Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, as amended.
Clause (c) makes it clear that it is a condition of this consent that the company will be subject to any measures of control, licensing, or acqui sition that may be brought into operation either by the Central or any State Government or any authority therein.
Under clause (t) the approval granted is without prejudice to any other approval/permission that may be required to be obtained under any other Acts/laws in force.
Having regard to the above and also to the terms and conditions of the consent letter, the grant of consent itself being condi tioned on RPL obtaining the necessary approvals, consents and permissions before embarking on the project, there was no impropriety in the CCI granting the consent without waiting for the formal endorsement of the various licences, letters and approvals in favour of RPL.
Moreover, CCI is aware of the progress of the various applications made by the company.
The Controller is also aware that the ICICI had looked into the financial soundness and feasibility of the project and there is material to show that the comments of the ICICI were made available to him.
When a project is being appraised by the institution like the ICICI and when the CCI is also aware, by reason of the participation of his representatives at the meetings of the Department of Indus try and the Department of Company Affairs about the stage or outcome of the proposals made under the IDR and MRTP Acts, it is clear that the CCI did not overlook any crucial aspect and that his grant of consent in anticipation of the neces sary transfers to the RPL was based on a practical appraisal of the situation and fully in order.
[78F H; 79A, B; 80B D] 5.
There has been sufficient compliance with the guide lines on the quantum of issue, debt equity ratio, interest rate and the period of redemption.
There was sufficient security for the debentures in the facts and circumstances of this case.
The preference in favour of shareholders of RIL was justified and based on intelligible differentia.
Indeed, if one considers the role of the CCI, he is primari ly concerned to ensure a balanced investment policy and not to guarantee the solvency or sufficiency of the security.
Most of the criticisms directed against deviation from guidelines were misplaced.
[94G, H; 95A, B] 6.1.
The discrimination alleged is on two grounds.
The first is that RIL is entitled straightaway to the allotment of shares of the face value of Rs.57.50 crores whereas only 5% of the investment by the debenture holders can be con verted into shares at par simultaneously 52 with the issue.
The second is that a loan of Rs.50 crores advanced by RIL to RPL will be converted into shares at par at the end of 3 years whereas the debenture holders will have to pay a premium even for converting 20% of their debentures into shares by that time.
These allegations do not bear scrutiny.
So far as the first ground is concerned, there is no justification for a comparison between these two categories of investors.
RIL is the promoter company which has conceived the projects, got them sanctioned, invested huge amounts of time and money and transferred the projects for implementation to RPL.
It is, therefore, in a class by itself and there is nothing wrong if it is allotted certain shares in the company, quite independently of the debenture issue, in lieu of its investments.
So far as the second ground is concerned, it overlooks certain disadvantages attached to RIL in regard to the loan of Rs.50 crores ad vanced by RIL as compared with the investor in the deben tures.
Firstly, RIL 's advance is interest free for 3 years whereas the debenture holders got interest at the rate of 12.5% during the period.
Secondly, the debenture loan is secured while the RIL 's are not.
Thus the debenture holders have certain benefits which RIL does not have and, if the debenture holders have the disadvantage of having to pay a premium, that cannot constitute basis for a ground of dis crimination.
[103E H; 104 A, B] 6.2.
RPL is a company not the State or a State instru mentality that is issuing the shares and debentures.
It is entirely for the company to issue the shares and debentures on such terms as they may consider practicable from their point of view.
There is no reason why they should not so structure the issue that it confers certain great advantages and benefits on the existing share holders or promoters than on the new subscribers.
It is not permissible for the CCI to withhold consent only for this reason or to stipulate that consent can be given only if the share holders and promoters as well as prospective debenture holders are all treated alike.
The subscribers to the debenture are only lenders to the company who have an option to convert their debt into equity on certain terms.
It is perfectly open to the sub scribers to balance the pros and cons of the issue and to desist from taking the debentures if they feel that the dice are loaded unfavourably in favour of the "proprietors" of the company.
[104B E] 7.1.
In the present case, a legal mortgage has been created by RPL in favour of the trustees in respect of its immovable and movable assets, except book debts, in respect of which financial institutions will hold a first charge on account of foreign loan.
RPL does not have any existing loans.
Therefore, the charge in favour of the debenture holders 53 iS presently the first charge.
No further borrowing is contemplated at this stage except the foreign currency loan to the extent of Rs.84 crores.
Even if the value of the foreign currency which has been sanctioned in principle by the three financial institutions is taken into account, the assets coverage goes down at each stage and does not make any critical difference to the value of the security of the debenture holders under the Trust Deed.
The purposes of borrowings, namely, term loan borrowings, deferred payment credits/guarantees and borrowing for financing new projects do not, on analysis, raise any difficulty.
There are suffi cient in built checks and controls.
The company, being an MRTP company would have to obtain both MRTP permission for creating any security irrespective of its value and fresh CCI consent under the CCI Act, except in case of exempted securities.
[119G, H; 120A C] 7.2.
With the escalation in the value of the fixed assets due to passage of time on the one hand and the re demption of a good portion of the debentures by the end of three years on the other, the security provided is complete and, in any event, more than adequate to safeguard the interests of the debenture holders.
[96G, H] 8.
Clauses 5 and 6 are only enabling clauses and in the nature of permitting the Company, despite the mortgage in favour of the debenture holders, to carry on his business normally.
What is referred to therein as residual charge is really a floating charge.
The Company 's normal business activities would necessarily involve alienation of some of its assets from time to time such as goods manufactured by it as well as procurement and discharge of loan and accommo dation facilities from banks, financial institutions and others.
The entire progress of the company would come to a standstill in the absence of such enabling provisions.
They are not only usual but essential because the basic idea is that the finances raised by the debentures should be em ployed for running the project profitably and thereby gener ate more and more funds and assets which will also be avail able to the debentures holders.
Further what the clauses provide is only that the consent and concurrence of the debenture holders need not be obtained by the company before creating securities that may have priority over the present issue of debentures.
But the trustees for the debenture holders have to concur before the company can raise any future borrowings and create, therefor, the security which will have priority over the security available to the present debenture holders.
The ICICI is not only a financial institution in the public sector but also one of the insti tutions financing the project and thus has a stake in its success and so can be trusted to safeguard the interests of the debenture holders.
The debenture trust 54 deed also contains a provision by which at the time of creation of any future charge the terms and ranking have to be agreed upon between RPL and ICICI.
Clause 16 of the trust deed authorises the trustees to intervene and crystallise the charge in certain circumstances and stultify an attempt by the company to create higher ranking charges.
There are also restraints on the company under the and the MRTP Act involving the consent of public financial institutions, Commercial Banks, the term lenders, share holders, the MRTP Commission, the Central Govt.
and the CCI before the creation of such securities.
[98B H; 99A, E, F] 9.
In certain brochures and pamphlets issued by RPL, the debentures were described as "fully secured convertible debentures".
The company admitted that there was such a description but explained that this was due to an oversight; the words "fully secured convertible debentures" were print ed in some brochures instead of the words "secured fully convertible debentures" without meaning or intending any change.
It was stated that the company 's representation was that the debentures were "secured fully convertible" ones.
This is also what had been set out in the application for consent.
Though the company did claim that the debentures were also fully secured, the emphasis in the issue was that the debentures were fully convertible and secured.
This explanation is plausible.
No importance or significance need be attached to the different description in some places.
particularly.
in the context of the nature of security actually provided for the debentures.
[95F H; 96A] 10.
Prospectus issued by RPL is not misleading because it stated that security will be provided to the satisfaction of the trustees and the CCI accepted that statement in the application for consent.
The debenture trustees are well known financial institutions and it is not possible for the CCI to ensure more than the usual practice which was fol lowed in the present case.
[100D, E] 11.
The CCI modified paragraph 5 of the consent by his letter of the 19th July, 1988 to say that allotment to the employees shall not exceed 50 debentures per individual.
It does not appear that the restriction of the allotments to the employees was at the instance of the Company; nor does it seem that any discrimination was intended in respect of the allotments to the employees.
Nor has attention been invited to any legal requirements or guidelines prescribing any fixed or minimum quota of allotment to the employees of the Company.
Under the circumstances, the question of dis crimination does not arise.
[107C, D] 55 12.
The consent order of the CCI clearly indicated that the consent conveyed in the letter shall lapse on the expiry of 12 months from the date thereof.
The consent order cate gorically stated that the approval was without prejudice to any other aPproval/permission that may be required to be obtained under any other Acts and laws in force.
It neces sarily follows that the obligation to obtain other permis sions continued.
There was no legal conditions that other approvals should be examined by the CCI before grant of its own consent.
As defined in the , a debenture need not be secured.
Therefore, guideline 10 means that security should be provided as is customarily adopted in corporate practice.
In the present case, the debentures are compul sorlly convertible and so no repayment is really involved.
The debenture is essentially an acknowledgement of debt with a commitments to repay the principal with interest.
The question of security becomes relevant for the purpose of payment of interest only in the unlikely event of winding up.
The guidelines did not provide for the quantum and the nature of the security.
A debenture may, therefore, be secured or unsecured.
An ordinary debenture has to be dis tinguished from a mortgage debenture which necessarily creates mortgage on the assets of a Company.
A compulsorily convertible debenture does not postulate any repayment of the principal and so does not constitute a debenture in the classic sense.
Even a debenture which is only convertible at option has been recognised as a hybrid debenture.
The guide lines for the protection of debenture holders issued on 14.1.1987 recognise the basic distinction between converti ble and non convertible debenture.
Compulsorily convertible debentures in corporate practice were adopted in India sometime after 1984.
Wherever the concept of compulsorily convertible debenture is involved, various guidelines issued by the Government of India treat them as equity and not as loan or debt.
Even a non convertible debenture need not always be secured.
In fact, modern tendency is to raise loan by unsecured stock which does not create any charge on the assets of a Company.
Whenever a security is created, it is invariably in the form of a floating charge.
In addition they are frequently secured by a trust deed as in the present case where specific property/land etc.
has been mortgaged to the trustees.
In the instant case, if the permission of the debenture holders were required or is insisted upon to create future security, 2.5 million debenture holders have to be informed and invited for the meeting.
The extravagant effects of this course would be collosal especially when a shareholders meeting is also additionally called for the same 56 body of persons.
It is, therefore, incorrect to say that a floating charge creates an illusory charge because future securities can be created ranking in priority over it.
[118D E] The British India Steam Navigation Co: vs The Commis sioner of Inland Revenue, ; Re.
Colonial Dusts Corporation, ; Speyar Brothers vs The Commissioner of Inland Revenue, ; Lemon vs Austin Friars Investment Trust Ltd., ; Flor ence Land & Public Works Co., ; Re.
Panama, New Zealand, and Australian Royal Mail Co., ; Re. Standard Manufacturing Co., ; Re.
Borak Foster vs Borax Co., ; Creatnor Maritime Co. Ltd. vs Irish Marine Management Ltd., referred to.
Palmer 's Company Law, 24th Edn.
672, 675, 676, 706; The Encyclopaedia of Forms and Precedents, 4th Edn., Vol.
6 p. 1094, 1095, 1097, 1098, referred to.
The Court, would be reluctant to interfere simply because one or more of the guidelines have not been adhered to even where there are substantial deviations unless the deviations are by nature and extent such as to prejudice the interests of the public which it is their avowed object to protect.
Per Contra, the Court would be inclined to overlook or ignore such deviations, if the object of the statute and public interest warrant, justify or necessitate such devia tions in a particular case.
Judicial control takes over only where the deviation either involves arbitrariness or dis crimination or is so fundamental as to undermine a basic public purpose which the guidelines and the statute under which they are issued are intended to achieve.
In the in stant case, there is no such infraction of the norms re quired to be followed in granting the sanction.
[123F H; 124A, B] 15.
Before the Courts grant any injunction they should have regard to the principles of comity of courts in a federal structure and have regard to self restraint and circumspection.
It may be impossible to lay down hard and fast rules of general application because of the diverse situations which give rise to problems of this nature.
Each case has its own special facts and complications and it will be a disadvantage, rather than an advantage, to attempt and apply any stereo typed formula to all cases.
Perhaps in this sphere, the High Courts themselves might be able to intro duce a certain amount of discipline having regard to the principles of comity of courts administering the same gener al 57 laws applicable all over the country in respect of granting interim orders which will have repercussion or effect beyond the jurisdiction of the particular courts.
Such an exercise will be a useful contribution in evolving good conventions in the federal judicial system.
[126F, G; 127A] [Having considered the facts and circumstances of the present cases, this Court directed refund of the sum of Rs.one lakh deposited RPL as ordered by the Court on 9.9.1988.
The deposit amount was meant for payment to the petitioners in case they were to spend unduly.]
