The petitioner was detained, under an order passed by the detaining authority under Section 3(1) of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activities Act, 1985, with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
The detaining authority reached his subjective satisfaction on the grounds (i) that the detenu was a 'bootlegger ' within the meaning of Section 2(b) of the Act because he was indulging in criminal and anti social activities by illegally storing and selling foreign liquor and beer and that four cases were registered against him under the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949; (ii) that he was also a 'dangerous person ' within the meaning of section 2(c) of the Act because he, as a member of a partic ular gang, was spreading an atmosphere of fear and terror by beating innocent people in the Ahmedabad city thus affecting the public order adversely and a case was also registered against him under Section 120(B), 212 and 307 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Section 25 of the Arms Act besides under the provisions of various other Acts.
The petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court challenging the validity of the detention order contending that the conclusions drawn by 183 the detaining authority were not supported by materials.
Quashing the detention order and allowing the Writ Petition, HELD: 1. To bring a person within the definition of Section 2(c) of the Act it must be shown that the person either by himself or as a member of or a leader of a gang habitually commits or attempts to commit or abets the com mission of offences punishable under Chapter XVI or XVII or XXII of the Indian Penal Code or any of the offences punish able under Chapter V of the Arms Act.
It must be shown that he is habitually committing or attempting to commit or abetting the commission of offences enumerated therein.
[187 H; 188B] 1.1 In the instant case, the detenu is said to have committed offences under Sections 307, 120 B, 212 of the Indian Penal Code and Section 25 of the Arms Act besides under the provisions of various other Acts.
Only one case registered under the provisions of Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code and Section 25 of the Arms Act fails within the said definition clause.
The other two offences registered under Sections 120 B and 212 are not covered under Section 2(c).
Therefore, this solitary incident would hardly be sufficient to conclude that the detenu was habitually com mitting or attempting to commit or abetting the commission of offences.
The general and vague allegations made in the grounds of detention that the detenu was taking active part in communal riots and entered into conspiracy to spread an atmosphere of terror being a member of a particular gang in the absence of any specific instance or registration of any case thereof, cannot be construed as offences falling under any of the above three chapters of the Indian Penal Code or chapter V of the Arms Act enumerated under Section 2(c) so as to characterise the detenu as a 'dangerous person '.
[188A E] 2.
A conjoint reading of Section 2(b) and Section 3(4) with the explanation annexed thereto clearly spells out that in order to clamp an order of detention upon a 'bootlegger ' under Section 3 of the Act, the detaining authority must not only be satisfied that the person is a 'bootlegger ' within the meaning of section 2(b) but also that the activities of the said bootlegger affect adversely or likely to affect adversely the maintenance of public order.
[188H, 189A] 2.1 In the instant case, the vague allegations in the grounds of detention that the detenu is the main member of a particular gang indulging in bootlegging activities and that he is taking active part in such dangerous activities, are not sufficient for holding that his 184 activities affected adversely or were likely to affect adversely the maintenance of public order in compliance with sub Section 4 of the Section 3 of the Act that the activi ties of the detenu have caused harm, dangeror alarm or a feeling of insecurity among the general public or any Sec tion thereof or a grave or widespread danger to life, property or public health as per the explanation to Section 3(4).
The offences registered in the.
four cases, under the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949 against the detenu on the ground that he was dealing in liquor have no bearing on the question of maintenance of public order in the absence of any other material that those activities of the detenu have adversely affected the maintenance of public order.
[189A D] Ashok Kumar vs Delhi Administration, and Piyush Kantilal Mehta vs The Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad City and Anr, Judgments Today, [1988] 4 703, applied.
