The appellant, Jawaharlal Nehru University, had set up a Centre of Post Graduate Studies at Imphal under section 5(2) of the University Act.
The Respondent while he was working as a temporary research Assistant in the School of International Studies of the University was offered the post of Associate Fellow at the Centre of Post graduate Studies, Imphal, on ad hoc basis which offer was accepted by him on 3 December, 1973.
His term of appointment was extended from time to time.
On 21st March, 1979 the University offered him the post of Assistant Professor in the Political Science Divi sion at the Centre at Imphal for a period of two years.
The respondent joined the post on 29 August, 1979.
Later, he was appointed as such on a regular basis from the date of his initial appointment, and was confirmed with effect from the same date.
The Centre of Post graduate Studies at Imphal was to be merged with the Manipur University as provided in the Mani pur University Act, 1980.
On 3 February, 1981 the Syndicate of the Jawaharlal Nehru University provided for the transfer of the Centre to the Manipur University and resolved that the members of the faculty employed by the Jawaharlal Nehru University Centre of Post graduate Studies, Imphal, immedi ately 'before its merger into the Manipur University would on and from that date become members of the staff of the Manipur University.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court praying for the quashing of the Resolution of the Jawaharlal Nehru University whereby his services were trans ferred to the Manipur University.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition holding that the respondent could not be obliged to join the Manipur University, and that he was confirmed as Assistant Professor in the employment of the 274 Jawaharlal Nehru University in its Imphal Centre and was entitled to continue in service until he attained the age of 60 years.
In appeal, the Division Bench upheld the view that the services of the respondent could not stand automatically transferred with the transfer of the Centre at Imphal, from the Jawaharlal Nehru University to the Manipur University.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The Centre of Post graduate Studies was set up at Imphal as an activity of the appellant Jawaharlal Nehru University.
To give expression to that activity, the Univer sity set up and organised the Centre at Imphal and appointed teaching and administrative staff to man it.
Since the Centre represented an activity of the University the teach ing and administrative staff must be understood as employees of the University.
[279H; 280A] (2) The contract of service entered into by the respond ent was a contract with the appellant University and no law can convert that contract into a contract between the re spondent and the Manipur University without automatically making it, either expressly or by necessary implication, subject to the respondent 's consent, notwithstanding any statutory provision to that effect whether in the Manipur University Act or otherwise.
The position of law is clear that no employee can be transferred, without his consent, from one employer to another.
The consent may be express or implied.
[280B C, E] (3) The transfer of the Centre of Post graduate Studies to the Manipur University may be regarded as resulting in the abolition of the post held by the respondent in the appellant University.
In that event, if the post held by the respondent is regarded as one of a number of posts in a group, the principle "last come, first go" will apply, and someone junior to the respondent must go.
If the post held by him constitutes a class by itself, it is possible to say that he is surplus to the requirements of the appellant University and is liable to be retrenched.
Since.
however, the respondent has been adjusted against a suitable post in the appellant University during the pendency of the litiga tion, the appellant cannot be permitted to retrench him.
[280F H; 281A]
