With a view to preventing the petitioner detenu from indulging in activities that were prejudicial to the mainte n ance of public Order in Greater Bombay, the Commissioner of Police, Greater Bombay, in exercise of the powers conferred on him by Sub Section (2) of Section 3 of the read with clause 4 of the National Secu rity (Conditions of detention) (Maharashtra) Order 1980 passed on Order of detention, pursuant whereof the Petition er detenu was detained in Central Prison, Nasik.
He was furnished with copies of grounds of detention and other material on the basis of which the detaining authority based his subjective satisfaction.
In order to challenge the legality and validity of the detention Order, the detenu filed a Writ Petition before the Bombay High Court which was dismissed.
Against the Order of the High Court, the detenu petitioner has filed criminal appeal after obtaining special leave.
He has also filed a separate Writ Petition in this Court challenging his deten tion.
Both were heard together by this, Court.
Counsel for the appellant raised several contentions assailing the legality of the detention order, one of which being that there was inordinate and unexplained delay caused by the Union of India in considering and disposing of his representation dated 26 9 88, as such his continued deten tion was unconstitutional and illegal being violative of Article 22(5) of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeal as also the Writ Petition this Court 192 HELD: The detenu has an independent constitutional right to make his representation under Article 22(5) of the Con stitution of India.
Correspondingly there is a Constitution al mandate commanding the concerned authority to whom the detenu forwards his representation questioning the correct ness of the detention Order clamped upon him and requesting for his release, to consider the said representation within reasonable dispatch and to dispose the same as expeditiously as possible.
[198H; 199A B] (Jayanarayan Sukul vs State of West Bengal, ; ; A bdul Karim & Ors.
vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Pankaj Kumar Chakravarty & Ors.
vs State of West Bengal, ; This constitutional requirement must be satisfied with respect but if this constitutional imperative is observed in breach, it would amount to negation of the constitutional obligation rendering the continued detention constitutional ly impermissible and illegal; since such a breach would defeat the very concept of liberty the highly cherished right which is enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution.
[199B C] The use of the word "as soon as may be" occurring in Article 22(5) of the Constitution reflects that the repre sentation should be expeditiously considered and disposed of with due promptitude and diligence and with a sense of urgency and without avoidable delay.
What is reasonable dispatch depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case and no hard and fast rule can be laid down in that regard.
[199D] Rashik Sk.
vs State of West Bengal, Smt.
Shalini Soni & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , In the instant case, the gap between the receipt and disposal of the representation is 28 days but upon the date of service of the order of rejection on the detenu the delay amounts to 32 days.
The only explanation offered by the 3rd respondent is that further information required from the State Government was received by the third respondent on 17 10 88 after a delay of nearly 14 days and then the repre sentation of the detenu was disposed of on 27 10 88 within which period there were certain holidays.
There is an inor dinate and unreasonable delay and the explanation given by the third respondent is not satisfactory and acceptable.
Detenu directed to be set at liberty forthwith.
[199F H; 200A, B] 193 B. Sundar Rao & Ors.
vs State of Orissa, ; Jnanendra Nath Roy vs The State of West Bengal, ; Frances Coralie Muffin vs W.C. Khambra and Others, ; ; Vijay Kumar vs State of Jammu and Kashmir State of Uttar Pradesh and another; , and Mohinuddin alias Moin Master and Ors., vs D.M. Beed, ; , referred to.
