Acting on the basis of the information contained in an advertisement in a newspapers offering the sale of imported manual and electric typewriters, adding and calculating machines, the customs authorities raided the premises of M/s Typewriters and Stationary Operation Private Ltd., Calcutta on 5th May, 1966 and recovered fifteen typewriters, adding & calculating machines.
On inquiry it was learnt that the said machines had been sold to the Company by R.N. Bagh, who in turn disclosed that the machines in question had been pur chased from crew members of the vessels.
On 7.5.66 the customs authorities searched the business premises of the Company and found several machines from the documents seized during the search it came to light that there was a conspir acy between the Respondents and some of the crew members of certain vessels whereunder it had been agreed that the Respondents would look after the families of the crew mem bers in India and the crew personnel would draw their wages abroad in foreign currency and after purchasing the said machines.
would supply to the Respondents after clearance under the concessions provided under the Baggage Rules.
The goods in question were seized on 5/7th May, 1966 and as required by Rule 124(a) of the Customs Act, notices as to why the goods should not be confiscated were due to issue within six months thereof.
Section 110(2) of the Customs Act provided that if a notice as contemplated by Section 124(a) is not issued within a period of six months as provided thereunder, the goods shall have to be returned to the person from whose possession, they were seized.
However a proviso to Sec.
110(2) makes a provision that the period of six months can be extended, 283 on sufficient cause being shown, by the Collector for a period not exceeding six months.
The officers of the Customs Department showed cause to the Additional Collector of Customs, Calcutta for extension of time to serve a show cause notice on Respondents and extension of six months was granted for the purpose under the proviso to Section 110(2) of the Customs Act.
No notice of the proceedings relating to the said extension was given to the persons from whose custody the goods were seized.
On 6th December 1966, the Assistant Collector of Customs issued a notice to each of the Respondents calling upon them to show cause why the goods should not be confiscated.
On April 18, 1967, the Respondents filed a Writ Petition in the High Court at Calcutta challenging the proceedings initiated against them by Customs Authorities.
The learned Single Judge of the High Court who heard the Writ Petition held that the Order of extension to be made under Section 110(2) of the Customs Act is not an administrative order but a quasi judicial order and as the order has been passed ex parte without notice to the owner of the goods, it was in breach of principle of Natural Justice.
The order of exten sion was accordingly quashed and it was held that the owner was entitled to the return of his goods.
The appellants appealed to the Appellate Bench.
The appellate Bench allowed the appeal in part, quashed the order of extension dated 3rd November, 1966 directed the appellants to restore the machines and documents seized from the Respondents.
However the Customs Authorities were per mitted to initiate and complete such other proceedings against the Respondents as were open to them in law.
The appellate Bench was of the opinion that the decision in Assistant Collector of Customs vs Charan Das, ; lays down the correct law and notice of extension should have been given to the owner of the goods before the Order of extension had been passed.
Hence this appeal by the Customs Department.
At the hearing of the appeal Respondents placed reliance upon Charan Das Malhotra, (supra).
Reference was also made to the decision in M/s Lokenath Tolaram etc.
B.N. Rangwani appeal were of the opinion that the view taken in the said two cases required reconsideration and the 284 appeal has been referred to a larger Bench for a decision on the question whether the Collector is bound to issue notice to the persons from whose possession the goods were seized and to give him an opportunity to make his representation on the point whether the time for issuing notice under Section 124(a) of the Act should be extended beyond six months.
Partly allowing the appeal this Court, HELD: The words "on sufficient cause being shown" in the proviso to Section 110(2) of the Customs Act indicates that the Collector of Customs must apply his mind to the point whether a case for extending the period of six months is made out.
[289E F] The right to notice flows not from the mere circumstance that there is a proceeding of a judicial nature, but indeed it goes beyond to the basic reason which gives to the pro ceeding its character, and that reason is that a right of a person may be affected and there may be prejudice to that right if he is not afforded an opportunity to put forward his case in the proceeding.
If the notice is not issued in the confiscation proceedings within six months from the date of the seizure the person from whose possession the goods have been seized becomes immediately entitled to the return of goods.
It is that right to the immediate restoration of goods upon the expiry of six months from the date of the seizure that is defeated by the extension of time under the provio to Section 110(2).
[289H; 290B C] There can be no right in any person to be informed midway, during an investigation, of the material collected in the case against him.
While notice may be necessary to such person to show why time should not be extended, he is not entitled to information as to the investigation which is in process.
[290H; 291A] The person from whose possession the goods have been seized is, therefore, entitled to notice of the proposal before the Collector of Customs for the extension of the original period of six months mentioned in Section 110(2) of the Customs Act and he is entitled to be heard upon such proposal but subject to the restrictions in regard to the need for maintaining confidentiality of the investigation proceedings.
[292D E] Ganeshmul Channilal Gandhi & Anr., vs Collector of Central Excise and Asstt.
Collector, Bangalore, A.I.R. , Sheikh 285 Mohammed Sayeed vs Assistant Collector of Customs for Pre ventive & Others, A.I.R. 1970 Calcutta 134 and Karsandas Pepatlal Dhineja & Ors., vs Union of India & Anr., not applicable.
