In these two appeals filed by the State of Andhra Pra desh against the orders of the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal, the question that arises for consideration is whether amended Rule 3 of the Andhra Pradesh Treasury and Accounts Subordinate Service Rules 1963 Is violative of the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Organisation of Local Cadres and Regulation of Direct Recruitment) Order 1975.
The circumstances under which this question has arisen are stated hereinbelow.
Prior to the filing of Representative Petitions Nos.
1595 and 788 of 1984 by the Respondents in the Tribunal out of which these appeals have arisen, seven persons belonging to category 5 of Branch II of the Andhra Pradesh Treasury and Accounts Subordinate Service had presented a Petition before the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal challeng ing the vires of Rule 3 of the Andhra Pradesh Treasury and Accounts Subordinate Service Rules 1963, being violative of para 5(1) of Andhra Pradesh Public Employment Order, issued by the President of India under clauses (1) & (2) of Article 371 D of the Constitution, inter alia on the ground that it made provision for promotion of clerks of the Directorate of Treasuries and Accounts and Assistants of the Finance De partment of the Secretariat to the post of Head Accountants and Sub Treasury Officer which posts had become Zonal posts after the promulgation of Presidential order.
According to them only the U.D. Accountants of the feeder sources of the Zone were eligible for consi 343 deration in that particular Zone for promotion to the rank of Head Accountant and Sub Treasury Officer and not the personnel from the other Zones, including U.D. Accountants of the Directorate.
The Tribunal held that by virtue of para 5(1) of the Presidential order, for purposes of promotion, Zonal Cadre had to be treated as a separate unit and consequently the posts of Head Accountants/SubTreasury Officers, could be filled up by promotion only on Zonal basis and as such Rule 3 which specified various categories of posts without refer ence to Zone as feeder posts for the purpose of promotion to the posts in question were inconsistent with para 5(1) of the Presidential order.
The Tribunal therefore declared that after the promulgation of Presidential order, the provisions of Rule 3 would have to be reviewed so as to make them consistent with the provisions of the Presidential order.
The Tribunal further declared that various categories of feeder posts including the posts of Assistant Section Offi cers of the Secretariat from which promotion to the posts of Head Accountants/Sub Treasury Officer could be made, Could not be made operative after the promulgation of the Presi dential order.
After the aforesaid decision of the Tribunal, the State Government amended Rule 3 and gave it a retrospec tive operation w.e.f. 18.10.1975.
The validity of the amended Rule was questioned by the Respondents in the context of certain Assistant Section Officers in the Finance Department (Secretariat Service) borne on Zone VII being appointed to the post of Sub Treas ury Officers borne on the Subordinate Offices under the Directorate of Treasuries and Accounts borne on Zones I to IV, by filing the said Representation Petitions before the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal.
It was again con tended before the Tribunal that the amended Rule 3 was violative of the Presidential order.
According to the State the amended Rule had been issued by the Governor in exercise of the power conferred on him by the Proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution and hence the validity of the Rule could not be questioned by the Petitioners.
It was further con tended by the State that the earlier G.O. was not violative of the Presidential order of the provisions of Article 371 D, but even so, as it was considered by the Tribunal to be inoperative because the special provision did not explicitly state that they had been made in exercise of the authority vested in the State Government under para 5(2) of the Presi dential order, the Government had set right the lacuna by framing the amended Rule specifically in exercise of the powers conferred on Government under para 5(2) of the Presi dential order.
344 The Tribunal held that the impugned G.O. 196 did not set out under which sub para viz., sub para (a), (b) or (c) in para 5(2) of the Presidential order, the G.O. was issued and therefore the amended G.O. could not be upheld.
The Tribunal also declared that there was no justification for transfer ring a person who did not belong to concerned Zone to be inducted into that Zone, as that would defeat the underlying purpose of the Presidential order.
The State has, therefore, preferred these appeals.
Allowing the appeals this Court, HELD: That the Tribunal has failed to construe para 5(2) of the Presidential order in its proper perspective and give full effect to the powers conferred thereunder on the State Government to make provisions contrary to the scheme of local cadres prescribed under para 5(1).
The words in para 5(2) viz., "nothing in this order shall prevent the State Government from making provision for" sets out the over riding powers given to the State Government under the sub para.
Such overriding powers have been given to the State Government in express terms in recognition of the principle that public interest and administrative exigencies have precedence over the promotional interests of the members belonging to local cadres and zones.
[353C E] In order to make the provisions of old rule to have currency even after the Presidential order was passed, the Government issued G.O. Ms. No. 728 on 1.11.75.
The Govern ment has issued G.O. Ms. No. 196 dated 17.6.83 for amending Rule 3 so as to make the Rule conform to the requirements of para 5(2) of the Presidential order.
[354B, C D] The mode of recruitment and the category from which the recruitment for a service should be made are all matters which are exclusively within the domain of the Executive.
It is not for judicial bodies to sit in judgment over the wisdom of the Executive in choosing the mode of recruitment or the categories from which the recruitment should be made as they are matters of policy decision failing exclusively within the purview of the Executive.
[355B] The question of filling up of posts by persons belong ing to other local categories or zones is a matter of admin istrative necessity or exigency.
When the rules provide for such transfers being effected and when the transfers are not assailed on the ground of arbitrariness or discrimination the policy of transfer adopted by the Government cannot be struck down by Tribunals or Court of Law.
[355C] 345 Rule 3 of the amended Rule declared to be intra vires of the Presidential Order.
[355E F]
