The appellants in some of the appeals are manufactur ers of or dealers in beer, the appellants in the other appeals are manufacturers of or dealers in cement.
The appellants filed writ petitions in the Andhra Pradesh High Court challenging the assessment made under the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957 on the turnover of packing material employed either by way of bottles for containing beer or by way of gunny bags for packing cement.
The appellants challenged the application of such rate in assessments made in relation to the period before 8 July, 1983.
The appellants also challenged the application of that rate proposed pursuant to section 6C in show cause notices issued by the concerned authority.
Section 6C was inserted in the Act with effect from 8 July, 1983.
The High Court while dismissing the writ petitions, proceeded on the basis that, having regard to the nature of the goods and to the trade practice in respect of beer and cement, the containers were necessary concomitants in the transactions, and the transfer of property in the containers was incidental or unavoidable, that the sale transactions had to be regarded as composite and integrated sales of the containers and their contents and what was really sold was the bottled beer or the cement packed in gunny bags.
The learned Judges expressed the view that the consideration paid by the purchaser to the dealer consisted not only of the price of the contents, namely, beer or cement, but also included the price of the containers, that is, the bottles and the cartons in the case of beer and gunnies in the case of cement.
While allowing the appeals and remanding the cases to the High 306 Court, and in the case of the writ petitions, while direct ing the assessing authority to determine the matters after allowing the dealers to show cause, this Court, HELD: (1) A transaction of sale may consist of a sale of the product and a separate sale of the container housing the product with respective sale considerations for the product and the container separately; or it may consist of a sale of the product and a sale of the container but both sales being conceived of as integrated components of a single sale transaction; or what may yet be of a third case, it may consist of a sale of the product with the transfer of the container without any sale consideration therefore.
The question in every case will be a question of fact as to the nature and ingredients of the sale.
It is not right in law to pick on one ingredient only to the exclusion of the others and deduce from it the character of the transaction.
In every case, the assessing authority is obliged to ascer tain the true nature and character of the transaction upon a consideration of all the facts and circumstances pertaining to the transaction.
[310C E; H; 311A] Hyderabad Deccan Cigarette Factory vs The State of A. P., [1966] 17 STC 624, referred to.
(2) There can be as many different kinds of transactions as the circumstances of the case may require either by reason of prevailing trade practice or market conditions or personal convenience, and as human ingenuity may devise for bonafide reducing the burden of tax.
Whether a transaction for sale of packing material is an independent transaction will depend upon several factors.
[312E] (3) The issue as to whether the packing material has been sold or merely transferred without consideration de pends on the contract between the parties.
The fact that the packing is of insignificant value in relation to the value of the contents may imply that there was no intention to sell the packing, but where any packing material is of significant value it may imply an intention to sell the packing material.
In a case where the packing material is an independent commodity and the packing material as well as the contents are sold independently.
The sale of the packing material is liable to tax independently.
[313E G] Commissioner of Taxes, Assam vs Prabhat Marketing Co. Ltd., [1967] 19 STC 84; The State of Karnataka vs Shaw Wel lace & Company Ltd., [1981] 48 STC 169; Arlem Breweries Ltd. vs The Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, Panaji, [1983] 53 STC 172; M/s. Jamana Flour 307 Mill (P) Ltd. vs State of Bihar, ; and Punjab Distilling Industries Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Simla, [1959] Supp. 1 SCR 683, referred to.
Section 6C seems to envisage a case where it is the goods which are sold there is no actual sale of the packing material.
The section provides by legal fiction that the packing material Shall be deemed to have been sold alongwith the goods.
In that event, the tax will be leviable on such deemed sale of the packing material at the rate of tax applicable to the sale of the goods themselves.
It is diffi cult to comprehend the need for such a provision.
It can at best be regarded as a provision by way of clarification of an existing legal situation, which merely explains that the components which have entered into determining the price of the goods cannot be treated separately from the goods them selves, and that no account was in fact taken of the packing material when the transaction took place, and that if such account must be taken then the Same rate must be applied to the packing material as is applicable to the goods them selves.
[314D E; 315A B] (5) It is difficult to accept the contention of the appellants that a rate applicable to the packing material in the Schedule should be applied to the sale of such packing material in a case under section 6C, when in fact there was no such sale of packing material and it is only by legal fic tion, and for a limited purpose, that such sale can be contemplated.
In the circumstances, no question arises of section 6C being constitutionally discriminatory, and therefore invalid.
[315B C] (6) The High Court has proceeded on the assumption that what is charged is the price of the bottled beer or of cement packed in gunny bags.
No attempt was made by the tax authorities to ascertain the facts of each case and to determine what were the actual ingredients of the contract and the intention of the parties.
Assumptions had been made when what was required was a detailed investigation into the facts.
Because of the lack of adequate and clear factual material, the High Court also was compelled to proceed on the basis of generalised statements and broad assumptions.
[315C E]
