The appellant company was carrying on business as a bullion merchant and in that capacity purchased about 9478 tolas of gold.
On information that the gold in question was smuggled, the customs authorities issued a notice to the appellant to the effect that the case had been placed before the Collector of Customs for adjudication by the Superintendent, Preventive Service, The notice stated inter alia : " You are requested to show cause . why penal action should not be taken against you and the 9478,19 tolas of gold in question under the provisions of sections 167(8) and 168 of the , for alleged violation of section 19 of the same Act read with section 8 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 ".
The Collector of Customs, after hearing the parties, came to the conclusion that the gold in question was smuggled gold and that there was a contravention of the provisions of section 19 of the read with section 8 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, and made an order in these terms: " I accordingly order that the entire quantity of the gold seized on the 21st November, 1950, amounting to 9478.19 tolas be confiscated under section 167(8) of the .
In lieu of confiscation, however, I give the owner of the said gold an option, under section 183 ibid to pay a fine of Rs. 10,00,000 (Rupees ten lakhs only) in addition to the proper customs duty and other charge leviable thereon within four months from the date of the despatch of this order.
The release of the gold will be further subject to the production of a permit from the Reserve Bank of India within the aforesaid period ".
The appellant challenged the validity of the order and contended (i) that on a proper construction of section 8(3) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act read with section 19 of the , it was not legally open to the customs authorities to take any action against it under the , as such action would prejudice the provisions of section 23 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, and (2) that, in any case, the conditions which the Collector of Customs had imposed in the impugned order for release of the confiscated gold were not warranted by the statute, 822 and that as the order was a composite and integrated one it was not severable and, therefore, should be quashed : Held, (1) that the scope of section 167(8) of the , is different from that of section 23 Of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
Whereas under section 23 Of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act proceedings are taken in Personam against the offender for the purpose of penalising him for the contravention of the provisions of the Act, an order for confiscation of the smuggled goods under section 167(8) Of the is one in rem.
There is a difference between the expression " any person concerned in any such offence " occurring in the third column of section 167(8) of the and the expression "whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act " occurring in section 23 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
A person may be concerned in the importation of smuggled goods, without being a smuggler himself or without himself contravening any of the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
In this case, the only penalty imposed under section 167(8) Of the was confiscation of the gold, which indicated that the customs authorities had dropped the proceedings in personam; consequently, the adoption of the procedure under the did not prejudice in any manner the provisions Of. section 23 Of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
The question whether two remedies are available to the authorities concerned in respect of a contravention which comes both under the and the Foreign Exchange Act was left open.
(2) The Collector of Customs had no jurisdiction to impose the two conditions for the release of the confiscated gold ; but, as the aforesaid conditions are severable from the rest of the impugned order, the latter is valid as to the confiscation of the gold and the payment of fine in lieu thereof.
R. M. D. Chamarbaugwalla vs Union of India, [1957] S.C.R. 930 and Shri Ram Krishna.
Dalmia vs Shri justice section R. Tendolkar and others; , , applied.
The relevant sections of the , and the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, are set out in the judgment.
