The petitioners were arrested on March 23, 1988 and produced before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, who remanded them to jail custody.
During the pendency of peti tioner 's application for bail, the prosecution filed charge sheet on June 23, 1988 for offences under Section 21, 23 and 29 of the .
Thereafter, on the petitioners ' application for bail under Section 167(2) Cr.
P.C. on the ground that the charge sheet was filed after the expiry of ninety days of their arrest, the Magistrate enlarged them on bail.
On an application, under sec.
439(2) read with Section 482 of the Cr.
P.C., filed by the prosecution for cancella tion of the bail, stating that since two of the accused were earlier absconding, the investigation in the case could not be completed within the time frame, the High court cancelled the bail order.
Hence, the special leave applications by the petitioners.
On the question: whether the discretion exercised by the High Court was legally sustainable and whether the accused had a special right to remain on bail merely because they had been enlarged under Proviso (a) to Section 167(2) of the Code, 378 Dismissing the Special Leave Petitions, HELD: An order for release on bail under proviso (a) to Section 167(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure may appropri ately be termed as on order on default.
Indeed, it is a release on bail on the default of the prosecution in filing charge sheet within the prescribed period.
The right to bail under the provision is absolute.
It is a legislative command and not Court 's discretion.
If the investing agency fails to file chargesheet before the expiry of 90/60 days, as the case may be, the accused in custody should be released on bail.
At that stage, merits of the case are not to be exam ined.
In fact, the Magistrate has no power to remand a person beyond the stipulated period of 90/60 days.
He must pass an order of bail and communicate the same to the ac cused to furnish the requisite bail bonds.
[381E G] The accused cannot claim any special right to remain on bail.
If the investigation reveals that the accused has committed a serious offence and charge sheet is filed, the bail granted under proviso (a) to Section 167(2) could be cancelled under Sections 437(5) or 439(2) of the Code.
[381H] In the instant case, the offences alleged are of serious nature and the discretion exercised by the High Court does not call for any interference.
[382A] Raghubir Singh vs State of Bihar, ; , referred to.
