The (Coke Act) and the (Coal Act) divested the ownership rights in the mines from the owners to the Central Government.
The Acts provided for payment in lieu of take over.
The payment was to be made to the respective owners after discharging their liabilities.
The Acts also provided for accrual of interest on the amount payable, for the procedural period.
Some of the owners filed writ petitions before the High Court claiming that the interest accrued exclusively be longed to owners and the same was not available for dis bursement to the claimants of the owners.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions, and held that the interest accrued under the Coal Act Cannot be made available to the Commissioner for meeting the claims of the creditors of the mine owners and it is to be exclusively given to the mine owners.
The present appeals, by special leave, challenge the said decision of the High Court.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.
It is clear from the scheme and plain reading of the various provisions of the Coal Act that the interest amount has to be made available to the Commissioner to meet the debts and liabilities.
The Commissioner has to adjudi cate the claims of creditors of the mine owners in accord ance with the priorities.
The claim, accepted by the Commis sioner, are to be satisfied out of the amount payable to the mine owners and the balance left after meeting the claims of all the 456 secured and unsecured creditors, is to be paid to the owners of the coal mines.
[462A, B] 2.1.
The High Court 's conclusions are primarily based on the interpretation of Section 18(5) of the Coal Act.
The High Court has quoted the meaning of the words "enure" and "benefit" from various dictionaries.
No dictionary or any outside assistance is needed to understand the meaning of these simple words in the context and scheme of the Coal Act.
The interest has to enure to the benefit of the owners of the coal mines.
The claims before the Commissioner under the Coal Act are from the creditors of the owners and the liabilities sought to be discharged are also of the owners of the coal mines.
When the debts are paid and the liabili ties discharged, it is only the owners of coal mines who are benefited.
Taking away the interest amount by the owners without discharging their debts and liabilities would be unreasonable.
They have only to adopt delaying tactics to postpone the disbursement of claims and consequently earn more interest.
Due to such delay the owner would get huge amount of interest though ultimately he may not get a penny out of principal amount on the final settlement of claims.
It would amount to conferring unjust benefit on the owners which can never be the intention of the Parliament.
[462D, E, F] 2.2.
Section 24A of the Coal Act provided that interest shall be paid at such rate not exceeding the rate of inter est accruing on any amount deposited by the Commissioner under Section 18.
Had the Parliament intended to give inter est to the owners, there would have been no necessity for fixing the maximum limit of interest payable to the claimant with reference to the rate of interest accruing to the scheduled amount.
1464B] 3.1.
A plain reading of Section 26 read with Section 18(5) of the Coal Act makes it clear that moneys paid to the Commissioner in relation to a coal mine are to be used for satisfying the debts and liabilities.
Interest amount ac crued under the Coal Act is undoubtedly money in relation to coal mine and as such it squarely comes within the ambit of Section 26 of the Coal Act.
[463E] 3.2.
The amended Section 18(5) of the Coal Act which escaped the notice of the High Court provides that the amount of interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the deposit account is also payable to the Commis sioner.
Section 22(3) of the Coal Act makes the assets, in the hands of Commissioner available for satisfying the debts in order of priorities.
The assets of the erstwhile owner lying in the 457 hands of the Commissioner of payment would include the interest which has been paid to the Commissioner under Section 18(5).Similarly Section 24 of the Coal ,Act says that unsecured creditors will be paid out of the money credited to the account of coal mine.
Moneys credited to the account of coal mine also include interest.
[463F, G] 3.3.
Under Section 18(5) of the Coal Act the interest accruing on the amount standing .to the credit of the depos it account shall also be payable to the Commissioner in addition to the sum referred to in sub section (1) of Sec tion 18.
It cannot be disputed that the interest paid to the Commissioner under Section 18(5) is money paid to him in relation to a coal mine and as such it has to be utilised in meeting the claims of the creditors of the mine owners and their other liabilities.
Even otherwise interest amount in the present context has no separate entity.
As the lamb belongs to the owner of the sheep, the interest goes with the principal.
The interest accrued under the Coal Act, is, thus, part of the kitty out of which the claims and liabili ties are to be met.
[463A D] 4.
The Coal Act and the Coke Act being identical, this decision in the Coal Act is equally applicable to the Coking Act.
[464C]
