The respondents were manufacturing various medicinal preparations and in that process were using tincture con taining alcohol.
On the enforcement of the they became liable to pay duty and also to obtain licence but they continued their manufacture without doing so.
The Commercial Tax Officer issued demand notices under Rule 12 of the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Rules, 1956 requiring payment of the duty which the respondents had failed to pay.
The respondents filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging the aforesaid notices, and the proceedings for recovery of duty.
Allowing the writ petitions the Division Bench quashed the notices as well as the proceedings for recovery on the ground that the Act was silent on the ques tion of levy of duty on escaped turnover, and hence Rule 12 which provides for recovery of escaped duty was outside the purview and scope of the Act and, therefore, ultra vires.
In these appeals it was contended that Rule 12 was invalid and 466 unreasonable and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution because it does not provide for any period of limitation for the recovery of duty.
Allowing the appeals and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
The liability to pay tax is created by the charging section 3 and Rule 12 confers, power on the autho rised officer to recover duty if the same has not been paid on account of any short levy or deficiency or any other reason.
Rule 12 is referable to section 19(2)(i) of the Act and carries out the purposes of the Act as it seeks to provide for recovery of duty as contemplated by section 3(3) of the Act.
It is designed to confer residuary power for recovery of duty if unpaid on account of short levy or deficiency or for any reason it remains unpaid.
If recovery of duty or any amount of sum payable to the Government under the Act is not covered by any specific Rule, additional supplementing provision is made for its recovery by this Rule.
This Rule does not create any additional charge or liability on the manufacturer for the payment of the duty.
The High Court Committed error in holding that the Rule is ultra vires the Act.
[470C D, 470A B] 2.
Rule 12 does not prescribe any period within which recovery of any duty as contemplated by the Rule is to be made, but that by itself does not render the Rule unreasona ble or violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In the absence of any period of limitation it is settled that every authority is to exercise the power within a reasonable period.
What would be reasonable period, would depend upon the facts of each case.
Whenever a question regarding the inordinate delay in issuance of notice of demand is raised, it would be open to the assessee to contend that it is bad on the ground of delay and it will be for the relevant officer to consider the question whether in the facts and circumstances of the case notice or demand for recovery was made within reasonable period.
No hard and fast rules can be laid down in this regard as the determination of the ques tion will depend upon the facts of each case.
[470F, G, H, 471A]
