The appellants were in possession of certain agricultur al lands as tenants.
Rev. Rutar Ford Padri and Vandru Padri were their landlords who had left the country long ago.
But it was alleged that the land was purchased for the benefit of American Baptist Formation Society and the respondents claim to be the Property Association of the Baptist Churches (Pvt.) Ltd. ( "The Association").
The land stood transferred to the Association as per order made by the Madras High Court in company petition.
The Association thus claimed to be the owner and also in defacto possession of the lands.
In 1975 the Association issued notice u,s 19(2) of the Act terminating the appellant 's tenancy on May 31, 1975.
The appellants received the said notice but did not send any reply.
Thereafter the Association moved the Tehsildar u/ss 19(2) read with 28(1) of the Act for the symbolic possession of the lands from the appellants.
Before the Tehsildar, appellants denied all the allegations and asserted that they were protected tenants.
On Nov., 1977 Tehsildar made an order accepting the contentions of the Association holding that the appellants had no right since their tenancy stood terminated.
Appellants appeal was also dismissed by the Joint Collector, Warrangal.
The appellants then approached the High Court by way of revision petition u/s 91 of the Act.
The High Court dismissed the revision.
Thereafter appellants came up before the Supreme Court by way of Spe cial Leave to appeal.
Accepting the appeal, this Court, HELD: That the contentions of the Association that it is in 473 defacto possession and entitled to symbolic possession is unavailable and indeed unacceptable.
Firstly, there can not be any dispute in this case about the protected tenancy rights of the appellants.
The revenue documents like Panani patrika and final record of Agricultural tenancy clearly establish that the appellants were recognised as protected tenants.
Secondly, it was not the case of the Association that Rev. Rutar Ford Padri and Vandru Padri first offered the land to the appellants before they transferred the same to the Association.
The Court also observed that the Associ ation cannot be permitted to take advantage of its high handedness.
It is an exploitation of the exploited.
It is an oppression of the oppressed.
The Court cannot countenance it.
[482F G; 483B] Reversing the impugned orders the Court directed the Tehsildar to put the appellants in possession of the agri cultural land in question within one month and ordered that the Association must pay the costs of the appellants quanti fied at Rs.20,000.
[483C D]
