The prosecution case was that a mob Of 40 50 persons including the appellant, formed an unlawful assembly with the common objects of dismantling the hut of R, of setting fire to it and committing assault, if resisted; they assaulted some persons, and the appellant ordered one Budi to set fire to the hut and Budi set fire to it with the result that it was burnt down, Twenty two persons including the appellant and Budi, were sent up for trial.
The Sessions judge found that all of them formed an unlawful assembly with the common objects of dismantling the hut and committing assault on remonstrance, but that there was no common object to set fire to the hut and the act of incendiarism was an isolated act of some members of the unlawful assembly.
He found that the appellant had given the order to Budi to set fire to the hut and Budi had set fire to it in consequence of the abetment.
The Sessions judge convicted the accused persons under sections 147, 148 and 323 of the Indian Penal Code.
Budi was further convicted under section 436 and the appellant under section 436 read with section 109 of the Indian Penal Code.
On appeal the High Court set aside the conviction of Budi under section 436 holding it not proved that he had set fire to the hut.
The High Court upheld the conviction of the appellant under section 436 read with section :cog holding that he had given the order to set fire to the hut and that it was actually set on fire by one of the members of the unlawful assembly.
The appellant challenged his conviction under section 436 read with section 109 on the ground that it was not established that the person who set fire to the hut had done so in consequence of the order of the appellant Held, that the appellant was rightly convicted under section 436 read with section 109 of the Indian Penal Code.
On the findings given in the case it must be held that the person who set fire to the hut was one of the members of the unlawful assembly and that he did so in consequence of the order of the appellant.
Raja Khan vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1920 Cal. 834 and Umadasi Dasi vs Emperor Cal. 112, referred to.
