The petitioner was detained on October 12, 1988 under Section 1) of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activi ties Act, 1985.
The grounds of detention and documents mentioned therein were served on him on the date of deten tion.
Earlier, the petitioner was detained in 1985 under the and was released.
Again in 1986 he was detained under the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activities Act, 1985.
On a writ petition, the Gujarat High Court quashed the detention order and released him.
These two detention orders were also taken into consideration by the Detaining Authority in arriving at his subjective satis faction as regards detention of the petitioner in 1988.
In the present writ petition, the petitioner has chal lenged the detention order passed on 12.10.88 on the grounds that the order was vitiated since the Detaining Authority relied upon earlier detentions in arriving at his subjective satisfaction, non disclosure of names and addresses of witnesses whose statements were mentioned in the grounds of detention and the vagueness of the statements made in the grounds of detention.
On behalf of the Respondents it was contended that though the earlier two detention orders were mentioned in the grounds of detention they were not considered by him in forming his subjective satisfaction for clamping the order of detention.
Allowing the Writ Petition.
HELD: 1.
It is now well settled that while considering the scope of 584 Section 15 of the Act the modification and revocation of detention order by the State Government shall not bar making of another detention order on fresh facts when the period of detention has come to an end either by revocation or by expiry of the period of detention.
But an order of detention cannot he made after considering the previous grounds of detention when the same had been quashed by the court, and if such previous grounds of detention are taken into consid eration while forming the subjective satisfaction by the detaining authority in making a detention order, the order of detention will he vitiated.
It is of no consequence if the further fresh facts disclosed in the grounds of the impugned detention order have been considered.
[588F G, 589A.B] Abdul Latif Abdul Waheb Sheikh vs B.K. Jha and Anr., ; and Chhagan Bhagwan Kahar vs Shri N.L. Kalna & Ors., JT 1989 1 SC 572, relied on.
In the instant case, admittedly in the grounds of deten tion specific reference has been made to the earlier two orders of detention made in 1985 and 1986 against the peti tioner.
The contention that though the earlier two detention orders have been mentioned in the grounds of detention and the copy of the orders passed in the previous detention cases as well as the grounds of detention were supplied to the detenu, yet these were not at all considered by the detaining authority in forming his subjective satisfaction for clamping the order of detention, cannot he sustained in view of the statements made in the grounds of detention.
[589C E] 3.
The other grounds regarding the vagueness of the averments made in the grounds about the petitioner indulging in criminal activities apart from the five criminal cases lodged under the Prohibition Act and mentioned in the grounds of detention do not satisfy the requirements envis aged in section 3(1) of the Act inasmuch as the said five specif ic criminal cases have no connection with the maintenance of public order.
The aforesaid criminal activity does not appear to have disturbed the even tempo of life of the people of the particular locality.
These statements are vague and without any particulars and such vague averments made in the grounds of detention are bad inasmuch as the detenu could not make an effective representation against the impugned order of detention.
As such the detention order is illegal and bad.
[589F H] Abdul Razak Nanhekhan Pathan vs The Police Commissioner, Ahmedabad & Anr., , referred to.
