By the present petition the Petitioner challenged the legality and validity of the detention order passed by the Respondent against him under Section 3(1) of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activities Act, 1985.
The detenu was arrested and kept in Sabarmati Central Jail on 5.10.1988.
The detenu immediately thereafter, made represen tation to the detaining authority as well as to the State Government as also to the Advisory Board against the deten tion order but he having not received any reply, he filed this Writ Petition.
The grounds of detention which were supplied to the detenu inter alia mentioned that by reason of various crimi nal acts committed by him with the help of his companions which included looting of persons, causing injuries by lethal weapons, he had become a terror in the area and as such a dangerous person within the meaning of section 2(c) of the said Act.
Grounds also enumerated seven criminal cases which had been registered against the detenu.
The detenu was stated to have committed offences affecting haman body by holding deadly weapons such as razor, knife, Tamancha, Sword, Hockey stick etc.
It was specifically mentioned that if the passers by refused to pay to the detenu the money as demanded by him, he used to threaten them of murder by showing weapons.
It was also stated in the grounds that particulars of detenu 's anti social activities were given by four persons of the area, who did not desire that their names he disclosed which were accordingly not disclosed claiming: privilege in that behalf.
Taking into consideration all the aforesaid facts the detaining authority felt satisfied that the detenu has been committing offences punishable under I.P.C. and that due to those activities of the detenu, public order was disturbed, he having become a hurdle in the main 570 tenance of public order.
This is how the detention order referred to above came to be passed.
The Petitioner challenged the detention order principal ly on two grounds, viz.,.
(i) that the grounds of detention are not germane and relevant as they are vague lacking in material particulars and (ii) that there has been complete non application of mind by the detaining authority in making the order of detention.
The Court immediately after conclusion of the hearing of the Writ Petition pronounced an order on May 5, 1988 allow ing the Writ Petition and stating that the written judgment shall follow later.
These are the reasons given by the Court in support of the said order whereby the Court, HELD: The averments made in the grounds of detention are absolutely vague inasmuch as no particulars as to which persons have been robbed or what offences have been commit ted by showing deadly weapons and at what place have not been mentioned.
[577B] There is also no mention when and where the detenu in a drunken condition demanded money from whom nor it has been stated when the detenu threatened, whom to murder by showing razor or Rampuri knife.
There is no particular instance also as to which peace loving citizens and in which area the Petitioner has beaten in public believing, that they are giving information of his criminal activities to the police.
It is also a vague statement that the detenu is coming in the way of maintenance of public order.
[575G, 576D G] The grounds and averments made in the grounds which were served on the detenu are vague and as such they are viola tive of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
[576H 577A] Pushkar Mukharjee & Ors.
vs The State of West Bengal,[969] 2 SCR 635 at page 641; and Piyush Kantilal Mehta vs Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad City & Anr., JT at page 710.
An act may create a 'law and order ' problem but such an act does not necessarily cause an obstruction to the mainte nance of public order.
[579A] Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar & Ors., ; at page 746.
571 The criminal cases in the instant case are confined to certain private individuals and it is merely a 'law and order ' problem and it has nothing to do with "maintenance of public order".
Its reach and effect is not so deep as to affect the public at large.
It does not create or tend to create any panic in the mini of the people of a particular locality or public in general nor it affects adversely the maintenance of public order.
There is nothing to show that the activities of the Petitioner have affected or tended to affect the even tempo of life of the community.
[571G 572A] It has been stated by the detaining authority that on relevant inquiry, it found the statements to he true and as such the names and addresses of those witnesses have not been given to the detenu as provided in Section 9(2) of the PASA Act, 1985.
The Court did not enter into that controver sy as in its opinion the detaining authority was satisfied not to disclose then names of those witnesses.
[581G 582A] Ashok Kumar vs Delhi Administration, ; not applicable distinguished.
