The appellant is the successor in interest of the mort gagor of the suit property.
The suit property was mortgaged on 22.5.1886.
In the normal course the suit for redemption should have been filed on or before 22.5.1946, the limita tion for such a suit being 60 years under the Limitation Act, 1906.
The appellant, however, filed the suit for re demption only on 28.12.1968.
The defence to the plea of limitation urged was that the son of the original mortgagee, while selling the property on 1.11.
1913, had specifically acknowledged the right of the mortgagor to redeem the property.
It was claimed that this acknowledgment constitut ed a fresh starting point for computing the period of limi tation.
The Trial Court accepted the plea and granted decree for redemption.
The Additional District Judge however ac cepted the appeal of the respondents.
The High Court, in appeal, confirmed the order of the Additional District Judge and held that the sale deed had nowhere acknowledged the right of the mortgagor to redeem the land.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the recital in the sale deed clearly con tained a specific acknowledgment by the mortgagee of a subsisting right of redemption in the mortgagor.
On the other hand, it was contended that the said recital did not serve as an acknowledgment.
It was further urged by the respondents that even otherwise the suit should have been filed within 7 years of the coming into force of the Limita tion Act, 1963, i.e., on or before 1.4.1971, and that it was actually instituted only on 18.4.1973.
Allowing the appeal, setting aside the orders of the Additional District Judge and the High Court, and restoring the decree for redemption passed by the Trial Court, this Court, 611 HELD: (1) The period of limitation cannot be extended by a mere passing recital regarding the factum of the mortgage but the statement on which the plea of an acknowledgment is based must relate to a subsisting liability.
The words used must indicate the jural relationship between the parties and it must appear that such a statement is made with the inten tion of admitting such jural relationship.
[613G 6 14A] Tilak Ram vs Nathu, AIR 1967 S.C. 935, referred to.
(2) In the instant case, it is not correct to treat the recitals in the document as a mere narration of the previous mortgage that had been created on the property.
The words spell out a clear intention that the moneys due under the mortgage still remained unpaid and also that the mortgagor had a subsisting right of redemption which he could enforce against the mortgagee.
[614E F] (3) In the Trial Court the plaintiff appellant had adverted to the provisions of the and the position that the suit should have been filed within 7 years of the application of the new Act, and had urged that the suit was within time.
The Trial Court had accepted the contention of the plaintiff appellant on this point.
It could not have been so accepted if the suit had in fact been instituted only in 1973.
In the cause title of the suit in the Trial Court the date of institution is set out as 28.12.1968/18.4.1973.
This position does not appear to have been specifically challenged either in the Trial Court or in the first Appellate Court.
The High Court in its judgment has pointed out that the suit had been filed on 28th of December, 1968.
In this state of the record, this Court has to proceed on the basis that the suit had been filed on 28th of December, 1968 and therefore to hold that the suit had been filed in time.
[615B C]
