The appellant firm was allotted contracts for manufac ture and sale of liquor for the year 1959 and for the subse quent periods from 1.1.
1960 to 31.3.1961 for Rs.2,56,200 and Rs.4,71,900 respectively by the M.P. Govt.
who also charged 7 1/2% over the auction money as mahua and fuel cess.
As writ petitions challenging the government 's right to charge this 7 1/2% were pending in the M.P. High Court, the Govt.
announced that it would continue to charge it and the question of stopping it was under consideration of Govt.
whose decision would be binding on the contractors.
The appellant firm paid for the above contracts a total extra sum of Rs.54,606.00.
On 24.4.1959 the M.P. High Court in Surajdin vs State of M.P., declared the collection of 7 1/2% as illegal.
Even after this decision the Govt.
continue to charge 7 1/2% extra money.
Again on 31.8.1961, the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in N.K. Doongaji vs Collector, Surguja, decided that charg ing of 7 1/2% by the Govt.
above the auction money was illegal.
Appellants came to know of this decision only in or about September, 1962.
On 17.10.1964 the appellants gave a notice under section 80 C.P.C. to the Govt.
of Madhya Pradesh requesting for the refund of Rs.54,606.00.
failing which a suit for recovery would be filed and later they instituted a civil suit in the court of additional District Judge, Jabalpur on 24.12.1964.
The Govt.
resisted the suit inter alia on the ground of limitation.
The Trial Court held that the suit was barred by 597 limitation and dismissed it.
The High Court also dismissed the appeal.
The appellants then came up in appeal by special leave.
While allowing the appeal and remanding the suit to the Trial Court for decision on merits.
This Court, HELD: 'Nul ne doit senrichir aux depens des autres ' No one ought to enrich himself at the expense of others.
This doctrine at one stage of English common Law was remedied by 'indebitatus assumpsit ' which action lay for money ' had and received to the use of the plaintiff '.
It lay to recover money paid under a mistake or extorted from the plaintiff by duress of his goods, or paid to the defendant on a consider ation which totally failed.
On abolition of 'indebitatus assumpsit ', courts used to imply a promise to pay which, however, in course of time was held to be purely fictitious.
[601G 602A] Courts is England have since been trying to formulate a juridical basis of this obligation.
Idealistic formulations as 'aequum et bonum ' and 'natural justice ' were considered to be inadequate and the more legalistic basis of unjust enrichment is formulated.
The doctrine of 'unjust enrich ment ' is that in certain situations it would be 'unjust ' to allow the defendant to retain a benefit at the plaintiff 's expense.
The relatively modern principle of restitution is of the nature of quasi contract.
But the English law has not yet recognised any generalised right to restriction in every case of unjust enrichment.
[602H 603B] The principle of unjust enrichment requires; first, that the defendant has been 'enriched ' by the receipt of a "benefit"; secondly.
that this enrichment is "at the expense of the plaintiff" and thirdly, that the retention of the enrichment be unjust.
This justified restitution.
Enrichment may take the form of direct advantage to the recipient wealth such as by the receipt of money or indirect one for instance where inevitable expense has been saved.
[603C 603D] There is no doubt that the suit in the instant case, is for refund of money paid by mistake and refusal to refund may result in unjust enrichment depending on the facts and circumstances of the case.
[604D] Though there is no constitutionally provided period of limitation for petitions under Article 226, the limitation prescribed for such suits has been accepted as the guide line, though little more latitude is available in the for mer.
[604F] For filing a writ petition to recover the money paid under a mis 598 take of law the starting point of limitation is three years is prescribed by Article 113 of the Schedule to the Indian and the provisions of section 17(1)(c) of the Act will be applicable so that the period will begin to run from the date of knowledge of the particular law, where under the money was paid, being declared void and this could be the date of the judgment of a competent court declaring that law void.
[609B] Moses vs Macferlan, ; at 1012; Sin clair vs Brougham, ; Fibrosa Spolka vs Fair bairn Lawson; , = ; ; Sales Tax Officer vs Kanhaiya Lal, ; M/s Budh Prakash Jai Prakash vs Sales Tax Officer, Kanpur, ; Kiriri Cotton Co. Ltd. vs Ranchhoddas Keshavji Dewani, ; D. Cawasji & Co. vs The State of Mysore & Anr., ; ; Madras Port 7rust vs Hymanshu Inter national, ; Shri Vallabh Glass Works Lid.
vs Union of India; , ; Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P.v.
M/s. Auriaya Chamber of Commerce Allahabad; , ; Sales Tax Officer vs Budh Prakash Jai Prakash, [1954] 5 STC 193; Salonah Tea Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs Superin tendent of Taxes, Nowgong & Ors.
, ; ; Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs State of Assam, ; ; Khyerbari Tea Co. Ltd. vs State of Assam, ; ; Loong Soong Tea Estate 's, case decided on July 10, 1973; Suganmal vs State of M.P., AIR 1965 SC 1740; Tilokchand Motichand vs H.B. Munshi, , referred to.
