The respondent landlord inducted the appellant into the suit premises pursuant to an agreement.
The agreement was described as agreement of leave and licence, the parties as licensor and licensee and the rent as compensation for use and occupation, and it was provided that the appellant (i) shall pay monthly rent regularly on or before the 5th day of each consecutive month; (ii) shall not sub let, under let or part with possession nor shall keep the premises vacant for more than three months without the consent of the licensor; (iii) that on the expiry of the deed, it shah be renewable at the will of the licensee.
Several years after the expiry of the above agreement the respondent instituted a civil suit for a decree of eviction of the appellant on the ground that the appellant was in occupation as a licensee and has illegally refused to vacate.
Rejecting the plea of the appellant that he was a month to month tenant protected by the provisions of, the Goa, Daman and Diu Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1968 and that the suit was barred by section 56 the Trial Court passed a decree for eviction which was confirmed in appeal by the District Judge.
The second appeal filed by the appellant was also dismissed by the High Court holding that it was concluded by concurrent findings of fact.
Hence this appeal.
Allowing the appeal, and setting aside the decree of the Courts below, 627 HELD: 1.
The findings of the Courts below were not those of fact so as to be binding on the High Court under section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code.
The case has to be decided on the nature of possession of the appellant which is de pendent on a correct interpretation of the document.
[628G] 2.
It is well settled that the main purpose of enacting the Rent statutes is to protect the tenant from the exploi tation of the landlord, who being in the dominating position is capable of dictating his terms at the inception of the tenancy; and, the Rent Acts must receive that interpretation which may advance the object and suppress the mischief.
By adopting a different approach the Rent laws are likely to be defeated altogether.
[630H, 631A] 3.
For ascertaining whether a document creates a licence or lease, the substance of the document must be preferred to the form.
The real test is the intention of the parties whether they intended to create a lease or licence.
If an interest in the property is created by the deed it is a lease but if the document only permits another person to make use of the property of which the legal possession continues with the owner, it is a licence.
The test of exclusive possession is not irrelevant but at the same time it is not conclusive.
If the party in whose favour the document is executed gets exclusive possession of the property, prima facie he must he considered to he a tenant; although this factor by itself will not be decisive.
[629A B C, 630B C] Associated Hotels of India Ltd. vs R.N. Kapoor, ; ; Sohanlal Naraindas vs Laxmidas Raghunath, ; applied.
Shell Mex and BP Ltd. vs Manchester Garages Ltd., ; explained 4.
In the instant case, the terms of the deed are not consistent with the respondent 's case of licence, and indi cate that an interest in the property was created in favour of the appellant in pursuance of which he was put in posses sion with a right of renewal The surrounding circumstances are also consistent with the deed being one of lease.
The notice to vacate the premises was served on the appellant after several years of expiry of the agreement.
There was no relationship or friendship between the parties, which would have induced the respondent to allow the appellant to occupy the building.
Realisation of rent was the sole considera tion.
The description of the parties as licensor and 628 licensee or the rent as compensation does not carry too much weight.
The agreement was in reality a document of lease, and the appellant has been enjoying the exclusive possession in the capacity of month to month tenant.
The suit filed by the respondent was, therefore, not maintainable.
[629F, 631 B C, D E]
