The appellant plaintiff, who was an employee of the respondent company, was dismissed from service on the bais of a domestic enquiry held against him in respect of certain charges of misconduct.
Thereupon, he filed a civil suit before the Court of Munsiff and sought the relief of back wages and injunction not to give effect to the order of dismissal The respondents in their written statement raised inter alia the plea that the suit was not maintainable as the relief sought was available to the plaintiff under section 2A of the .
The Trial Court came to the conclusion that the Civil Court had the jurisdiction to try the suit.
The High Court, in revision, held that the nature of the relief which was sought by the appellant plaintiff was such which could only be granted under the , and therefore the civil court had no jurisdiction to try the suit.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant (i) on the basis of the language of section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure the civil court had jurisdiction to try all kinds of suits except those which were either expressly or impliedly barred, and the High Court was not right in reaching the conclusion that it was impliedly barred; (ii) as the remedy under the was discretionary, it could not he said that there was a remedy available to the appellant under the scheme of the Act and thus the jurisdiction of the civil court could not be barred by implication.
On the other hand, it was contend ed on behalf of the respondents that (i) the relief sought by the appellant in substance was the relief of reinstate ment with backwages which relief was available only in the ; (ii) the Act itself provided the procedure and remedy and it was not open to the appellant to approach the civil court for getting the relief which he could get only under the scheme of the Act; and (iii) the discretion of the Government to make a reference or not was not arbitrary.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court.
641 HELD: (1) It is clear that wherever the jurisdiction of the civil court was expressly or impliedly barred, the civil court will have no jurisdiction.
[644B] (2) It is clear that except under the industrial law, under the law of contract and the civil law, an employee whose services are terminated could not seek the relief of reinstatement or backwages.
At best, he could seek the relief of damages for breach of contract.
(3) The manner in which the relief has been framed by the appellant in this case, although he seeks a declaration and injunction but in substance it is nothing but the relief of reinstatement and backwages.
This relief could only be available to a workman under the .
[644C D] (4) The discretion of the State Government for making a reference under section 12(5) of the is not arbitrary and it would not be said that the reference to the labour court or tribunal is not available to a worker who raises an industrial dispute.
[646G] Bombay Union of Journalists & Ors.
vs The State of Bombay & Anr., ; ; Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. vs Ramratan Mahato, AIR 1973 Cal 258; Dhulabhai etc.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh; , ; Nanoo Asan Madhavan vs State of Kerala, [1970] Vol.
I LLJ Kerala 272, referred to.
(5) In view of the language of section 10, read with section 12(5) of the , an adequate remedy was available to the appellant under the scheme of the itself which is the Act which provides for the relief of reinstatement and backwages which in fact the appellant sought before the civil court by filing a suit.
[648B] (6) The scheme of the clearly excludes the jurisdiction of the civil court by implication in respect of remedies which are available under the Indus trial Disputes Act and for which a complete procedure and machinery has been provided in this Act.
[649F G]
