The appellant, while working in the Police Department as a clerk, was selected, and subsequently appointed, as Excise Sub Inspector.
After several years, he was reverted and sent back to his parent department.
He challenged the reversion order before the Sub Judge, who allowed him to continue in the Excise Department, where he was holding a substantive post.
After a decade, he was compulsorily retired by the Excise Commissioner.
The appellant moved the High Court by way of a writ petition challenging the said order and con tending that the Excise Commissioner was not competent to pass the order as the appellant belonged to the Police Department where his lien continued.
The High Court rejected the writ petition.
This appeal by special leave is against the said deci sion of the High Court.
It was contended that the lien against original post in the police Department could not vanish even though the appellant was holding a substantive post in the Excise Department.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Rule 3.14 of the Punjab Service Rules provides that a competent authority shall suspend the lien of a Government servant when he is appointed in a substantive capacity to a permanent post outside the cadre on which he is borne.
This rule cannot be operated to the prejudice of a Government servant who on his own has acquired legal right to an ex cadre post.
Indeed, the rule is for the benefit of a Government servant who intends to return back to his parent department.
But the appellant never wanted to return back to his parent department.
He was stoutly opposing repatriation and asserting his right to remain in the ex cadre post.
He has thus denied himself of the benefit of that rule.
[683F H] 681 T.C. Sharma vs Prithvi Singh & Ors., 16: referred to.
Lien is not a word of article It just connotes the right of a civil servant to hold the post substantively to which he is appointed.
Generally when a person with a lien against a post is appointed substantively to another post, he ac quires a lien against the latter post.
Then the lien against his previous post automatically disappears.
It is a well accepted principle of service jurisprudence that no Govern ment servant can have simultaneously two liens against two posts in two different cadres.
[684A B] 3.
In the instant case, the civil court has already ruled that the appellant had a right to continue in his substantive appointment as Excise Sub Inspector.
He secured that declaration when the Excise Department repatriated him to his parent department.
Alter obtaining that decree from a court of competent jurisdiction, he could not turn round and say that he still retained lien against his post in the parent department.
The lien in his parent department must be held to have been cancelled consequent on the decree of the civil court.
Therefore, the Excise Commissioner seems to be the only competent authority to pass the order compulsorily retiring him from service.
[689C D] This Court directed the respondent to determine the pensionary benefits of the appellant and pay the same to his legal heirs within three months, if not already paid.]
