The appellant assesse is a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act.
Its members are Cardamom growers in the State of Kerala.
The Society conducts the business as an auctioneer under a licence issued to it under the Carda mom Act (Act 42 of 1965) read with the Cardamom (Licensing and Marketing) Rules, 1977, one of the Conditions of this licence being that as an auctioneer it shall not charge more than one percent of the sale price as commission for the services rendered by it.
It is common ground that the socie ty has obtained the relevant licence and the individual members/growers of Cardamom had no such licence.
The mode of the business was that planters left their produce with the Society and the Society after mixing the produce of all the growers, put the same to auction.
The Society collected 1% as commission out of the sale proceeds from each of the planters.
Besides cardamom, the Society sold other goods also.
The Kerala General Sales Tax Act 1963 imposes sales tax on every dealer whose total turnover for any year exceeds a specified sum which differed from year to year.
In 1957 the Kerala Legislature introduced a surcharge on sales tax.
Section 3 of the Kerala Surcharge on taxes Act 1957 pre scribes that the tax payable under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act 1963, shall, in the case of a dealer whose turnover exceeds Rs.30,000 a year, be increased by a surcharge at the rate of 5% of the tax payable for that year.
The provisions of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act were made applicable to the levy and collection of the said surcharge.
Kerala Act 40 of 1976 stepped up the .rate of surcharge.
The important feature of the latter Act is that unlike sales tax, which the dealer was entitled to get reimbursed from the purchaser of the goods sold by him, the surcharge had to be borne by the dealer himself, as 720 Sub Section (2) of Section 3 of the Surcharge Act prohibited the dealer from collecting the surcharge payable by him.
Further the dealer might be liable for sales tax at differ ent rates on the turnover of the different goods dealt with by him, he was to pay surcharge calculated on the amount of the sales tax payable by him in respect of his total deal ings throughout the year.
The assessee 's contention was that the Society sold goods only in its capacity as a commission agent for various principals and that on the general principle of agency, an agent like the assessee could be liable to surcharge only to the same extent as the principal whom it represented.
On this plea, it could not be made liable for any surcharge in respect of the sales effected by it on behalf of the princi pals whose sales through the Society did not exceed the limits set out in Sec.
3(1) of the Surcharge Act.
The Tribunal had accepted the above contention of the appellant in the appeals against the assessment for the assessment years 1967 68 to 1969 70.
The sales Tax assess ments of the appellant for the assessment years 1973 74 to 1976 77 were completed by the Sales Tax Officer following the aforesaid order of the Tribunal.
These assessments were set aside by the Dy.
Commissioner of Sales Tax who took the view that the Society was liable to pay surcharge on its aggregate turnover in each of the assessment years.
The appellant assessee preferred appeals to the Appellate Tribu nal against the orders of the Deputy Commissioner.
The Tribunal allowed the appeals following its order relating to the earlier assessment years.
It accordingly set aside the orders of the Dy.
Commissioner and restored the assessments made by the Sales Tax Officer for the assessment years 1973 74 to 1976 77.
The Department moved revision petitions before the High Court against the order of the Appellate Tribunal.
The High Court accepted the revision of the De partment and set aside the order of the Tribunal.
Hence these appeals by the assessee.
It was contended by the appellant (i) that the liability of an agent is co extensive with that of principal and its liability cannot be higher than that of principal; (ii) that it is contrary to the principle underlying rule 9(k) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act whereunder the turnover of sales or purchases made by a dealer through his agent in respect of which tax has been paid by the agent, is excluded from his taxable turnover and (iii) that the assessee has been placed in a financial predicament in that it has to pay he surcharge from out of the meagre commission of 1% limited by the statute.
721 Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: The Surcharge Act does not envisage a fresh deter mination of the assessee 's turnover at all.
It prescribes nothing more than a simple arithmetical calculation of the prescribed percentage on the sales tax determined as payable by the assessee for that year.
It does not permit the compu tation of the surcharge, for whatever reason, on a part only of the tax determined as payable by the assessee for the year in question.
It does not contemplate any dissection of the turnover into transactions on behalf of various princi pals by reference to their individual liability to pay either sales tax or surcharge.
The contentions urged on behalf of the petitioner create a number of difficulties and or about a very simple procedure, evolved by the statute to meet the present situation It brought the Commission agent within the definition of a dealer and made his aggregate turnover liable to tax.
But it provided at the same time that the turnover so included and taxed in the hands of the agent should he excluded from the turnover of the principal, where he is separately assessed.
[726C D, 727E F, 728C] Rule 9(k) confers an exemption not on the Commission agent but on the Principal and does not help the assessee.
[728D] The rate of tax on any type of goods being uniform irrespective of the turnover, the turnover in regard to that item will get assessed only at one place: either in the hands of the principal or in the hands of the agent but not both.
[728D] A suggestion was mooted before us that the hardship to the assessee on this account is so substantial that this requirement should be held to he an unreasonable restriction violating Article 19.
This is a new contention involving investigation into facts which this Court is not inclined to permit the assessee to raise here for the first time.
[728G H]
