Rule 58 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, which deals with availability of areas for regrant of a mining lease, requires a notification to be published in the offi cal gazette at least 30 days in advance.
Rule 59 directs the procedure laid down in Rule 58 to be followed in the case of any land in respect of which the State Government had re fused to grant a prospecting licence or a mining lease on the ground that it was required to be reserved for any purpose.
The expression "reserved for any purpose" was earlier followed by the words "other than prospecting or mining for minerals", which was omitted by an amendment in 1963.
An application for grant of mining lease in respect of the disputed area had been rejected earlier on the ground that it was reserved for some other purpose.
Subsequently, however, a mining lease in regard to the said area was granted in favour of respondent No. 4.
The appellant chal lenged the allotment on the ground that the procedure for settlement as laid down in Rule 59 read with Rule 58 was not followed before the grant.
The High Court dismissed that application on the ground that Rule 59 was confirmed to cases where earlier reservation was made for mining pur poses.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The grant of mining lease in favour of respond ent No. 4 was illegally made in violation of Rule 58 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960.
[833E F] 2.1 Rule 59 covered the instant case.
Earlier the only category which was excluded from the application of this Rule was prospecting 831 or mining leases.
The effect of the 1963 amendment is that by omitting the words "other than prospecting or mining for minerals", prospecting and mining leases have also been placed in the same position as the other cases.
The other cases to which the Rule applied earlier have not thus been excluded.
[833E B] 2.2 It is clearly in the public interest to notify the proposal to grant a mining lease.
The State and its authori ties will, in that case, have the choice of selecting the most suitable person by following the just and equitable criteria laid down by the Rules.
[833D]
