This Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution has been filed by one Madhu Mehta National Convenor of Hindusta ni Andolan and a Social worker praying for a writ of Habeas Corpus or an appropriate direction in regard to one Gyasi Ram s/o Param aged 60 years, who, is stated to be waiting for a decision on his mercy petition by the President of India for about 8 or 9 years.
He is stated to be confined in the Death Cell, Central Jail, Jhansi.
The Circumstances under which the Writ Petition has been filed may be stated thus: Gyasi Ram was convicted under Section 302, IPC.
and sentenced to death by Sessions Judge, Jhansi on October 19, 1978 for committing the Cold blooded murder of one Bhagwan Singh, a Government servant.
One Daya Ram was also associat ed with him for the Commission of the said Crime, who had escaped.
The death sentence awarded to Gyasi Ram was con firmed both by the High Court as also by this Court.
On 18.12.1981, the wife of Gyasi Ram filed a mercy Petition before the President of India which remained undis posed till the filing of this Writ Petition.
It appears that mercy petitions presented by Gyasi Ram on 6.10.1981 and 26.11.1981 were rejected by the Governor of the State and were received in the Ministry of Home Affairs on 5.12.1981 for consideration by the President of India.
On 21.4.1983, the mercy petitions were put up for orders before the President, and the President returned the file for further consideration.
In the meantime, information was received by the Govern ment from the Registry of this Court that Daya Ram s/o Moolchand had also 775 filed a Special Leave Petition against the Judgment dated 17.10.1984 of the Allahabad High Court whereby the death sentence imposed upon him was confirmed.
Subsequently two mercy petitions were filed on his behalf which were forward ed to the Governor of the State for consideration in the first instance on 9.4.84 and 9.8.85, which remained undis posed.
In the Counter affidavit filed on behalf of the Union of India attempt has been made to explain this long delay occurred in the disposal of the mercy petitions the main reason, amongst others, that is attributed to the long delay in 'disposing of the mercy petitions of Gyasi Ram, is the pendency of the mercy petitions filed by Daya Ram, with the Governor of the State, in regard to which the Union is stated to be in touch and Correspondence with the State Government.
It is said that the decision on the mercy Peti tion moved on behalf of Daya Ram has a direct bearing to the decision to be taken on the petitions moved on behalf of Gyasi Ram.
It was only on 15.3.89, the Union Government had been informed on telex that the mercy petition of Daya Ram has since been disposed of.
The Sessions Judge, Jhansi had visited the said convict in Jail on 22.5.88 and had sent a report to the effect "Gyasi 's mental state is such that he might commit suicide by hanging his head on the iron grill of his ceil if a decision on his mercy petition is not taken soon.
" Thereafter the instant Petition has been filed.
The question that arose for determination by this Court, in the facts and Circumstances, of the case was whether by reason of the long delay in the execution of the death sentence awarded to Gyasi Ram, he was entitled to any commutation, alteration in his sentence in view of this Court 's Judgments in T.V. Vatheeswaran vs State of Tamil Nadu, and Sher Singh & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab, ; Allowing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: Undue long delay in execution of the sentence of death would entitle the condemned person to approach this Court or to he approached under Article 32 of the Constitu tion but this Court would only examine the nature of delay caused and circumstances that ensued after the sentence was finally confirmed by the Judicial process and will have no jurisdiction to re open the conclusions reached by the Court while finally maintaining the sentence of death.
[782G] The Court is entitled and indeed obliged to consider the question 776 of inordinate delay in the light of all circumstances of the case to decide whether the execution of sentence should he carried out or should he altered into imprisonment for life.
No fixed period of delay can he considered to be decisive.
[782H 783A] Speedy trial in Criminal cases though may not he a fundamental right, is implicit in the broad sweep and con tent of Article 21.
Speedy trial is part of one 's fundamen tal right to life and liberty.
[783B] There is no justifiable ground for keeping the mercy petition of Daya Ram and Gyasi Ram pending for such a long time.
In the half yearly return dated 8th October, 1985, and thereafter in the successive half yearly returns of the Uttar Pradesh Government upto 16th Jan., 1989, year after year, the Mercy Petitions of Daya Ram were shown to have remained unattended and undisposed and consequently the Mercy Petition made to the President of India by Gyasi Ram was also undisposed.
[781B] The time and the manner in which the Mercy Petition has been dealt with in this case in respect of Gyasi Ram make sad reading and speak of the deplorable lack of speed and promptitude which in these matters should he there.
In the meantime, there is no denying the fact that Gyasi Ram has suffered a great deal of mental pain and agony.
[781C] The Convict has suffered mental agony of living under the shadow of death, for long far too long.
He should not suffer that agony any longer.
[783D] The Court directed that the death sentence imposed on Gyasi Ram be altered to imprisonment for life.
[783E] Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, and Smt.
Triveniben vs State of Gujarat, ; , referred to.
