There are four Medical Colleges in the City of Bombay, all affiliated to the University of Bombay.
Out of four, three colleges are run by the Municipal Corporation and one is run and conducted by the State of Maharashtra.
Rule 4A framed by the Municipal Corporation and Rule 5 framed by the State Govt.
vide Govt.
Resolution dated June 18, 1971 govern the admissions of students to post graduate degree and diploma course in the respective Medical Colleges.
Both the aforesaid Rules provide for collegeate institu tional preference for admission in the M.D. Course.
In other words, in each college, candidates who passed their M.B.B.S. exam from that college were to be preferred for purposes of admission to the Post Graduate M.D. degree, no matter wheth er the candidates had secured less marks than those who secured higher marks, having passed the M.B.B.S. Exam.
from other colleges.
On this basis some candidates who were not able to secure admission to the M.D. Course in the respec tive colleges from which they had passed their M.B.B.S. Examination were not also admitted in the other medical colleges in the City of Bombay, in view of college wise institutional preferences as provided by Rule 4A and Rule 5 referred to above.
Those students/candidates challenged the validity of the afore said Rule 4A and Rule 5 framed by the Municipal Corpn.
and the State Govt.
in the High Court, as being violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition and struck 920 down the impugned Rule 4A in whole and Rule 5 in so far as it applies to the Govt.
Medical College, as discriminatory and violative of article 14 of the Constitution and thus in valid.
Hence these appeals by Special Leave.
Dismissing the appeals with some directions, the Court, HELD: When the University is the same for all these colleges, the syllabus, the standard of examination and even the examiners are the same, any preference to candidates to the post graduate degree course of the same University except in order of merit, will exclude merit to a great extent affecting the standard of educational institutions.
In such circumstances, college wise institutional prefer ence cannot be supported and, this Court has not approved of such preference at all.
[931F G] So far as educational institutions are concerned unless there are strong reasons for exclusion of meritorious candi dates, any preference other than in order of merit, will not stand the test of article 14 of the Constitution.
[932C D] The Rules are discriminatory and do not satisfy the test of reasonable classification and as such, cannot be sus tained.
The Court accordingly dismissed the appeals and directed that the students who have been admitted to post graduate M.D. Course pursuant to the impugned Rules, their admission shall not be interfered with or disturbed.
[933E] The High Court has directed to the appellants to frame rules adopting certain alternative methods for admission in the Post graduate M.D. Course for the next year.
The said directions appear to be in the nature of suggestions by the High Court and the appellants will be free to frame the rules for admission in the Post graduate M.D. Course in the said four colleges in the City of Bombay in conformity with the provision of article 14 of the Constitution and in the light of the Judgment of this Court and in framing the Rules, the appellants may take into consideration the sug gestions of the High Court.
[934G H; 935A] Dr Pradeep Jain vs Union of India & Ors., ; , distinguished.
Nidamarti Mahesh Kumar vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, ; , not applicable.
921 Jagdish Saran & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , not applicable.
State of Rajasthan & Anr.
vs Dr. Ashok Kumar Gupta & Ors., ; , not applicable.
