The appellant Company took a fiat No. 84, Mehr Dad, Cuffe Parade, Bombay, from its owner Mehdi Mandil on leave and licence basis for the residence of its Officers '/Employ ees '.
The first Respondent, Divisional Manager of the Compa ny at Bombay, acted as power of attorney of the Company and executed the agreement with the land lord for leave and licence initially for a period of 11 months renewable for a total period of 66 months.
The agreement also provided for an advance payment of Compensation amounting to Rs. 16,500 monthly compensation of Rs. 1500 and a deposit of Rs.3,50,000 to be returned at the end of the licence period free of interest.
The company complied with all the terms of the agreement.
On 1.11.80, the appellant Company allowed the first Respondent to occupy the flat as company 's employee.
Three years later i.e. on 23.3.84, the first Respondent filed a suit in the Court of Small Causes Bombay against the Company and the owner of the flat for a declaration that he was the actual licencee of the flat and for a permanent injunction to restrain the defendants from interfering with his posses sion of the flat.
He based his claim as a licencee on the basis of two letters dated 25.1.84 and 1.2.84 written by the Manager of the Company, one Mr. Jain.
Three days after filing the said suit, first Respondent resigned and his letter of resignation was accepted by the company on 27.3.84.
Since the first Respondent, ex employee of the company did not vacate the flat, the company filed a complaint against him under Section 630 of the Companies Act before the_ Addl.
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bombay.
The Com plaint was filed by Mr. Atul Mathur, as attorney of the company, who by then had taken over the place vacated by the first respondent.
751 The trial Magistrate found the first respondent guilty under Section 630 of the Company 's Act and sentenced him to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000 and directed to deliver vacant possession of the fiat to the company.
In lieu of payment of fine aforesaid, first respondent was directed to undergo simple imprisonment for 3 months.
The first respondent preferred an appeal to the Session Court against the order of the Trial 'Magistrate.
By his order dated 22.10.86, the Addl.
Sessions Judge, Greater Bombay dismissed the appeal.
Thus both the trial court as also the first appellate Court concurrently found that the company was the real licencee.
Thereupon the first Respondent filed a Petition under Article 227 of the Constitution before the High Court, which later, he was permitted to convert as one under Sec.
482 of the code of criminal procedure.
The first Respondent con tended before the High Court: (i) That the complaint was not properly filed inasmuch as the complainant was not duly authorised by the company which irregularity vitiated the proceedings; (ii) That the Addl.
Chief Judl.
Magistrate had no jurisdiction to adjudi cate such a complicated matter in summary proceedings under Section 630 of the Companies Act, and (iii) The Addl.
Ses sions Judge had wrongly cast the burden of proof on the accused.
The High Court rejected the contentions (1) and (3) and came to the conclusion that the letters written by Mr. Jain afforded basis for the first respondent to bona fide dispute the company 's claim for possession of the flat.
The High Court also took the view that the first respondent having filed civil suit earlier in point of time, the Criminal Court ought to have stayed its hand and allowed the Civil Court to adjudicate upon the issue.
Damodar Das Jain vs Krishna Charan Chakraborti & Anr., [1985] 57 Com.
Cases.
Aggrieved by the High Court 's order allowing the first Respondent 's Writ Petition, the company has filed this appeal by special leave and the question that fails for determination by the Court is whether the High Court was right in reversing the Judgments of the Courts below in a matter arising under Section 630 of the company 's Act in exercise of its powers under section 482, Cr.
Allowing the appeal and granting time to the first Respond ent till 752 30.9.89 to vacate the flat in question, this Court, HELD: The term "Officer or Employee" m Section 630 of the Company 's Act applies not only to existing officers or employees but also to past employees or officers if such officer or employee either wrongfully obtains possession of any property or having obtained the possession during his employment withholds the same after the termination of his employment.
Baldev Krishna Sahi vs Shipping Corpn.
of India Ltd., [1987] IV SCC 361 and Amrit Lal Chum vs
Devo Prasad Dutta Roy; , [758C] Merely because the first respondent had schemingly filed a suit before tendering his resignation, it can never he said that the Civil Court was in seisin of a bona fide dispute between the parties and as such the Criminal Court should have stayed its hands when the company filed a com plaint under Section 630.
If a view is mechanically taken that whenever a suit has been flied before a complaint is laid under Section 630, the Criminal Court should not pro ceed with the complaint, it would not only lead to miscar riage of justice but also render ineffective the salutory provisions of Section 630.
[763E F] What has to he seen in a complaint under Section 630 is whether there is "no dispute or no bona fide dispute" re garding a property claimed by the company between the compa ny and its employee or ex employees.
It is needless to say that every dispute would not become a bona fide dispute merely because the company 's claim to possession is refuted by an employee or ex employee of the company.
As to when a dispute would amount to a bona fide dispute would depend upon the facts of each case.
[764E] The Court set aside the judgment of the High Court and restored those of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magis trate and the Addl.
Sessions Judge.
[766C] Damodardas vs Krishna Charan Chakraborti & Anr., [1988] 4 Judgment Today p. 714.
and Ballavdas Agarwala vs Shri J.C. Chakravarty; , , referred to.
