Respondent No. 1 made an application to the Central Government for permission to establish an undertaking for the manufacture of Ossein and Gelatine in the State of Rajasthan.
The appellant Association made representations before the Central Government objecting to the grant of the said application inter alia on the ground that it would cripple the small scale business of its members, who were already functioning far below capacity on account of short supply of crushed bones.
The Central Government rejected the objections and granted the application of the Respondent, under section 22 of the , by its order dated 20.9.1988.
Aggrieved by the said order, appellant association has preferred this appeal under section 55 of the MRTP Act.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that the Central Government has failed to pass a reasoned order and has not followed the principles of natural justice.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The order of the Government is a detailed and elaborate one.
It sets out the contentions and deals with them seriatim.
The point made that existing units were already functioning below capacity due to insufficient supply of crushed bones and that the entry of the Respondent No. 1 into the arena would drive them out of business has not been overlooked.
Only, as against this, the Government has considered to be more weighty the economic advantages in granting the application of Respondent No. 1 arising out of the circumstances that they would be setting up the industry in a backward area; that they had categorically undertaken to export at least 60% of their proposed pro 816 duction; that since they would be producing their own hydro chloric acid, the availability of such acid to others will not be affected; and that the short supply of the raw mate rial (crushed bones) may not be a constraint for permitting the manufacture of value added products like Ossein and Gelatine.
The order bears testimony to the fact that the pros and cons have been fully considered and a decision taken.
It is not within the province of the Courts to ap praise the evidence or review the conclusion of the Govern ment.
[818G H; 819A B] Oramco Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. vs Gwalior Rayon Silk Manu facturing (Weaving) Company Ltd. & Anr., and Bombay Oil Industries vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
In the instant case, requirements of natural justice have been fulfilled and no prejudice has been caused to the appellant.
Of course the order has been passed by an officer different from the one who heard the parties.
However, the proceedings were not in the nature of formal judicial hear ings.
They were in the nature of meetings and full minutes were recorded of all the points discussed at each meeting.
The order itself summarises and deals with all the important objections.
The delay in the passing of the order also does not vitiate the order in the absence of any suggestion that there has been a change of circumstances in the interregnum brought to the notice of the authorities or that the author ity passing the order has forgotten to deal with any partic ular aspect by reason of such delay.
The contention that the application of Respondent No. 1 had referred to bonemeal as the raw material used and this was later changed to 'crushed bones ' is pointless because it is not disputed that all along the appellant was aware that the reference to bonemeal was incorrect and that Respondent No. 1 was going to use crushed bones in the project.
That some documents were produced at the hearing by Respondent No. 1 which the appel lant could not deal with effectively is also without force as, admittedly, the appellant 's representatives were shown those documents but they did not seek any time for consider ing them and countering their effect.
Moreover, the issue is one of grant of approval by the Government and not any particular officer statutorily designated.
It is also per fectly clear on the records that the officer who passed the order has taken full note of all the objections put forward by the petitioners.
[819C H; 820A D]
