The respondent who was carrying on the business of transporting goods challenged before the High Court the imposition of supervision fee levied under Standing Order No. 3 on the goods in transit through the limits of the Municipal Corporation of Baroda.
Before the framing of Standing Order No. 3, a transporter was required to pay octroi at the point of entry in the city and claim refund thereof at the point of exit after satisfying the authority that the goods which had entered were being taken out.
Standing Order No. 3 framed under section 466(1)(A)(f) read with section 147 of the Bombay provincial Corporations Act 1949, provided that when a transporter entered into the corporation limits with goods which were only in transit, he could on payment of supervision fee carry the goods through the corporation limits under the supervision of the staff of the Corporation without payment of octroi at the point of entry.
The High Court held Standing Order No. 3 as illegal and without the authority of law.
The High Court observed that under section 466(1)(A)(f) the Commissioner had the authori ty to frame standing orders only in respect of goods on which octroi was payable and as octroi was not payable on the goods which were in transit, no standing orders could be framed under the Section The High Court further held that quid pro quo was not satisfied as no service was rendered to the transporter.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the levy of supervision fee was optional; the procedure under Standing Order No. 3 was introduced to avoid hardship to the transporter; it was open to him to follow the normal procedure of paying the octroi and claiming refund; the requirement of quid pro quo was in substance 563 satisfied, and the fee was charged only to facilitate the transporter in carrying the goods in transit.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The procedure under Standing Order No. 3 is not compulsory and it is the option of the transporter to take advantage of this Standing Order if he so chooses otherwise follow normal procedure of payment of octroi and claiming refund.
[868H 869A] (2) Clause (f) of section 466(1)(A) contemplates that the Commissioner may by standing order prescribed the proce dure for the goods which are introduced in the city limits.
for immediate exportation and also the fees which could be charged.
It is clear that this provision which confers the authority on the Commissioner to frame standing orders does not talk of goods on which octroi is payable.
The Commis sioner therefore had the authority under section 466, and the Standing Orders have been framed in accordance with the procedure prescribed under that section.
[867D E; 869D] (3) It appears that while taking the view that the levy could not be justified under Entry 52 of the State List which authorises the State Legislature to impose a tax on entry of goods into a local area, the High Court was examin ing the fees prescribed as a tax, and it was on that basis that the High Court took the view that no such tax could be levied on goods on which no octroi was payable.
But, as it is not a tax, the imposition could not be said to be bad on the ground that the State Legislature had no authority to impose it.
[869E 870A] (4) In order to establish a quid pro quo concept it is not necessary to establish exactly that the amount collected is spent on the services rendered.
[872A] Sourthen Pharmaceuticals & Chemicals Trichur & Ors. etc.
vs State of Kerala & Ors. etc.
; , and Sreeni vasa General Traders & Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
(5) So far as the charging of supervision fee is con cerned, it reasonably appears to be a charge for the serv ices rendered.
The High Court was, therefore, not right in coming to the conclusion that this fee was not justified because, according to the High Court, it was not established that the fee was in consideration of the services or privi lege conferred on the transporter.
[872F]
