The Central Govt.
in exercise of its power under Section 9 of the enacted the Nationalised Banks (Management and Miscellaneous Provisions) Scheme, 1980.
Clause 3(b) of the said scheme deals with the appointment of workmen Directors and it provides that the Central Govt.
shall constitute the Board of a Nationalised Bank consisting of one Director from among the employees of the nationalised bank, who are workmen, to be appointed from out of a panel of 3 such employees furnished to it by the Representative Union.
Clause 3(c) of the Scheme deals with appointment of non workmen Directors and it provides that the Central Government shall constitute the Board of a nationalised bank consisting of one director, from among the employees of the nationalised bank, who are not workmen, to be appointed after consultation with the Reserve Bank.
The consistent practice of the Central Govt.
was to appoint a non workman Director from out of a penal of 3 names furnished to it by the majority association of non workmen employees.
By a circular dated 23.8.82, it was clarified that as far as appointment of non workmen Director is concerned, there is no justification for restricting the choice to the office bearers of the Association.
This was to enable the Central Govt.
to appoint any officer of proven 851 ability and character to the Board of Directors of a natio nalised Bank irrespective of his affiliation with any asso ciation.
The petitioners in these petitions to this Court, chal lenged this circular as contrary to the mandate of the Act and the Scheme, and also contended that clause 3 of the Scheme was ultra vires Section 9 of the Act.
Allowing the petitions, HELD: 1.
The Circular is ultra vires the Act and the Scheme and it is, therefore, null and void and of no effect.
[861C] 2.
The object of the is to render the largest good to the largest number of people.
The object of Section 9 of the Act is to empower the Central Govt.
to make a Scheme for the constitution of the Board of Directors so as to include representatives of the employees i.e. workmen and non workmen and other specified categories viz. depositors, farmers, workers and artisans.
The representatives of these classes of people are to be either elected or nominated in the manner specified by the Scheme.
The legislature has left it to the Central Government to make a scheme providing for appointment to the Board from amongst the specified catego ries either by election or by nomination.
The discretion as to the mode of appointment is left to the Central Govern ment, but it is not an unrestrained or unrestricted discre tion, but a discretion which must be reasonably exercised so as to give effect to the true intent of the legislature i.e. to give the Board a truly representative character so as to reflect the genuine interests of the various persons manning or dealing with the bank as an industry and a commercial enterprise.
What is postulated is such election or nomina tion as would lend to the Board of Directors its truly representative character in consonance and harmony with the extremely delicate, vital and significant role of the bank ing industry in the context of the national policy and objectives and economic development.
The mode of election or nomination must, therefore, be such as would be ideally suitable and appropriate to the banking industry.
Neither the election nor the nomination should be conducted in a manner unmindful of the distinctiveness of the banking industry.
The Central Govt.
must in this regard act in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India which has the necessary expertise and intimate knowledge in the field of banking, finance and other connected matters.
[856F H; 857A B, C G] 852 2.1 But the Central Government has no discretion to avoid election even where election is appropriate and feasi ble in respect of a particular category of persons.
For the appointment of representatives of depositors, farmers, workers other than employees and Artisans, the discretion is entirely that of the Central Govt.
to choose the mode of representation.
On the other hand, in the case of employees, election is indeed the most logical, the most appropriate, the most democratic and certainly the most advantageous form of representation.
They are well identified, well organised, well motivated and interested associates and participants in the banking industry.
They are as such a part of the bank as the management is.
There can be no legitimate management culture foreign to their vital interests.
There can be no valid management policy contrary to their genuine needs.
The Act does not contemplate a management unmindful of the true and legitimate interests of the employees.
In a nationalised bank, everyone is as much an employee as he is an employer.
There is no antithesis between the management and the em ployees.
The distinction that traditionally existed prior to nationalisation is no longer applicable.
The true management culture is indeed the culture that represents the various interests of all persons specified under Section 9 as well as the larger and wider interests of national economy as postulated in the preamble to the Act.
[858B G] 3.
The Central Govt.
understood sub clause (c) of Clause 3 regarding non workmen employees to warrant the same type of representation as in the case of workmen employees men tioned under subclause (b) of Clause 3.
The field of choice was thus understood by the Government to be limited to the panel of names furnished by the representative Union of workmen or Association of non workmen as the case may be.
But sub clause (c) of Clause 3 is vaguely drafted and when read without regard to the legislative intent, as disclosed by the Act, is capable of a contrary interpretation viz. there is no justification for restricting the choice of non workmen Directors to the office bearers of the Associa tion.
That interpretation is wrong and, in any case, out of harmony with the principle enshrined in Articles 19(1)(c) and 43(A) of the Constitution.
[860B D] 4.
It is open to the Central Government to amend the Scheme to improve on the machinery for the conduct of an appropriate election, it is incumbent upon it, until any such amendment is made, to work the present Scheme in such a way as to give the maximum scope for the concerned employees to exercise their choice in the selection of their represen tatives.
[860H; 861A] 853
