D executed a document in favour of M hypothecating an eight annas share in a village for the purpose of discharging a debt of Rs. 29,496 payable by him to Al.
In respect of this property there was a pre existing think in favour of j for a period of 9 years, under which D took Rs. 2,205 as peshgi money without interest and the annual rent was fixed at RS.
2,205.
The document provided that (i) interest at 1/2 per cent.
per month was payable on the sum Of Rs. 29,496 ; (ii) (luring the subsistence of the thika M would receive the rent from j and appropriate Rs. 1,769 12 o towards interest and pay Rs. 435 4 o as rent to D ; (iii) after the expiry of the thika M would take physical possession of the land and appropriate the produce towards interest and Pay Rs. 435 4 o as rent to D; (iv) on the expiry of the thika M would repay the peshgi amount of Rs. 2,205 to j and this sum was added to principal amount due ; (v) on the expiry of 15 years, or after the extended period, D would repay the entire principal amount; (vi) and the property was given as security for the amount payable by D.
The respondents who are successors of D instituted a suit for redemption on the basis that the transaction was a usufructuary mortgage, for rendition of accounts and for recovery of surplus profits.
The appellant, successor of M, contended that the suit for redemption was not maintainable as the transaction was not a mortgage but a lease, and that even if it was a mortgage there was no statutory liability to render accounts as the document provided that the receipts were to be taken in lieu of interest and the case was governed by section 77, Transfer of Property Act : Held, that the transaction was a mortgage and not a lease.
The guiding rule of construction is that the intention of the parties must be looked into and that once there is debt with security of land for its redemption the arrangement is a mortgage by whatever name it is called.
Held, further, that there was a contract between the mort gagor and the mortgagee within the meaning Of section 77, Transfer of Property Act to the effect that the receipts from the mortgaged property be taken in lieu of interest and consequently the mortgagee was not liable to render accounts.
The stipulation 1086 in the document for payment of Rs. 435 4 0 to the mortgagor was a personal obligation of the mortgagee and he had a right to take the entire receipts from the land in lieu of interest.
Though the rate of interest is stated as per cent.
per month it was mentioned to enable the parties to approximately fix the amount to be appropriated by the mortgagee from and out of the rent received from the thikadar.
The mere fact of the mention of the rate of interest could not make section 77 inapplicable in view of the clearly expressed intention of the parties.
Pandit Bachchu Lal vs Chaudhri Syed Mohammad Mah, (1033) , referred to.
