The respondent was engaged in the manufacture of sorbi tol, which fell under items 68 of the Central Excise Tariff.
During a visit to the factory premises by the Central Excise Officers it was found that the respondent also manufactured and captively consumed starch hydrolysate which, according to the appellant, was glucose and fell under Item E of the Central Excise Tariff.
In reply to the show cause notice issued by the appellant, the respondent contended that starch hydrolysate was not 'goods ' since the same was not marketable and therefore no excise duty was payable on it; and that even if the same was liable for duty it would not be under Item 1 E.
There were adjudication proceedings thereafter, and the adjudicator held that starch hydrolysate was glucose and fell under item E, and that the respondent had suppressed the fact of manufacture thereof.
In the premises, the adjudicator ordered payment of excise duty and further imposed a penalty.
The Tribunal, however, allowed the respondent 's appeal and held that starch hydrolysate manufactured by the re spondent was not, and never was, a marketable commodity, and hence that would not be 'goods ' on which excise duty could be charged.
The Revenue appealed to this Court.
Before this Court, it was inter alia contended on behalf of the appellant: (i) that the Tribunal misdirected itself in applying the proper test for the determination of the question, and that the true test to determine in a matter of this nature was to consider not only whether starch hydrolysate was actually marketable but also to consider whether conceptually the said goods were capable of being marketed, and the Tribunal should have examined or called for fresh evidence to deter mine that question; and (ii) even transient items of arti cles could he 'goods '.
provided these were known in the market as distinct and separate articles having distinct and separate uses, and if these were capable of being marketed even during short period.
784 785 On behalf of the respondent it was contended that; (i) starch hydrolysate which was utilised in the manufacture of sorbitol, was not being marketed and was not capable of being marketed in view of its highly unstable character resulting in fragmentation even if kept for a day or two; and (ii) starch hydrolysate was not marketable product and would not therefore be "goods" on the manufacture of which excise duty could have been demanded or would have been payable and therefore for non payment of duty, there had been no negligence or failure.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) If the process or activity of the assessee brings into existence an article different and distinct from what it was before the process and a new identifiable arti cle known in the market as such comes into being, then the use of such article in the instant case starch hydrolysate would attract duty on the part of the assessee even in captive consumption.
[788G] South Bihar Sugar Mills Ltd., etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
(2) The word "manufacture" implies a change but every change in the raw material is not manufacture.
There must be such a transformation that a new and different article emerges having a distinct name, character or use.
[790D] Union of India vs Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd., [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 586.
(3) Duty is levied on goods.
As the does not define "goods", the legislature must be taken to have used that word in its ordinary, dictionary meaning.
The dictionary meaning of the expression is that to become goods it must be something which can ordinarily come to the market to be bought and sold and is known to the market.
It would be such an article which would attract 'duty ' under the Act.
[790E] Union Carbide India Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., (4) It is true that the goods with unstable character can be theoretically marketable if there was a market of such transient type of articles which are goods.
But one has to take a practical approach.
[792G] 786 (5) It was the duty of the Revenue to adduce evidence or proof that the articles in question were goods.
If the Department was to charge duty of excise on this starch hydrolysate as one form of glucose it would be the burden on the Department to establish that starch hydrolysate was not merely marketable but was being marketed as glucose in some form.
The Revenue has not produced any evidence whatsoever though asked to do so.
Bhor Industries Ltd. Bombay vs Col lector of Central Excise, Bombay; , [793A F] (6) It appears that there was no market enquiry by the Revenue.
In view of the fact that there was positive evi dence that starch hydrolysate was never marketed and in view of further fact that in the light of the nature of the goods being highly unstable, it was highly improbable that the goods were capable of being marketed and there being in spite of the opportunities, no evidence produced at all that the goods, in fact, were capable of being marketable, it must be held, as did the Tribunal, that the starch hydroly sate were not dutiable under the .
[794G 795A]
