The appellant was a manufacturer of agarbatis, dhoop sticks, dhoop coil and dhoop powder failing under Tariff Item No. 68 of the Central Excise Tariff.
It claimed exemp tion from duty of excise on the ground that these items being handicrafts were fully exempt from such payment under notification No. 55/75.
The appellant 's further case was that under Notification No. 111/78 all goods which were exempt from the whole of duty of excise leviable thereon unconditionally were exempted from the operation of Rule 174 of the Central Excise Rules, which required a manufacturer to take out a licence.
The Collector rejected the claim of the appellant and held that these items were not handicrafts.
It was contended before the Tribunal that dhoop sticks, coil and power were agarbaties and agarbaties were accepted as handicrafts by various authorities including the Central Government; mere use of power in the manufacture of these items did not bar them from being called handicrafts; and, in any event, there was no warrant in invoking longer time limit for five years for raising the demand.
The Tribunal rejected the contentions of the appellant.
It was found by the Tribunal that the main part of the manufacture of agarbaties, etc. was done with the aid of power; only a very small part of the required work was done by hand; and that it was difficult to accept that these were handicrafts merely because some authorities had chosen to treat agarbaties as handicrafts.
The Tribunal held that the Revenue was entitled to levy tax for a period of five years prior to the issue of show cause notice and not six months pursuant to rule 9(2) of the Central Excise Rules.
874 Before this court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that in order to sustain the order of the Tribunal beyond a period of six months and upto a period of 5 years under section 11 A it had to be established that the duty of excise had not been levied or paid by reason of either fraud or collusion or wilful mis statement or suppression of facts or contravention of any provision of the Act or Rules made thereunder, with intent to evade payment, as provided in the proviso to sub section (1) of section 11 A.
In this context, it was urged that there was scope for believing that agar baties were entitled to exemption and if that was so, then there was enough scope for believing that there was not need of taking out a licence under rule 174 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944.
On the other hand, the Revenue contended that the failure to take out the licence and thereafter to take the goods out of the factory gate without payment of duty was itself sufficient to infer that the appellant came within the mischief of section 11 A of the Act.
While partly allowing the appeal, and remanding the case to the Tribunal to modify the demand, this Court, HELD: (1) In view of the evidence examined by the Tribu nal and in the light of the well settled principle and the background of the definition of handicrafts, the Tribunal was right in holding that agarbaties were not handicrafts.
[881D E] M.S. Company Private Limited vs Union of India, SC, referred to.
(2) Failure to pay duty or take out a licence is not necessarily due to fraud or collusion or wilful mis state ment or suppression of facts or contravention of any provi sion of the Act.
Suppression of facts is not failure to disclose the legal consequences of a certain provision.
[884B] Collector of Central Excise, Hyderabad vs M/s. Chemphar Drugs and Liniments, Hyderabad, [1989] 2 SCC 127, referred to.
(3) Mere failure or negligence on the part of the pro ducer or manufacturer either not to take out a licence in case where there was scope for doubt whether goods were dutiable or not, would not attract section 11 A of the Act.
[884D] (4) In the facts and circumstances of the case, there were materials to suggest that there was scope for confusion and the 875 appellants believing that the goods came within the purview of the concept of handicrafts and as such were exempt.
If there was scope for such a belief or opinion, then failure either to take out a licence or to pay duty on that belief, when there was no contrary evidence that the producer or the manufacturer knew that these were excisable or required to be licenced, would not attract the penal provisions of section 11 A of the Act.
If the facts were otherwise, then the position would be different.
[884E F]
