The short supply of levy rice to the State Government by licensed millers is a contravention of the Haryana Rice Procurement (Levy) Order, 1979 made under section 3 of the Essen tial Commodities Act, 1955.
The said contravention is pun ishable under section 7 of the Act.
Under section 10(1) of the Act a person is deemed to be guilty of contravention of such an order, if he was in charge of and was responsible to the company for the conduct of its business.
Under the proviso thereto, a person is, however, not liable to any punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Under explanation (a) to the section the term "company" includes a firm or other association of individuals.
The appellants, partners of a firm running a rice mill, were convicted for contravention of the provisions of the procurement order read with section 7 of the Act, and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment and fine.
The High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellants that there was no evidence adduced by the prosecution that they were in charge of the business of the firm when the offence was committed and in the absence of any such evidence the conviction could not be sustained.
Partly allowing the appeal, 887 HELD: 1.
There is no vicarious liability in criminal law unless the statute takes that also within its fold.
Section 10 of the does not provide for such liability.
It does not make all the partners liable for the offence whether they do business or not.
[890C] 2.1 The obligation for the accused to prove under the proviso to section 10(1) that the offence took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such offence, arises only when the prosecution establishes that the requisite condition mentioned in sub section 1 that the partner was responsible for carrying on the business and was during the relevant time in charge of the business, is satisfied.
[890E] 2.2 In the instant case PW 1 had deposed that the state ment regarding purchase of paddy and supply of levy rice was signed by appellant No. 3 as partner on behalf of the firm.
There is no other evidence on record to indicate that other partners were also conducting the business of the firm when the offence was committed.
[890G 891A] The conviction and sentence of appellant No. 3 are, therefore, maintained.
The conviction and sentence of appel lant Nos. 1, 2 and 4 are set aside.
They are acquitted from all the charges.
[891C]
