These two Writ Petitions have been filed by the widows of the pensioners viz. Smt.
Bhagwati and Smt.
Sharda Swamy, as they have been refused family pension after the demise of their husbands.
Bhagwanti is the widow of an Ex Subedar of the Indian Army who retired after serving for 18 years on 3.8.1947.
He was given pension.
In 1955 his wife died and in 1965 he married the petitioner.
The Subedar died in Septem ber 1985 in an accident.
The Petitioner Smt.
Bhagwanti who has two minor children applied for family pension but the same was not granted to her.
The other Petitioner Smt.
Sharda Swamy is the wife of the retired railway employee.
Her husband took voluntary retirement at the age of 44 years in November 1979.
The Petitioner married her deceased husband in 1981 and has a daughter born to her in 1984.
Petitioner 's husband died in 1986.
The petitioner applied for a family pension but by a letter dated 3.8.1988, she was informed that her application has been rejected.
It was stated therein that it has not been found possible to include wife of a Government Servant who had married after retirement in the definition of ' ' family" for grant of family pension.
In the counter affidavits filed on behalf of the Union, the stand taken in the first case is that the pension has been refused as the marriage was after retirement and in the other case the Union relied on the definition of "family" occurring in Rule 54(14)(b) of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules 1972, which speaks of marriage before re tirement.
1011 The common stand taken thus by the Union is that family pension would not be admissible to spouses who get married after the retirement of the Government servant nor to chil dren born after retirement.
Allowing the Writ Petitions this Court HELD: Pension is payable, as pointed out in several Judgments of this Court, on the consideration of past serv ice rendered by the Government servant.
Payability of the family pension is basically on the self same consideration.
Since pension is linked with past service and the avowed purpose of the Pension Rules is to provide sustenance in old age, distinction between marriage during service and mar riage after retirement appears to be indeed arbitrary.
[101411 1015B] Admittedly, the definition of "family" as it stands after amendment excludes the spouse of the Government serv ant who has got married to such Government servant after his/her retirement and the children born after retirement also stand excluded.
[1014F] In most cases, marriage after retirement is done to provide protection, secure companionship and to secure support in old age.
[1015C] The consideration upon which pension proper is admissi ble or the benefit of the family pension has been extended do not justify the distinction envisaged in the definition of "family" by keeping the postretiral spouse out of it.
[1015D] The two limitations incorporated in the definition of "family" suffer from the vice of arbitrariness and discrimi nation and cannot be supported by nexus or reasonable clas sification.
[1016D] The words "provided the marriage took place before retirement of the Government servant" in clause (i) and "but shall not include son or daughter born after retirement" in clause (ii) are thus ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitu tion and cannot be sustained.
[1016E] D.S. Nakara & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; ; Deoki Nanaan Prasad vs State of Bihar & Ors., [1971] Suppl.
SCR 634; Smt.
Poonamal vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; referred to.
