Six persons were charged under section I43 Indian Penal Code for being members of an unlawful assembly the common object of which was to murder one Anne Gowda.
Five of them were further charged under section 302 Indian Penal Code for committing murder by intentionally causing the death of Anne Gowda, and the sixth was charged under section 302/109 Indian Penal Code for abetment of murder.
The trial Court acquitted all the six accused under section 143, acquitted two of them but convicted the three appellants under section 302, and convicted the sixth accused under section 302/109.
On appeal the High Court maintained the conviction of the appellants under section 302 but acquitted the sixth accused under section 302/109.
It was contended by the appellant that as the prosecution had not established which of the appellants had given the fatal blow none of them could be convicted under section 302 simpliciter and that as no charge had been framed under section 34 they could not be convicted under section 302/34 Indian Penal Code : Held, that the omission to mention section 34 Indian Penal Code in the charge could not affect the case unless prejudice was shown to have resulted in consequence thereof.
The charge was that the appellants and two others committed the murder by intentionally causing the death of the deceased.
The appellants had notice that they were being tried as " sharers in the offence " and that their liability was collective and vicarious and not individual.
The appellants had neither alleged nor shown that the omission to specify section 34 in the charge had caused them any prejudice.
Common intention is a question of fact and is to be gathered from the acts of the parties.
The evidence showed that there was preconcert, that the appellants attacked the deceased with choppers injuring him on the head, the neck, the shoulders and the forearms and that the appellants not only caused injuries to the deceased at the place where they met him but they also chased him when he tried to run away to save himself and continued to assault him with the deadly weapons till he was dead.
The conduct of the appellants, the ferocity of the attack, the weapons used, the situs of the injuries and their nature together with the fact that there was preconcert established that the common intention of the appellants was to murder the deceased.
