The appellant was a voter in the Mala constituency of the Kerala Legislative Assembly, election whereof was held on March 23, 1987 and the first respondent, sitting Chief Minister of the State was declared elected from the said constituency.
The appellant challenged the validity of 1st Respond ent 's election on the ground of various corrupt practices committed by him.
It was alleged in the Election Petition that at the instigation of the first respondent, Respondent No. 2 published a notice wherein it was stated that he was withdrawing his candidature.
It was further stated in the notice that his purpose of contesting was to highlight the grievances of the Kudumbi Samudayam community with a view to get that community the status of Scheduled Caste and since the Kerala Government under the leadership of the first respondent (returned candidate) had decided to give a fa vourable consideration in regard to the community 's den.and for inclusion in the list of Scheduled Castes, it had become necessary for the first respondent to win the election.
He thereby offered his support to Respondent No. 1.
According to the appellant this act constituted a corrupt practice within the meaning of Section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
It was further alleged by the Election Petitioner that Respondent No. 1, committed corrupt practice by asking Government servants to lead processions in support of his candidature.
A photograph of a procession was filed.
Election Petitioner further alleged that at the instiga tion of the first respondent a video cassette called "Mala yude Purogathi" had been used in the constituency wherein persons like Shri Jose P. George, Government Pleader, Kerala High Court, Shri Tomas Thottappally, 959 Veterinary Doctor spoke in support of the first respondent which is a corrupt practice.
The video cassette was filed in a sealed cover.
The first respondent contested the Election Petition and pleaded that since the copies of the photograph, notice and the video cassette have not been furnished to him alongwith the Election Petition, the same was liable to be dismissed in limine under section 86(1) for noncompliance with the provisions of section 83(1).
The High Court rejected the contention of the appellant that Respondent No. I could obtain copies of the documents from the High Court; and defend his case, and took the view that non furnishing to the respondent copies of the docu ments alongwith a copy of the Election Petition was non compliance with section 81(3) and as such, the election petition was liable to be dismissed, which the High Court did.
Hence this appeal.
Almost identical arguments were advanced before this Court.
Counsel for the appellant strenuously contended that the video cassette etc.
do not from an integral part of the petition, on the other hand, they had been filed in the proceedings as evidence of facts and copies of such docu ments need not be served on the respondent alongwith a copy of the Election Petition.
On behalf of the first respondent it was mainly argued that failure to supply the documents violates the provisions of section 81(3) as in the absence of those the Election Petition served cannot be said to be true copy of the election petition as contemplated by sec tion 81(3) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: An election is the democratic method for selecting the representatives of the people in Parliament or in the Legislative Assembly.
When a candidate gets himself elected by adopting or committing any corrupt practice, his election must be set aside on proof of such corrupt practice.
At the same time, the procedure prescribed by the Act for challeng ing an election must be strictly followed.
[964H 965A] Satya Narain vs Dhuja Ram, ; Whenever there is an allegation of corrupt practice, the election petition shall contain a concise statement as to the material fact on which the petitioner relies and also must set forth full particulars of the corrupt practice alleged by the petitioner.
[964F] 960 When a document forms an integral part of the election petition and a copy of such document is not furnished to the respondent alongwith a copy of the election petition, the copy of the election petition will not be a true copy within the meaning of section 81(3) and, as such, the Court has to dismiss the election petition under section 86(1) for non compliance with section 81(3).
[965F G] Section 81(3) which enjoins that every election peti tion shall be accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are respondents mentioned in the petition, and every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition.
Section 81(3) however, does not provide for giving of copies of the docu ments either referred to in the election petition or filed in the proceedings.
[963D] Section 86(1) is a mandate on the Court to dismiss an election petition if there be a non compliance with the provisions of section 81(3).
I963F] The appellant in the instant case, has not served on the first respondent a true copy of the election petition inasmuch as admittedly, a copy of the video cassette which forms an integral part of the election petition, was not served alongwith the election petition.
It was noncompliance with the provisions of section 81(3) of the Act.
(M. Karuna nidhi vs H.V. Hande, [972H 973A] The question of exercise of jurisdiction by the Court in permitting the appellant to supply the particulars does not arise at all.
[972F] Sahodrabai Rai vs Ram Singh Aharwar, ; ; Thakur Virendra Singh vs Vimal Kumar, ; ; Mithilesh Kumar Pandey vs Baidyanath Yadav, [1984] 2 SCR 278; Azhar Hussain vs Rajiv Gandhi, ; ; Shri Udhav Singh vs Madhav Rao Scindia, [1977] 1 SCC 511 and A. Madan Mohan vs Kalavakunta Chandrasekhara,
