The appellant is a foreign national.
At Colva, on seeing a police party on patrol he accelerated the speed of his motor cycle ignoring the signal given by Assistant Sub Inspector of Police (P.W. 7) and in that process lost con trol over the vehicle and fell down.
Thereafter he immedi ately stood up and removed a paper wrapping from his pant pocket and threw it away which on verification was found to contain a small quantity of brown sugar.
The appellant was taken to the nearby police post along with the motor cycle.
A hand bag attached to the motor cycle was opened and exam ined in the presence of two pancha witnesses and it was found that there was brown sugar hidden in the Camera case, Ganja oil in the steel container, and opium in the shaving cream tube, torch light and shoe.
All the substances were weighed and seized under a panchnama and sample of these contrabands divided into three categories were sent to Chemical Analyst (PW. 6) who found that one sample contained 16.8% w/w of Morphine (an alkaloid extracted from opium), and the other sample contained a dark brown 1026 sticky substance having odour similar to that of extract of cannabis.
The quantity of the substance namely a dark brown soft mass having characteristic colour of opium found in the third sample was not sufficient to carry out further analy sis.
The appellant was consequently prosecuted for possession of prohibited drugs under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotrop ic Substances Act, 1985.
The Sessions Judge convicted him under Sections 21, 20(b)(ii) and 18 of the Act and imposed a sentence of 10 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 1,00,000 and in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year.
The High Court dismissed the appeal of the appel lant and confirmed the sentence passed by the Trial Court but modified the default sentence from one year to six months.
In this appeal challenging the correctness of the con viction it was contended on behalf of the appellant that: (i) in the absence of any injury on the person of the appel lant, the case of the prosecution that the appellant fell down from his vehicle is hardly acceptable (ii) the pancha witnesses were not the respectable inhabitants of the local ity therefore the seizure of the contrabands was in viola tion of the provisions relating to search and seizure; (iii) the omission to send sufficient representative quantity of the contrabands for analysis affected the veracity of the prosecution case; (iv) the omission to include the owner of the motor cycle (PW 5) as an accused and the non examination of the person at whose instance the vehicle was lent to the appellant affected the prosecution case; and (v) since the appellant was in possession of these drugs or substances in a small quantity for his personal consumption he was liable to be punished only under section 27(a) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
If a person is thrown off or fails from a speeding vehicle he may sustain injuries either serious or simple or escape sometimes unhurt but it depends on the speed of the vehicle, the manner of fall, the nature of the soft and the surface of the earth etc.
In the instant case, the evidence and other connected facts lead to the inference that the appellant had fallen down immediately after he attempted to speed up the vehicle and was caught hold of by the police.
Therefore it is right that the appellant was caught by the police under the circumstances as put forth by the prosecution and the appellant however escaped unhurt.
[1031H; 1032A D] 2.
If pancha witnesses are not respectables of the same locality 1027 but from another locality, it may amount only to an irregu larity, not affecting the legality of the proceedings and that it is a matter for Courts of fact to consider and the Supreme Court would not ordinarily go behind the finding of facts concurrently arrived at by the Courts below.
[1032G H; 1033A B] Sunder Singh vs State of U.P., ; Tej Bahadur vs State of U.P., and State of Punjab vs Wasson Singh and Ors.
, ; ; ap plied.
2.1 In the instant case, the appellant was secured in the midnight near the Police Out Post.
It is indisputably shown that the pancha witnesses are not outsiders but are residents of the same area where the Police Out Post is situated.
The fact that these two witnesses are not residing in the vicinity of the seizure, does not disturb the accept ance of the evidence relating to the seizure of the contra bands and other articles.
Except making some bare sugges tions that both the witnesses were regular and professional witnesses, nothing tangible has been brought out in the cross examination to discredit the testimony.
[1033C E] 3.
In the instant case, the omission to send sufficient quantity of samples of contrabands for analysis does not affect the intrinsic veracity of the prosecution case.
The testimony of the Chemical Analyst and her opinion recorded in the unimpeachable document lend assurance to the case of the prosecution that the contrabands seized from the posses sion of the appellant were prohibited drugs and substances.
[1033F H] 4.
The Medical Officer is not expected to know the differences in the legal parlance as defined in section 2(xiv) and (xxii) and specified under Schedules I to III of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Rules 1985 made under the Act.
Therefore, the admission of the Chemical Analyst that she does not know the difference between the narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances by itself is no ground for ruling out her evidence.
[1034A B] 5.
There is absolutely no material to hold that the owner of the motor cycle was in any way connected with the seizure of the contrabands or he has committed any indict able offence though the vehicle belonged to him.
The non examination of the person at whose instance the owner lent his motor cycle to the appellant does not in any way affect the prosecution case.
[1034C D] 1028 6.
Section 27(a) of the Act provides punishment for illegal possession in small quantity for personal consump tion of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance.
The expression 'small quantity ' occuring in that section is explained under Explanation I there of as such quantity as may be specified by the Central Government by Notification in the Official Gazette.
[1035A B] In the instant case, the penal provisions of section 27(a) has no role to play as the prohibited drugs and sub stances possessed by the appellant were far in excess of the quantity mentioned in Column 3 of the table under the rele vant Notification.
[1036D] Even if a person is shown to have been in possession of a small quantity of a narcotic drug or psychotropic sub stance, the burden of proving that it was intended for the personal consumption of such person, and not for sale or distribution, lies on such person as per Explanation 2 of Section 27 of the Act.
[1036E] The very fact that the appellant in the instant case had kept these drugs and substances in many ingeniously devised places of concealment in the camera, shaving tube, torch and shoes would indicate that the appellant was having full knowledge that the drugs he carried were prohibited drugs and that he was having them in violation of law.
Therefore, the sentence of 10 years rigorous imprisonment and the fine of Rs.1,O0,000 with the default clause as modified by the High Court does not call for interference.
[1036F; 1037D]
