The petitioner, who claims himself to be a human right activist, filed this writ petition in public interest on the basis of a newspaper report concerning the death of a scoot erist who was knocked down by a speeding car.
The report further states that the injured person was taken to the nearest hospital but the doctors there refused to attend on him; that they told that he be taken to another hospital, located some 20 kilometers away, which was authorised to handle medico legal cases; and that the victim succumbed to his injuries before he could be taken to the other hospital.
The petitioner has prayed the directions be issued to the Union of India that every injured citizen brought for treat ment should instantaneously be given medical aid to preserve life and thereafter the procedural criminal law should be allowed to operate in order to avoid negligent death, and in the event of breach of such direction, apart from any action that may be taken for negligence, appropriate compensation should be admissible.
The Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare of the Union of India, the Medical Council of India, and the Indian Medical Association were later impleaded as respond ents.
Documents relating to the steps taken from time to time in this 998 regard were produced.
by the respondents.
Reference was made to the Code of Medical Ethics drawn up by the Medical Coun cil of India, wherein the need to attend to the injured/serious persons immediately without waiting for the police report or completion of police formalities was recog nised and the Government of India was requested to take necessary and immediate steps to amend various provisions of law which come in the way of government doctors as well as other doctors in private hospitals or public hospitals in this regard.
The proceedings of the meeting held on 29.5.1986 in which the Director General of Health Services acted as Chairman were also referred to.
This Committee had formulated some guidelines.
On behalf of the Union of India it was stated that there was no provision in the Indian Penal Code, Criminal Procedure Code, or the Motor Vehicles Act, etc.
which prevented doctors from promptly attending seriously injured persons and accident cases before the arrival of police.
Disposing of the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: (1) Article 21 of the Constitution casts the obligation on the State to preserve life.
[1005G] (2) There can be no second opinion that preservation of human life is of paramount importance.
That is so on account of the fact that once life is lost, the status quo ante cannot be restored as resurrection is beyond the capacity of man.
[1005F] (3) The patient whether he be an innocent person or a criminal liable to punishment under the laws of the society, it is the obligation of those who are incharge of the health of the community to preserve life so that the innocent may be protected and the guilty may be punished.
Social laws do not contemplate death by negligence to tantamount to legal punishment.
[1005F] (4) Every doctor whether at a Government hospital or otherwise has the professional obligation to extend his services with due expertise for protecting life.
[1006A] (5) No law or State action can intervene to avoid/delay the discharge of the paramount obligation cast upon members of the medical profession.
The obligation being total, absolute and paramount, laws of procedure whether in statute or otherwise which would interfere with the discharge of this obligation cannot be sustained and must, therefore, give way.
[1006B] 999 (6) The Court gave directions for giving adequate pub licity to the decision in this case by the national media, the Doordarshan and the all India Radio, as well as through the High Courts and the Sessions Judges.
[1006E F] Per G.L. Oza, J. (concurring) (1) The Code of Medical Ethics framed by the Medical Council was approved on 23rd October, 1970.
This only re veals an unfortunate state of affairs where the decisions are taken at the highest level good intentioned and for public good but unfortunately do not reach the common man and it only remains a text good to read and attractive to quote.
[1007D E] (2) It is clear that there is no legal impediment for a medical professional when he is called upon or requested to attend to an injured person needing his medical assistance immediately.
There is also no doubt that the effort to save the person should be the top priority not only of the medi cal professional but even of the police or any other citizen who happens to be connected with the matter or who happens to notice such an incident or a situation.
[1008F] (3) The members of the legal profession, our law courts and everyone concerned will also keep in mind that a man in the medical profession should not be unnecessarily harassed for purposes of interrogation or for any other formality and should not be dragged during investigations at the police station and it should be avoided as far as possible.
[1009C] (4) Law courts will not summon a medical professional to give evidence unless the evidence is necessary and even if he is summoned, attempt should be made to see that the men in this profession are not made to wait and waste time unnecessarily.
[1009D]
