This is an application filed by the Petitioners seeking directions of the Court for implementation of this Court 's order dated 17.12.86 in its true spirit, in particular, praying that the promotion orders dated 30.12.87 be given effect from the back dates (deemed dates) or the dates when their juniors were promoted.
The circumstances that led to the filing of this application may be stated thus.
The Petitioners were members of the regularly constitut ed class II Engg.
service of the State with effect from 25.12.1970 and were working as Sub Divisional Officers.
Further avenues of promotion to them were barred because the State Government construed the service Rules to mean that without a degree in Engineering, a class II officer could not be promoted to class I service.
The said interpretation of the State Government was disapproved by this Court in the case of A.S. Parmar vs State of Haryana, [1984] 2 SCR 476 as a consequence whereof a degree in Engineering did not remain an essential pre requisite for a member of Class II service for being promoted to Class I service.
After the Judgment in Parmar 's case, the Petitioners filed a Writ Petition in this Court seeking a direction to the State Government to consid er the case of the Petitioners and others similarly situated for promotion to the post of Executive Engineers in Class I service.
On 24.2.84 an undertaking was given to the Court by the State, that the State would consider the claims of all the eligible persons including the petitioners for regular appointment to Class I service within four months.
Instead of granting promotions, the State.
Government amended the Rules with retrospective effect from 10.7.64 so as to make a degree in Engineering as an indispensable qualification for an officer in Class II service for being promoted as Class I officer.
The Petitioners thereupon amended their Writ Peti tion and challenged the validity of 1080 the amendment and the Court by its Judgment dated 17.12.86 struck down the amendment to the Rules as ultra vires the State Government.
In another case involving the same point viz., Ashok Gulati vs B.S. Jain, this Court directed the State Government to consider the cases of all eligible members of Class II service for promotion as Executive Engineers, within six months time.
The State having failed to comply with the Court 's order aforesaid, a contempt petition was flied, which was disposed of by the Court 's order dated 30.12.87 by which time the State had reported to the COurt that the promotions to all concerned eligible officers had since been granted.
The Petitioners have now filed this application contend ing that since their placement In Class II service had been made effective with effect from 25.12.70 though the order therefore was issued on 27.10.85, they Were entitled to be considered for promotion to Class I service as and when they attained eligibility after 25.12.70 especially in view of the Court 's Judgment in Parmar 's case whereby the degree in Engineering was no longer a necessary qualification.
The Petitioners therefore urge that they be placed in their rightful position by giving promotion from back dates or deemed dates, or, in any case, the date when persons junior to them were given promotions.
According to them promotions granted to them belatedly on 30.12.87 did not render true justice to them and that the said order did not fully comply with the Court 's order.
Further a grievance is also made that no benefit has been given to those officers who retired from service during this period.
On the other hand the State contended that it has duly complied with the Court 's order by giving promotions w.e.f. 30.12.87.
The State supported its contention by saying that in approval of its action the Court on 17.12.86 dropped further proceedings in contempt petition which meant that there has been due compliance with the Court 's order.
Disposing of the application with directions this Court, HELD: The combined effect of the striking down of the amendment to the Rules by the Government and the direction issued to the Government in Ashok Gulati 's case to consider for promotion the names of all the eligible Class II offi cers would entitle the petitioners to seek the benefit of promotion from 24.6.84 When the time limit of four months sought for by the State Government to make the promotions came to expire.
But for the unsustainable amendment made to the Rules, the Government could not have postponed the promotions of the 1081 Petitioners and other Class II officers similar to them beyond the time limit of four months which expired on 24.6.84.
It would therefore follow that the order of promo tion made by the State Government on 30.12.87 will not amount to due compliance of the Court 's directions dated 17.12.86.
The Government cannot take advantage of its own error in making an illegal amendment to the Rules with retrospective effect and postpone the benefit of promotion to Class II officers.
[1087G 1088B] The Government cannot also take umbrage for its action in giving promotion to the petitioners and other eligible Class II officers with effect from 30.12.87 either because the directions given on 17.12.86 did not set out the date from when promotions should be given or because the Court passed orders on 4.1.1989, dropping further proceedings in the contempt petition.
[1088C] The State Government was directed to give promotions to all eligible Class II officers with effect from 24.6.84 and to give them all the consequential benefits arising there from.
The court further directed that the benefit of promo tion and consequential benefits should also be given to all those officers who were eligible for promotion on 24.6.84 but who have retired since then.
[1089B]
