This is defendant 's appeal by Special Leave.
Respondents 1 to 5 alongwith one other person filed a representative suit on behalf of themselves and other members of Thousand Yadhava Community against the appellant No. 1 Defendant for an order directing him to render true accounts of the management of the properties of the Thou sand Yadhava Community including the Sri Ramasami Sri Navneetha Krishnasami Devasthanam Temples and their proper ties and pay to them the amount ascertained as payable on such rendition of accounts.
The appellant was the Trustee of the said temples.
The case of the plaintiffs respondents was that the said temples were private religious trusts and the appellant as trustee had committed several acts of misman agement in respect of the properties.
The appellant defendant denied those allegations and contended that the suit as framed was not maintainable in view of the provisions of the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit.
It held that the said temples were not private temples belonging to the said community, and that both the temples were covered by the provisions of section 6(20) of the Act, and as such the suit was barred by the provisions of the Act and thus not main tainable.
The plaintiffs preferred appeal to the High Court against the order of the Trial Court.
The High Court allowed the plaintiffs appeal and passed a preliminary decree against the appellant No. 1 defendant for rendition of accounts while dismissing the suit in other respects.
The High Court took the view that a party seeking relief of accounting cannot approach the Deputy Commissioner or any other authority under the Act and hence the Civil Court was not barred either expressly or by necessary implication from entertaining the suit so far 2 as it was for accounting.
However the High Court did not decide the question as to whether the Temples were private temples or could be regarded as public religious endowments.
Defendant No. 1 filed the appeal, by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: There is no doubt that in respect of a public trust, beneficiaries as a class can file a suit against the Trustee for rendition of accounts subject to the bar imposed by Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908.
[5H; 6A] Chapter VIII of the Act has no bearing on the question of the liability of a trustee to render accounts to the beneficiaries as a group or class and it does not provide for determining or deciding a dispute in respect of such rendition of accounts and hence, Section 108 of the said Act does not bar a suit like the one filed by Respondent No. 1.
[6H; 7A B] Sri Vedagiri Laxmi Narasimha Swami Temple vs Induru Pattabhirami Reddy, ; , referred to.
