The appellants landlords leased out their land, situate at Kolhapur, to respondents Nos. 1 and 2 and the husband of respondents Nos. 3 and 4 on 12.10.1950 for a period of ten years.
After the expiry of the lease period, they initiated proceedings under the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, for obtaining possession of the lands but the application was dismissed ex parte, as it was held that the provisions of the Act were not applicable to the land inas much as only grass grew thereon naturally.
Thereupon the appellants terminated the tenancy under the provisions of the Land Revenue Code and filed a Civil Suit against the respondents for possession mesne profits and for damages.
Respondents 1 and 2 contested the suit contending inter alia that the civil court had no jurisdiction to try the suit inasmuch as the Act was applicable to the land and that they having been in rightful possession, the notice of termina tion of tenancy was invalid.
The trial court tried the issues amongst others relating to the applicability of the Act, jurisdiction of the civil court and estoppel and after going through the evidence led by the parties, decreed the suit.
The respondents appeal against the said decree having failed before the first appellate court, they preferred Second Appeal to the High Court of Bombay.
The High Court set aside the judgment and order of the trial court as affirmed by the first appellate court and remanded the case back to the trial court with a direction that it should raise the necessary issues on the pleadings of the parties and should make a reference to the competent authority under Section 85A of the Act in regard to the issues which are required 2 to be determined by the competent authority under the Act and on receipt of findings, dispose of the suit according to law.
Being dissatisfied with the said order, the appellants moved application for leave to appeal under the Letters Patent but the same having been dismissed they have filed this appeal after obtaining special leave.
The appellants ' principal contention, amongst others, before this court is that the appellants ' application under Section 29(2) read with section 25(2) of the Act having been dismissed on the ground that the Act was not applicable and thus the authority had no jurisdiction to deliver possession is a finding which would operate as res judicata; hence the High Court 's direction making a reference to the competent authority under section 85A of the Act, now would be barred.
According to them the civil court itself has jurisdiction to decide the issues.
Respondents ' contention is that the direction of the High Court is consistent with the provi sions of the Act and that the earlier proceedings under the Act initiated by the appellants having been determined ex parte, it could not operate as res judicata.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: After the amendment of section 70(b) of the Act by insert ing words 'or was at any time in the past, a tenant ' the position has changed.
The Civil Court has now no jurisdic tion to decide an issue arising incidentally in a civil suit which is to be specifically decided by a competent authority under the Act.
Civil Court in such a case shall refer the issue to that authority and dispose of the suit in accord ance with the decision of the authority.
[11F] (See G.S. Shinde vs R.B. Joshi, ; ;) The High Court in the instant case has rightly sent back the suit to the trial court with the direction to refer issues, if raised to be determined exclusively by the compe tent authority, to that authority.
[13G] If a matter directly and substantially in issue in a former suit has been adjudicated upon by a court of exclu sive jurisdiction, the adjudication will bar the trial of the same matter in a subsequent suit.
[15E] In the instant case, the Mamlatdar having decided the appellants ' application for possession, the appellants themselves went to the Civil Court and filed the suit.
It does not now lie in their mouth to say that 3 the decision of the Mamlatdar would act as res judicata for the trial court.[15F] The Mamlatdar 's Court is a civil court for the purpose of Section 85A of the Act.
[15F] In its comprehensive sense the word 'suit is understood to apply to any proceeding in a court of justice by which an individual pursues that remedy which the law affords.
The modes of proceedings may be various but if a right is liti gated between parties in a court of justice the proceeding by which the decision of the court is sought may be a suit.
But if the proceeding is of a summary nature not falling within the definition of a suit it may not be so treated for the purpose of Sec. 11.
[15H; 16A] Besides, assuming the Mamlatdar in deciding the applica tion in 1962 63 to have been a court of exclusive jurisdic tion for the purpose of section 11 C.P.C., its decision rejecting the application would not be an evidence on the question of tenancy merely because it could be inferred from that deci sion.
[16B] The expression 'heard and finally decided ', in section 11 means a matter on which the court has exercised its judicial mind and has after argument and consideration come to a decision on a contested matter.
It is essential that it should have been heard and finally decided.
What operates as res judicata is the ratio of what is fundamental to the decision but it cannot be ramified or expanded by logical extension.
[16F G] (See Vithal Yaswant vs Shikander Khan Mutumukhtan, ; The law is well settled that a court which had no juris diction to try a cause cannot by its own erroneous decision confer on itself competence to decide it and its decision on the question of jurisdiction cannot operate as res judicata.
Conversely the decision relating to jurisdiction cannot be said to constitute the bar of res judicata where by an erroneous interpretation of a statute it holds that it has no jurisdiction.
[17B] (See Pandurang Mahadeo Kavade & Ors.
vs Annaji Balwant Bokil & Ors., ;) Shivappa Satawappa Ashtekar vs Gajanan Chintaman Desh Pande, [1953] 55 Bom.
Law Reporter.
843; Dhondi Tukaram vs Dadoo Piraji, ; Bhimaji Shanker Kulkarni vs Dundappa Vithappa Udapudi and Anr., ; ; Mussamiya 4 Imam Haidar Bax Razvi vs Rabari Govindhai Ratnabhai & Ors., ; ; Trimbak Sopana Girme vs Gangararn Mhatarba Yadav, ; Ishverlal Thakorelal Almaula vs Motibhai Nagjibhai, [1966] 1 SCR 367; Pandurang Hari Jadhav vs Shankar Maruti Todkar, ; Kalicharan Bhajanlal Bhayya vs Rai Mahalaxmi, ; Neminath Appayya Hanammannaver vs Jambu Rao Satappa Kocheri, AIR 1966 Mys.
154; Jambu Rao Satappa Kocheri vs Neminath Appayya Hanammannaver, ; ; Noor Mohd. Khan Ghouse Khan Soudagar vs Fakirappa Bharmappa Machenahalli, ; ; Ramchandra Rao vs Ramchandra Rao, [1922] 49 I.A. 129 and Bhagwan Dayal vs Mst.
Reoti Devi, ; , referred to.
