The appellant and respondents 7 to 13 are Assistant Conservators of Forest and are governed by the Bihar Forest Service Rules, 1953.
As per Rule 3 thereof appointment to the said post is made either by direct recruitment or by promotion of selected Rangers.
The appellant and respondents 7 to 12 were promoters and respondent 13 was a direct recruit.
Though the appellant was promoted subsequent to the promotion of respondents 7 to 12, his appointment was made retrospective.
The appellant was the last to be confirmed as Assistant Conservator of Forest.
As a Ranger also the appellant was appointed much later to respondents 7 to 12.
On the basis of confirmation seniority has been determined.
The appellant challenged the seniority of respondents 7 to 13 over him, by way of a Writ Petition in the High Court.
He relied on a memorandum to the Cabinet which contained a note that if the appellant was found fit for promotion his place would be above 10 general category officers and since the memorandum was approved by the Cabi net his name in the seniority list should have been placed above those officers.
The respondents resisted the claim stating that the Cabinet had not approved the memorandum in its entirety.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition and this appeal, by special leave, is against the said judgment.
The contentions raised before the High Court were reiterated in this appeal, this appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, 202 HELD: 1.1.
Rule 35 of the Bihar Forest Service Rules, 1953 specifically deals with seniority.
In the instant case, Clause (i) of the proviso is not attracted.
Even Clause (ii) is not attracted inasmuch as respondent No. 13 even though was appointed by direct recruitment, was not appointed "at the same time" as the appellant and respondents7 to 12.
It is Clause (iii) which is relevant for the determination of the seniority inter se of the appellant and respondents 7 to 12.
On a plain reading of this Clause it is apparent that on substantive appointment of Rangers to the service by promo tion, their seniority inter se in the service is to be governed by "their seniority inter se held as Rangers".
The appellant as well as respondents 7 to 12 have already been confirmed as Assistant Conservator of Forest and meet the requirement of "substantive appointment to the service by promotion".
In order to determine their inter se seniority as Assistant Conservator of Forest, therefore, their senior ity inter se as Rangers shall be the determining factor.
Respondents 7 to 12 had been appointed as Rangers much before the date on which the appellant was appointed as a Ranger.
Hence the claim of seniority as made by the appel lant has no substance.
[204D; 205B E] 1.2.
It is settled law that the provisions of statutory rules cannot be modified or altered by executive instruc tions, and it is only in the absence of statutory rules that executive instructions have relevance.
As such even if for the sake of argument it may be accepted that on account of the memorandum to the Cabinet or any other executive in struction the appellant was to be given seniority as claimed by him, it could not be done, as in case of a conflict, the statutory provisions contained in proviso (iii) of Rule 35 of the Rules shall prevail.
[205E F]
