The petitioner was directed to be detained under section 3(2) of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti social Activities Act, 1985.
In the grounds of detention it was alleged that the petitioner was conducting anti social activities of illegally storing indigenous and foreign liquor in his possession and selling it by himself and through his men and that he and his men beat innocent citizens thereby creating an atmosphere of fear and terror and he had thus become obstructionist in the maintenance of public order.
Reference was made to a previous order of detention which had been set aside by the High Court, and to the fact that notwithstand ing the previous detention, the petitioner continued to carry on his criminal and anti social activities affecting maintenance of public order.
It was further stated in the grounds that the detaining authority had considered taking action against the petitioner section 93 of the Prohibition Act for good conduct, and under sections 56B and 57(c) of the Bombay Police Act for his externment, but all these steps were either found not feasible or adequate.
It was then stated that there was a possibility of the petitioner, who was in jail, being released on bail and continuing his criminal activities, and to prevent the same there was no other alternative except to pass the order of detention.
Allowing the writ petition and quashing the order of detention this Court, HELD: (1) The satisfaction of the detaining authority is not open to judicial review but a citizen is entitled to protection within the meaning of Article 22(5) of the Con stitution of the procedural guarantees envisaged by law, and the Court frowns upon any deviation or infraction of the procedural requirements.
[184A B] (2) The fact that the detenu was in jail at the time the order of 178 detention was made and the possibility of his release from jail being made a ground of detention is not approved of by this Court.
[184C] Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah, ; Binod Singh vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad, Bihar & Ors., ; and Smt.
Shashi Aggarwal vs State of U.P., ; , referred to.
(3) The detaining authority must disclose in a case where the detenu is already in jail that there is cogent and relevant material constituting fresh facts to necessitate making of an order of detention.
[184F] Abdul Razak Abdul Wahib Sheikh vs Shri S.N. Sinha, Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad & Anr.,, J.T. and Ramesh vs State of Gujarat, J.T. , referred to.
(4) There is a wide gap between law and order and public order.
The criminal offence may relate to the field of law and order but such an offence would not necessarily give rise to a situation of public order.
Depending upon peculiar situations, an act which may otherwise have been overlooked as innocuous might constitute a problem of public order.
Selling of liquor by the petitioner would certainly amount to an offence under the Prohibition Act but without some thing more would not give rise to a problem of public order.
Similarly commission of any other criminal offence even assault or threat Of assault would not bring the matter within the ambit of public order.
[185B C] (5) Disclosure of adequate facts to enable a full and adequate representation to the Preventive Detention Board is one of the positive guarantees within the scope of Article 22(5) of the Constitution.
In the present case the grounds of detention show that the allegations are more or less vague and have the effect of making it difficult for the petitioner to make an adequate representation.
[185D E] A.K. Roy 's case, , referred to.
(6) The grounds of detention show how helpless the authorities feel in the matter of enforcing prohibition within the State.
[186B] (7) It is perhaps necessary to indicate that the provi sions of the Prohibition Act of 1949 or the Bombay Police Act should be suitably amended to meet the requirements of society.
Even if the provisions under those Acts are made stringent the person proceeded against has the benefit of a trial or a regular hearing and pursuing an appeal 179 against adverse orders, but in a case of preventive deten tion trial is avoided and liberty is taken away without providing a right to defend himself.
[185H; 186A]
