When the foreign vessel M.V. "Vali Pero" arrived at the port of Calcutta, 10 non Greek seamen on board that ship filed a suit in the admiralty jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court for recovery of their dues.
During the trial, depositions of the defendants ' witnesses were recorded on commission.
Objection was raised on behalf of the plaintiffs to reception in evidence of these depositions on the ground of absence of witness ' signature of the deposition as re quired in Rule 4 of chapter XXII of the Calcutta High Court Rules, 1914, applicable to the Original Side.
The objection was upheld by the learned Single Judge as also by the Divi sion Bench.
The learned Single Judge then decreed the suit on the unrebutted evidence of the plaintiffs.
One Special Leave Petition has been filed against the judgment of Division Bench affirming the order of the learned Single Judge ex cluding the defendants ' evidence.
The other Special Leave Petition has been filed against the judgment of the learned Single Judge decreeing the plaintiff 's suit after excluding the defendants ' entire oral evidence.
On behalf of the ' appellants it was contended that omission of witness ' signature on the deposition recorded by the Commissioner did not invalidate the deposition atleast in a case like the present where the correctness and authen ticity of the deposition was undisputed; that in this sense the requirement of the witness ' signature on the deposition was not a mandatory requirement; that the defect was curable by obtaining the witness ' signature even now; that the respondents ' counsel had admitted the correctness of the depositions; and that the respondents had omitted to raise any objection will after the suit was closed for judgment.
In reply, the respondent relied on the reasons 188 given in the Division Bench 's judgment construing the re quirement in Rule 4 as mandatory.
It was also urged that the argument of curing the defect by obtaining signatures even now was not advanced in the High Court and should not be permitted at this stage.
Allowing the appeals and remanding the suit to the learned Single Judge to be decided afresh, this Court, HELD: (1) The requirement of witness ' signature on the deposition in Rule 4 is directory even though the require ment of the deposition being recorded, read over to him and corrected wherever necessary is mandatory.
Mere omission of the witness ' signature on the deposition does not render the deposition invalid when the correctness and authenticity thereof is undisputed.
[196F] (2) The essential requirement of Rule 4 is that the deposition of a witness examined on commission shall be taken down in writing, read over, and where necessary, translated to the witness in order that mistakes or omis sions, if any, may be rectified or supplied.
The mandate in Rule 4 to this extent must be complied strictly in order to ensure a correct record of the deposition.
[196B C] (3) The signature of the witness is not a part of the deposition and apart from acknowledging the correctness of his deposition on the deposition itself, it is not essential for any other purpose in this context.
[196D] (4) While the essential requirements of Rule 4 are no doubt mandatory requiring strict compliance, the requirement of witness ' signature therein is directory of which substan tial compliance is sufficient.
[196G] (5) There is substantial compliance of this directory requirement where the correctness and authenticity of the deposition is undisputed.
Compliance can be had of this requirement even by subsequent admission of correctness of the deposition by the witness, in case of dispute.
[196H; 197A] (6) Under the Code of Civil Procedure a deposition recorded in a Court, except that under Order 18, Rule 16 C.P.C., does not require the witness ' signature on the deposition.
The requirement of signature is not court 's assurance since the witness is not examined in court.
Ac cordingly, it cannot be said reasonably that the omission of witness ' 189 signature on the deposition renders the deposition incom plete.
[196E] (7) Rules of procedure are not by themselves an end but the means to achieve the ends of justice.
Rules of procedure are tools forged to achieve justice and are not hurdles to obstruct the pathway to justice.
[197B] (8) Construction of a rule of procedure which promotes justice and prevents its miscarriage by enabling the court to do justice in myriad situations, all of which cannot be envisaged, acting within .the limits of the permissible construction, must be preferred to that which is rigid and negatives the cause of justice.
Where the outcome and fair ness of the procedure adopted is not 'doubted and the essen tials of the prescribed procedure have been followed, there is no reason to discard the result simply because certain details which have not prejudicially affected the result have been inadvertently omitted in a particular case.
[197B C] (9) Ordinarily, the word 'shall ' used at several places in Rule 4 must be given the same meaning at all places.
However, it is also settled that this is not an invariable rule and even though the word 'shall ' is ordinarily mandato ry but in the context or if the intention is otherwise it may be construed to be merely directory.
In short, the construction ultimately depends on the provision itself keeping in view the intendment of the enactment and the context in which the word 'shall ' has been used.
[197H; 198A] Ganesh Prasad Sah Desari & Anr.
vs Lakshmi Narayan Gupta, ; ; Govindlal Chagganlal Patel vs The Agricultural Produce Market Committee, Godhra & Ors., ; , referred to.
