The appeallants are the tenants of certain intermediary landlords known as Girasdars.
Respondents Nos. 4 5 are the legal heirs of certain Girasdars from whom some of the appellants held lands on lease.
Respondent No. 9 is a Giras dar who is represented by the Assistant Custodian Evacuee Property.
The other respondents, being statutory authorities are formal parties.
The dispute between the parties relate to the mode of allotment to the Girasdars which has arisen in the following circumstances.
After the coming into force of the Saurashtra Land Reforms Act 1951, the respondents Girasdars, as required by the Act filled in Form I showing therein the cultivable land in the estate as 1353.34 acres.
The family of the Girasdars was treated as an 'A ' class Girasdar.
The Mahalkari Kutiana by his decision dated June 25, 1959 held that the entire area comprising cultivable land formed part of the joint and undivided estate of all the Girasdars and on that basis he allotted to them three eco nomic units of land amounting to 60 acres.
The Girasdars preferred an appeal against the said decision and in that appeal, the Deputy Collector, Porbander, Respondent No. 2, modified the allotment made by Mahalkari.
He took the view that some of these Girasdars had separate or swang lands and thus entitled to separate allotments from swang lands, out of their swang estate.
A revision application was preferred before the Gujarat Revenue Tribunal against the decision of the Deputy Collec tor.
The Tribunal agreed in principle with the Deputy Col lector that the Girasdars were entitled to separate allot ment both from the estate held jointly by them and also to separate allotments from the Estates separately by them.
The Tribunal accordingly held that the Girasdars were entitled to three 79 economic units out of the aforesaid cultivable lands jointly held by them and some of them were entitled to separate allotments out of the lands separately held by them but included in the aforesaid area of 1353.34 acres.
The tenants thereupon challenged the decision of the Tribunal before the High Court by means of a writ petition.
The High Court held that in respect of the joint or "Majmu" estate of the concerned Girasdars, they were liable to be treated as one unit and entitled to allotment as an 'A ' class Girasdars and were thus entitled jointly to three economic holdings which came to 60 acres.
The High Court affirmed the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Ali Khokhar, Girasdars who had handed over 15 acres of land of the joint estate and directed that on the basis of joint holding, the Girasdars were entitled to the balance area of 45 acres.
It also upheld the decision of the Tribunal that some of the Girasdars were entitled to separate allotments as 'C ' class Girasdars with respect to their separate hold ings.
Thus the High Court treated the total holding of 1353.34 acres as partly joint and the remaining part com prised separate holdings of some of the Girasdars.
The appellants tenants have appealed to this Court after obtaining special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Judicial notice can be taken that much lesser hardship would be caused to a tenant whose land holding was substantially in excess of the economic holding if a part of that land were taken for allotment to the Girasdars than to a tenant whose excess holding was only marginal if a part of his land is taken for such allotment.
[85F] The Revenue Tribunal in deciding as to whose excess land should be handed over by the tenants has proceeded on a just and equitable basis that it should touch only such tenants whose land substantially exceeds the economic holding, and smaller tenants should not be asked to surrender any part of their holdings.
