The appellant tenant was in occupation of the premises and carrying on business.
The original respondent who was the owner of the said premises filed an eviction petition against the appellant on the ground of bona fide requirement as he wanted to set up his eldest son in business by start ing a photo studio in the said premises.
The appellant disputed the correctness of the claim and alleged that the property in which the said premises were situated was the absolute endowed property of which the original respondent was the de facto trustee and as such he had no personal or proprietary interest in the said property to evict the appellant on the ground of personal use and occupation.
The respondent asserted that he was the absolute owner of the said premises.
The Rent Controller passed a decree for eviction on the ground that the bona fide requirement of the respondent landlord was made out and also on the ground that the appellant had denied the title of the respondent which denial was not bona fide.
The appellant filed an appeal before the Appellate Authority which was dismissed upholding the order of eviction passed by the Rent Controller.
The appellant preferred a revision petition to the High Court and a Single Judge of the High Court also upheld the order of eviction.
The appellant came in an appeal to this Court by special leave.
It was contended for the appellant that in order to constitute a ground for eviction the denial of title must be anterior to the filing of the eviction petition and a denial of title in the course of eviction petition would not con stitute a ground for eviction.
The contention on behalf of the respondent was that the denial of the landlord 's title was not the only ground pleaded for eviction but it was also contended that the appellant was liable to be evicted as the respondent wanted the said premises for his personal bona fide use and occupation.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, this Court, 154 HELD: The A.P. Rent Act was enacted with a view to consolidate the law relating to regulation of leasing of buildings, control of rent thereof and prevention of unrea sonable eviction of tenants in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
Section 10 of the A.P. Rent Act deals with eviction of tenants.
Sub Section (1) of that section prohibits eviction of tenants except in accordance with the provisions of that section or sections 12 and 13 of that Act.
[156D E] It is well settled that the Court hearing a suit or appeal can take into account events which are subsequent to the filing of the suit in order to give appropriate relief or mould the relief appropriately.
[157F] Kundan Mal vs Gurudutta, Judgments today (1989) 1 S.C. 147, not applicable.
The landlord can recover possession of the property only on one or more of the grounds enacted in the relevant sec tion of the Rent Acts.
Even after the termination of the contractual tenancy the landlord under the definitions of the terms landlord and tenant contained in the Rent Acts, remains a landlord and the tenant remains a tenant, because of the express provision made in the enactments that a tenant means or includes 'a person continuing in possession after the termination of the tenancy in his favour '.
Yet another important feature of the Rent Acts is that either by way of a non obstante clause or by necessary implication these enactments have done away with the law contained in section 108 of the Transfer of Property Act dealing with rights and liabilities of the lessor and the lessee.
[158D E] Maharaja of Jaypore vs Rukmani Pattamahdevi, 46 I.A. 109; A.I.R. [1919] P.C. 1 and V. Dhanapal Chattiar vs Yeso dai Ammal; , , referred to.
Sada Ram and Others vs Gajjan Shiama, A.I.R. 1970 Punjab H.P. 22 and Machavaram Venkate Narayana Rao vs Sarvepalli Narayane Rao Sarada and another, , relied upon.
