The appellant has filed a contempt petition against the Respondents, alleging that the directions dated 20.4.1988 of this Court, have not been complied with.
The Respondents were directed to reconsider the case of the appellant for promotion on the basis that his medical category continues to be S I from 1977, and that the medical category would be taken into account if the rules for promo tion so require; otherwise not.
It was also directed that the consideration of promotion would be completed within four weeks; (See 1988(3) SCR 646).
On behalf of the respondents, it was stated that the promotional entitlements of the petitioner had been fina lised as per the directions of the Court, after re examining the petitioner 's case for promotion within the specified time and since there was no failure to comply with the directions, no contempt had been committed.
It was also submitted that the petitioner 's medical categorisation has nothing to do with the refusal to promote him.
Disposing of the petition, HELD: 1.
The judgment of this Court did clearly proceed on the footing that the lower medical categorisation preju diced the petitioner in the matter of obtaining appropriate promotions.
For the first time, the respondents have taken the stand in the contempt proceeding that the lower categor isation has nothing to do with the refusal to accord promo tion to the petitioner.
The plea now advanced cannot there fore be accepted.
[377E F] 371 2.
The .defence services have their own peculiarities and special requirements.
The considerations which apply to other government servants in the matter of promotion cannot as a matter of course be applied to defence personnel of the petitioner 's category and rank.
Requisite experience, conse quent exposer and appropriate review are indispensable for according promotion, and the petitioner, therefore cannot be given promotions as claimed by him on the basis that his batch mates have earned such promotions.
Individual capacity and special qualities on the basis of assessment have to be found but in the case of the petitioner these are not avail able.
[377G H; 378A B] 3.1 As regards compensation, the petitioner advanced tail claims by contending that he has suffered physical and mental torture, loss of reputation and of social acceptance and financial loss.
What promotions the petitioner would otherwise have earned would be a matter of speculation and cannot be ascertained at this stage for lack of appropriate decisive criteria.
His grievance that he suffered in dignity and humiliation as a result of being looked down upon by his batch mates, friends and relatives, has perhaps been suffi ciently met by the appellate judgment which has declared that his lower medical categorisation was unjustified and the petitioner continued to be Shape I without break from 1977.
[368E G] 3.2 The defence personnel have peculiar incidence of service.
Life 's course does not run smoothly for everyone.
Some relevant factors to be considered for award of compen sation are the duration of time for which the petitioner was subjected to various medical checks and hospitalisation, and the consequent suffering which he underwent, the loss of promotional prospects and the fact that he would now be obliged to request to be released from service prematurely.
A total compensation of RS.4 lakhs would meet the ends of justice.
The petitioner would not be entitled to any other claim on these heads, but he would be entitled to all other service benefits which an officer of the Lt. Colonel 's rank would be entitled to hold.
[378G H; 379A B] Major K.D. Gupta vs Union of India, and Lt. Col. K.D. Gupta, vs Union of India, ; referred to.
This Court directed that the amount of Rs.4 lakhs be paid to the petitioner within 2 months and the petitioner may be released from the defence service in accordance with any decision that might be taken on his request for such release.
[379C D] 372
