These two appeals were preferred against the decision of the Nagpur High Court in an appeal under 'section 19(1)(f) of the Defence of India Act, 1939, modifying an award of compensation made 1178 under section 19(i)(b) of that Act in respect of certain premises requisitioned by the Government under 75(A) of the Rules framed under the Act.
Both the parties applied for and obtained leave to appeal to the Federal Court under sections 109 and 110 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
A preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the Government that the decision of the High Court was an award and not a judgment, decree or order within the meaning of sections 109 and 110 of the Code and as such no appeal lay therefrom : Held, that the objection must prevail and both the appeals stand dismissed.
There could be no doubt that an appeal to the High Court under section 19(1)(f) Of the Defence of India Act from an award made under section 19(i)(b) of that Act was essentially an arbitration proceeding and as such the decision in such appeal cold not be a judgment, decree or order either under the Code of civil procedure or under Cl. 29 Of the Letters patent of the Nagpur High Court.
Kollegal Silk Filatures Ltd. vs province, of Madyas, I. I,.
R. , approved.
There is a well recognised distinction between a decision given by the Court in a case which it 'hears on merits and one given by it in a proceeding for the filing of an award.
The former is a judgment, decree or order of the Court appellable under the general law while, the latter is an adjudication of a private individual with the sanction of the Court stamped on it and where it does not exceed the terms of the reference, it is final and not appealable.
There can be no difference in law between an arbitaration by agreement of parties and one under a statute.
A referrence to arbitration under a statute to a court may be to it either as a court or as an arbitrator.
If it is to it as a court, the decision is a judgment, decree or order appealable under the ordinary law unless the statute provides otherwise, while in the latter case the Court functions as a persona designata and its decision is air award not appealable under the ordinary law but only under the statute and to the extent provided by it.
An appeal being essentially a continuation of the original proceedings, what *as at its inception an arbitration proceeding must retain its character as an arbitration proceeding even where the statute provides for an appeal, Rangoon Botatung Company vs The Collecter , Rangoon (1912) L.R. 39 I.A. 197 .The special officer sales the building sites Dassabhai Beznoji, Bom 506 the special officer sales the Building sites vs Dassabhai Bozanji Motiwala Manavikram Tirumalpad vs the Collector of the Nilagrie, Mad 943 and secretary of state for India in council vs Hindustan Co operative Insurance society Limited ,(1931) L.R. 58 I. A 259 relied on.
National Telephone Company Limited vs Postmaster General, , explained.
