The Respondent filed proceedings for eviction against the Petitioner firm in respect of a property situated at Narnaul under the Haryana Urban (Control of Rent and Evic tion) Act, 1973 and obtained a decree of eviction.
Petition er 's appeal against that decree failed in the High Court and the Special Leave Petition filed by it in this Court was also dismissed on 24.8.87.
While dismissing the Special Leave Petition this Court inter alia directed that the order of eviction shall not be executed for a period of six months on the Petitioner 's filing usual undertaking in this Court within four weeks.
Usual under taking implied that the Petitioner was in possession of the property and that it would deliver vacant possession of the property by the time granted to it by the Court.
The Petitioner did not file any undertaking in this Court.
Instead three of Sanjay Kumar and Lala Ram sons of Rajkumar and Ved Prakash who are sons of Ganpat Ram (a partner in the petitioner 's firm) filed a suit in the Court of senior Sub Judge, Narnaul for permanent injunction restraining the decree holders from ejecting Sanjay Kumar & Lala Ram.
In the said suit the said plain tiffs obtained an order of temporary injunction dated 3.11.
The said suit was filed against Kalu Ram and Puran Chand son of Roshan Lal and also against Ganpat Rai.
The learned Senior Subordinate Judge in his order dated 12.2.88 granting injunction to the plaintiffs took the view that the plaintiffs had claimed a right of tenancy to the premises in question independently and as such the decree of eviction passed by this Court in Special Leave Petition No. 5597 of 1987 would not bind the plaintiffs.
On this reason ing he issued the injunction.
Being unable to obtain possession of the property in question, Kalu Ram and Ant.
who were respondents in Special Leave Petition (decree holders) have filed this Petition praying for initiation of Contempt of Court proceedings against the Petitioner firm.
224 Disposing of the Petition with some directions this Court, HELD: On the date of the order of this Court dated 21st August 1987, in the Special Leave Petition, the Petitioner therein had obtained time on the implied assurance and representation that they were in possession of the premises in question and were capable of delivering the vacant pos session to the applicants.
The effect of the said order of this Court, is that the applicants would have vacant posses sion from the firm, Ganpat Ram Rajkumar.
[227C D] Having regard to the relationship between the parties and having regard to the undertaking promised to be filed in this Court, upon which time was obtained from this Court, it appears, there is a clear non compliance of the order.
[227E] The said order must be implemented and cannot be allowed to be defeated by the dubious methods adopted by the part ners of the said firm of Ganpat Ram Raj Kumar.
The whole conduct betrays a calculated attempt to defeat the order of this Court and to mislead the Court.
Sons and grandsons of the partners or erstwhile partners of the firm cannot be allowed to frustrate the order of this Court.
[227G H; 228A] The Respondents, all of them, were guilty of acts which had to the situation and thereby frustrate the order of this Court.
Though perhaps the respondents could not be found guilty of violating any undertaking as there was none, in the facts and circumstances of the case, this Court should ensure compliance with its order dated 24th August 1987 and see that vacant and peaceful possession is given to the applicant in the interest of Justice.
[229D E] Failure to give possession, if it amounts to contempt in a situation of this nature is a continuing wrong.
There was no scope for application of section 20 of the Act.
[230B] The Court accordingly directed the learned Senior Sub Judge.
Narnaul (Haryana) to cause, deliver up the vacant possession of the shop situated at Sabji Mandi Narnaul Distt.
Mohindergarh (Haryana), if necessary with the help of police forthwith.
The learned Senior Sub Judge is also di rected to report compliance immediately.
Save as aforesaid, the Court passed no order on this application.
Respondents viz., firm Ganpat Ram, Rajkumar, Ganpat Ram, Rajkumar, Sanjay Kumar, Lalu Ram and Ved Prakash are directed to pay to the applicants the costs of this Application, quantified at Rs.2,500.
This order will 225 not prevent or prejudice the applicants from taking any step for recovery of arrears of rent and mesne profits as they are entitled to in accordance with law.
[230C E] Babu Ram Gupta vs Sudhir Bhasin & Anr., ; and Thackar Hariram Motiram vs Balkrishan Chatrathu Thacker
