A detention order under sub section (2) read with sub section (3) of Section 3 of the was passed against the detenu on the ground that the detenu, who was in jail in a case registered under Section 307 IPC was trying for release on bail, and there was every possi bility of his being released, and that he was likely to indulge in activities prejudicial to public order and public life.
The order was confirmed by the State Government on the report of the Advisory Board.
In a Writ Petition filed in this Court it was contended that as the grounds of detention did not disclose any past history of any crime by the detenu, nor was there any mate rial on record to show that the incident referred to in the grounds would be repeated in future, the detention order based on a solitary incident and on an apprehension that the detenu was likely to act prejudicially to the interest of public order, in the event of his being released on bail, was illegal.
Dismissing the writ Petition, the Court, HELD: When an incident was such that it created communal tension and the authorities were apprehensive of the break ing of a communal riot, such incident in itself may be sufficient, and may afford justification for the satisfac tion of the detaining authority for the detention of the detenu in order to prevent him from indulging in such activ ity prejudicial to public order even though there is no antecedent act of similar nature or past history of commis sion of crime by the detenu.
[246C D] In the instant case, the situation that emerged as a result of the incident was grave and serious and prejudi cially affected public order.
242 It may be a solitary incident but it gave rise to communal tension and there was apprehension of a communal riot.
The police report on the incident is a sufficient material for the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority that there was disturbance of tranquility and harmony of public life.
The detaining authority had taken into consideration all the circumstances including the grave and serious situa tion that emerged as a result of the incident.
There were cogent reasons apparent on the face of the record for justi fying the order of detention.
[245H; 246A B] Alijan Mian vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad, ; and Ayya vs State of U.P. and another; , , relied on.
Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah, and Smt.
Shashi Aggarwal vs State of U.P. and others; , , referred to.
