The Respondent firm imported from Japan, "metallised polyester films" which were in the shape of film rolls several metres long.
The goods were cleared on payment of customs duty as well as additional duty/countervailing duty leviable under section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act.
Thereaf ter the Respondent firm moved three applications claiming refund of the additional duty of customs paid by it.
The claim was made under the terms of a notification of exemp tion issued under section 25(1) of the Customs Act.
Under notification No 228/76 dated 2.8.1976, an exemption from the Customs Tariff Act was granted in respect of "articles made of plastics, all sort but excluding those specified in the Table annexed and failing under Chapter 39 of the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act.
The Tribunal accepted the claim of refund made by the ' Respondent.
In so doing it relied on the decisions of the Madras High Court in Precise Impex P. Ltd. vs Collector, , of the Calcutta High Court in Continental Marketing P. Ltd. vs Union, and of the Bombay High Court in A.V. Jain vs Union, WP 2136 of 1986 decided on 30.1.1987.
The Tribunal also referred to its earlier decision in Export India Corporation P. Ltd. vs Collector; and Collector vs Fancy Dying and Printing Works Bombay.
The Tribunal held that the goods imported by the Re spondent were articles made of plastics but they were "films" and thus not one of the Categories of articles mentioned in the Table.
Aggrieved by the decision of the Tribunal, the Collector of Customs has filed these appeals under section 130 E(B) of the . 232 Before this Court the Department contended that the goods are "sheets" or "foils" or other "rectangular or profile shape" and hence liable to duty.
The assesses ' assertion is that the goods are "films" though specie of plastics articles yet they are different from any mentioned in the table.
According to it even if they are treated only as thin sheets of plastic material, they can be described only as "sheetings" and not sheets.
On consideration of the rival contentions advanced by the parties and after making reference to the other relevant notifications granting exemption issued under rule 8(1) of the Central Excise Rules in respect of items falling under Item No. 15A of the Central Excise Tariff Act, this Court dismissing the appeals, HELD: Films made of plastic fall in a category of their own and do not fail within the categories of articles ex cepted by the Table.
Film is a well known, distinct and independent category of plastic article known to commerce.
[235A] The Court agreed with the view of the Bombay High Court that, though for certain purposes there is a distinction between "films", "foils" and "sheets", so far as the article presently in question is concerned it is recognised in trade only as "film".
[238F] The goods under consideration cannot be described either as "foils or sheets".
A film roll of indefinite length and not in the form of individual cut piece can be more appro priately described as "sheetings" rather than ' 'sheets".
[238G ;239A] The expression "other rectangular or profile shapes" in the table is also not appropriate to bring in the items in question.
For one thing, the articles have a distinct name in the market as "films" and therefore they are outside the table.
It will not be possible to accept the contention that articles which have a clear commercial identity as "films" should be brought within the wide and vague expression "other rectangular or profile shapes", because if the film is cut into small pieces each piece will be rectangular in shape.
The items imported do not come in a rectangular shape they are imported as rolls of polyester films.
They are not articles of rectangular shape.
Nor would it be possible to treat them as of other "profile" shape.
The Court was unable to attribute any precise meaning to the expression "profile" shape but it cannot be taken to be comprehensive enough to take in any shape whatever.
If the expression "rectangular" or other "profile" shape in the table is given 233 such wide and unrestricted interpretation then practically any article of plastic can be brought within the meaning of one or other of the expressions used in the Table and thus the entire exemption can be altogether deprived of any content.
The Court took the view that the articles are "films" and, as, this expression does not find specific mention in the table, the assessee is entitled to exemption under the main part of the notification.
[239E H; 240A]
