The appellant was working as Private Secretary to the Deputy Election Commissioner until July .26, 1977 when the Deputy Election Officer under he whom was working relin quished his charge.
One Tilak Raj who was working as Private Secretary to Chief Election Commissioner was promoted as Under Secretary.
In order to fill the vacancy caused by his promotion, Re spondent No. 2 M.L. Sarad, was appointed to the said post w.e.f. September 1,1979.
The appellant made a representation complaining that the said appointment was contrary to the Election Commission {Recruitment of Staff) Rules, which was rejected on the ground that he was not eligible for appoint ment to the said post.
Thereupon, the appellant filed a Writ Petition challenging the notification dated 23.10.79 ap pointing the said M.L. Sarad as Private Secretary.
During the pendency of the Writ Petition the Commission under due intimation to the Court amended the 1974 Rules as a result of which entry at serial No. 9 relating to the Post of P.S. to Chief Election Commissioner was omitted.
The appellant was informed by the Commission that it had withdrawn the Memo of October 26, 1979 wherein it was stated that the appellant was not eligible for appointment to the post in question.
The Court took due notice of the amendment but held that the Writ Petition survived since the appellant was not considered for appointment to the post w.e.f. 1.9.79.
The appellant contended before the High Court that (i) the entire exercise culminating in the amendment of the Rules was mala fide; (ii) that the amendment conferred arbitrary and unfettered power on the Chief Election Commis sioner to appoint any person as his Private Secretary; (iii) that in case the appellant had been appointed to the post on 1.9.79, subsequent amendment of the Rules would not have operated 250 retrospectively to his detriment and he would have contin ued.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the 1979 Rules were not mala fide nor were they arbitrary and that since the memo of 26.10.79 was withdrawn, the appellant was entitled to be considered for appointment to the post in question w.e.f. 1.9.79.
Accordingly the High Court directed the class II Departmental Promotion Committee to consider the case of the appellant to the post in question w.e.f. 1.9.79.
It further ordered that if the appellant is selected for appointment to the said post, his appointment will be deemed to have been made on ad hoc basis from 1.9.79 to December 14, 1979 after which 1979 Rules came into opera tion.
Monetary benefits were also directed to be paid to the appellant.
The appellant being dissatisfied with the aforesaid order preferred Letters Patent Appeal which was summarily rejected on 24.7.80.
The appellant has, therefore, appealed to this Court after obtaining Special Leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Article 324 confers the power of superintendence, direction and control of elections in the Chief Election Commissioner.
Free and fair elections are the basic postu lates of any democratic system.
A duty is cast on the Chief Election Commissioner to ensure free and fair elections.
This makes the post of Chief Election Commissioner a sensi tive one.
The Chief Election Commissioner has to deal with several matters which are brought before him by political parties as well as the Government.
His office is called upon to handle correspondence which require a high degree of secrecy and confidentiality.
He would naturally require the services of his Private Secretary for handling such secret and confidential files and correspondence.
Integrity, hones ty and competence are the basic hallmarks for the said post.
In addition, he must be a person in whom the Chief Election Commissioner has absolute trust and faith.
It is for this reason that the tenure of the post is made co terminus with the tenure of the Chief Election Commissioner.
That is for the obvious reason that a man chosen by the predecessor may not be enjoying the same degree of confidence of his succes sor.
He may like to have his own man of confidence to attend to his secretarial work.
It is, therefore, not without reason that the choice of personnel to the post of Private Secretary is left to the Chief Election Commissioner him self.
[255E G] Since consultation with the U.P.S.C. was not necessary after the 251 amendment introduction by the 1979 Rules, the Chief Election Commissioner was entitled to choose the man of his confi dence as Private Secretary.
The choice of Respondent No. 2 to the post cannot, therefore, be questioned.
[256C]
