The appellant company is engaged in the business of transport of goods and parcels in Southern India and for that purpose has appointed agents at various stations.
The respondent was one such agent appointed at Madras.
As pro vided in clause III of the Contract, the respondent was to arrange a suitable godown and engage employees.
The Company took on lease a godown at No. 10, Srinivasan Road, T. Nagar, Madras and the same was put in possession of the respondent for the purpose of carrying on his agency business of the Company.
During the course of the Company 's audit, it transpired that the Respondent not only mismanaged the business but had misappropriated some of the income of the company.
The appellant, therefore, terminated his agency with effect from 14.10.1988 in terms of clause XI of the Contract and in formed him that the company would be taking possession of the Godown premises for carrying on the business on its own, as provided in the contract.
Thereafter the respondent was informed by a letter that the company has taken possession of the Godown on 15.10.88 and another agent R. Sundarajan had been appointed in his place.
But the respondent prevent ed R. Sundarajan and also the company from carrying on the business at the godown premises.
The company, therefore, filed a suit for declaration of its right to carry on the business in the premises and for a permanent injunction restraining the respondent from interferring with its pos session on the ground that after the termination of the agency of the respondent, the company acquired a right to carry on the business of the company and further the company had since acquired the possession of the premises on 15.10.88.
Pending decision of the suit, the appellant prayed for the issuance of a temporary injunction.
The Trial Judge of the Madras High Court granted temporary injuction re straining the 411 respondent from interfering with the appellant 's business but on appeal by the respondent the Division Bench of the Madras High Court vacated that temporary injunction.
Hence this appeal by the appellant company.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Under law, revocation of agency by the Principal immediately terminates the agent 's actual authority to act for the Principal unless the agent 's authority is coupled with an interest as envisaged under section 202 of the .
When agency is revoked, the agent could claim compensation if his case falls under section 205 or could exercise a lien on the Principal 's property under section 221.
The agent 's lien on Principal 's property recog nised under section 221 could be exercised only when there is no agreement inconsistent with the lien.
[416B C] In the present case, the terms of the agreement by which the respondent was appointed as agent, expressly authorise the company to occupy the godown upon revocation of agency.
Secondly the lien, in any event, cannot be utilised or taken advantage of to interfere with Principal 's business activi ties.
[416C D] An agent who receives property or money from or for his Principal obtains no interest for himself in the property.
When he receives any such property he is bound to keep it separate from his own and that of others.
[416E] (See Foley vs Hill, All E.R. Reprint 16 at 198; It is not every agent who is in a fiduciary position vis a vis his principal.
For example if 'A ' appoints 'B ' to be his agent merely to sign a memorandum and places no particular trust in 'B ' the doctrine of fiduciary relations would not apply.
Likewise where the Principal authorises an agent to do particular and specified acts, the doctrine of fiduciary relation may not arise.
[418C D] In this case, the respondent 's possession of the suit premises was on behalf of the company and not on his own right.
It is, therefore, unnecessary for the company to file a suit for recovery of possession.
The respondent has no right to remain in possession of the suit premises after termination of his agency.
He has also no right to interfere with the Company 's business.
The case, therefore, deserves the grant of temporary injunction.
[419F G] 412 Smt.
Chandrakantaben and Anr.
vs Vadilal Bapalal Modi and Ors., [1989] 2 SCC 630 at 643; Narayani Amma vs Bheska ran Pillai, AIR 1969 Kerala 214; Abdul Nabi Sahib vs Bajab Sahib & Anr., AIR 1944 Mad 221 and Jamma vs Reghu, AIR 1977 Orissa 12, referred to.
