Sub section (4) of section 3 of the provides that no order passed by an officer men tioned in sub section (3) shah remain in force for more than twelve days after the making thereof unless, in the mean time, it has been approved by the State Government.
The Commissioner of Police, Delhi, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (2) of section 3 of the Act, as delegated to him by the Delhi Administration, passed an order on 19.1.1989 detaining the petitioner The order of detention was approved by the Administrator on 31.1.1989.
The petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court challenging the validity of the detention order contending that (i) the day on which the order of detention was passed should he included in the period of computation of twelve days and since the order of detention was approved on 31.1.1989, that is, on the thirteenth day after the expiry of twelve days, it had ceased to be in force; (ii) the non supply of the copy of order delegating the power of deten tion on the Commissioner of Police has seriously prejudiced the detenu; and (iii) there was serious non application of mind by the detaining authority.
342 Dismissing the petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
In computing the period of twelve days referred to in sub section (4) of section 3 of the Act, the day on which the order of detention was passed should be excluded.
Therefore the approval of the order of detention was made within twelve days after the making of the order of deten tion.
[350D] 1.1 Sub section (4) of section 3 has given a clear indication as to the computation of twelve days.
It excludes the day on which the order is made.
The word 'after ' in sub section (4) of section 3 of the Act is very significant and clearly excludes any contention that in computing the period of twelve days the day on which the order of deten tion is passed should be included.
The period of twelve days has to be calculated 'after ' the making of the order of detention, i.e. the day on which the cause of action arises has to be excluded in computing the period of time.
[346E F; 349D; 348H] 1.2 It is true that in sub section (4) the officer making the order of detention shall forthwith report the fact to the State Government, but the word 'forthwith ' will not be taken into consideration for the purpose of computing the period of twelve days inasmuch as there is clear indica tion that the said period shah be computed after the order is made.
Computation of twelve days including the day on which the detention order is made will be ignoring the direction of the legislature, as given in sub section (4) itself, that the said period of twelve days will commence after the making of the detention order.
[346F G] 2.
When the language of a statute is plain and simple, the question of ascertaining the intention of the legisla ture does not arise.
[349D] 2.1 Sub section (4) of section 3 admits of only one interpretation regarding the computation of twelve days and, accordingly, the question as to the adoption of the inter pretation which ensures to the benefit of the detenu does not arise.
[346H; 347A] T.C. Basappa vs T. Nagappa, ; ; Haru Das Gupta vs State of West Bengal, ; and Ratcliff vs Bartholomew, , followed.
Nillapareddi Chandrasekhara Reddy vs The Government of Andhra Pradesh and Anr., ; C. Krishna Reddy and Anr.
vs Commissioner of Police Hyderabad & Ors., 343 and Gulam Sarwar vs State of Bihar & Ors.
, , distinguished.
Manjuli vs Civil Judge, AIR 1970 Bom.
1 and In re: V.S. Mehta, AIR 1970 AP 234, approved.
The expression "in the meantime" in sub section (4) of section 3 of the Act clearly indicates that the State Government can approve of the order of detention even on the day it is passed.
The language of sub section (4) of section 3 is plain and simple and the question whether the order of detention can be approved on the day it is passed or not does not at all arise.
[349F] Prabhu Narain Singh vs Superintendent, Central Jail, Varanasi, ILR 1961 1 All. 427, disapproved.
The Act does not provide for supplying a copy of an order under Section 3(3) of the Act.
In the instant case, the said order has not been relied upon by the Commissioner of Police in passing the impugned order of detention.
It may be that by virtue of the said order under section 3(3) of the Act, the Commissioner of Police could exercise the powers of the detaining authority under section 3(2) of the Act.
But, that has nothing to do as to the subjective satis faction of the Commissioner of Police in making the impugned order of detention.
[351D E] 5.
In the instant case, a copy of the application for bail was with the detaining authority before he made the order of detention.
So, it is not correct to say that the detaining authority proceeded on the basis that the detenu had made applications for bail in all the cases pending against him.
Accordingly there was no non application of mind by the detaining authority.
[352A B & C]
