The appellant company was engaged in the manufacture and sale of a malted milk product marketed under the brand name "Horlicks".
The appellant brought the product within the octroi limits of Bangalore in bulk containers, rebottled the same in small bottles and exported the major portion of the rebottled product beyond the octroi limits of Bangalore.
The appellants made representation protesting against the levy of octroi on Horlicks in respect of the quantity of the goods which was exported outside the municipal limits after being rebottled, and sought refund of the octroi duty on the ground that there was no use or consumption or sale of the said milkfood within the municipal limits, and that the imposition of octroi was illegal and unwarranted.
The re spondent Corporation rejected the claim.
Thereupon the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court challeng ing the levy/retention of the octroi duty on Horlicks ex ported out of the municipal limits.
The petition was resisted by the Corporation on two grounds, namely, (i) the transferring the Horlicks imported in bulk into bottles amounted to use of the Horlicks within the city; and (ii) the octroi collected was in accordance with law and unless the procedure prescribed under rules 24 and 25 of Bye law 45 framed by the Municipal Corporation under the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949 was followed no obligation or duty was cast on the part of the Corporation to refund any part of the octroi collected.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and held that when the Horlicks powder was transferred into bottles of different sizes, 354 the appellant did not use Horlicks within the city of Banga lore.
In the appeal, the Division Bench agreed with the learned Single Judge on the first point.
On the second point, however, the Division Bench rejected the contention of the appellant that opening or breaking open the drums and putting the powder in the bottles amounted to breaking bulk and as such there was no scope of applying for refund under rule 24 which provided for refund in the case of articles on which octroi duty had been paid and which were subsequently exported beyond the octroi limits without breaking bulk.
According to the Division Bench, no importance could be attached to the expression 'without breaking bulk ', and the appellant not having applied in accordance with rules 24 and 25, no amount could be refunded.
Before this Court, the Corporation sought to raise an additional plea that where refund was due in respect of the duties like this, the amount could not be refunded because there was possibility of undue enrichment of the claimant.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) Octroi in this case is a duty on the coming in of the raw materials which is payable by the producer or the manufacturer.
It is not the duty on going out of the fin ished products in respect of which the duty might have been charged or added to the costs passed on to the consumers.
In such a situation, no question of 'undue enrichment ' can possibly arise.
[362G] (2) There is no dispute that the Horlicks powder was brought in bulk in drums.
After being imported, the entirety of the Horlicks powder had not been sold.
A part of the powder has been put in the bottles and exported outside the city of Bangalore.
[361E] (3) Octroi cannot be levied or collected in respect of goods which are not used or consumed or sold within the municipal limits.
[364F] (4) Indubitably, amounts have been realised as octroi on the entry of the goods on which octroi was not leviable because these were not for use or consumption within the municipal limits.
Mere physical entry into the city limits would not attract the levy of octroi unless goods were brought in for use or consumption or sale.
[364C D] (5) In this case, putting the powder from the drums to the bottles 355 for the purpose of exporting or taking these out of the city is neither use nor consumption of the Horlicks powder at tracting the levy of octroi.
Such amounts, therefore cannot be retained by the respondent corporation.
[362D E] C.W.P. No. 19873 of 1977 High Court of Punjab Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co. of India Ltd. vs Bel gaum Borough Municipality, [1963] 2 Supp.
SCR 216, referred to.
(6) "Without breaking bulk" is not an expression of art, nor is it an expression defined in the Act or the rules.
It has, therefore, to be construed in its literal and ordinary sense to the extent possible, and construed as it is, trans ferring the product from the drums by breaking seal of the drums to bottles cannot be said to be "without breaking bulk".
Certainly the bulk was broken in the procedure fol lowed.
[361H; 362A E] (7) Rule 24 does not apply.
In that view, rules 25 and 26 have no scope of application.
[364C] Kirpal Singh Duggal vs Municipal Board, Ghaziabad, , referred to.
(8) Realisation of tax or money without the authority of law is bad under Article 265 of the Constitution.
Octroi cannot be levied or collected in respect of goods which are not used or consumed or sold within the municipal limits.
So these amounts become collection without the authority of law.
The respondent is a statutory authority in the present case.
It has no right to retain the amount, so far and so much.
These are refundable within the period of limitation.
[364E F]
