The grievance of the respondents who have been recruited to Indian Forest Service and the Indian Police Service is that although the Emergency Commissioned Officers & Short Service Commissioned Officers in Short ECOS & SSCOS respec tively have been recruited after the respondents yet their year of appointment has been fixed earlier than the year of allotment of the respondents under rule 3(2)(d) of the IFS (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1968 & Clauses (c) & (d) of sub rule (3) of Rule 3 of I;P.S. (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1954 which is retrospective in operation.
The Tribu nal struck down the rules as ultra vies of Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution.
Both the High Court and the Tribunal have taken the view that although Section 3 of the All India Services (Amendment) Act, 1975 validates the impugned rules purporting to have been made with retrospective effect, yet the impugned rules are invalid in as much as they prejudi cially, affect the interests of the respondents.
While allowing the appeals and disagreeing with High Court and the Tribunal, this Court, HELD: The Tribunal has struck down the impugned rules, namely rule 3(2)(d) of the Indian Forest Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1968 and clauses (c) and (d) of sub rule (3) of Rule 3 of the Indian Police Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1954 as ultra vires Articles 14 and 16.
Office Memorandum dated January 29, 1966 provides for the rehabilitation of the ECOS and SSCOs recruited since 276 November 1, 1962 after their release from the Armed Forces.
The contents of the Memorandum are in the nature of execu tive instructions.
[277D: 282B; 286B] Although the impugned rules were not in existance in 1966 the executive instructions as contained in the Office Memorandum conferred the same benefit as conferred by the impugned rules.
In other words, it is apparent that the executive instructions have now been adopted as rules framed under the Act.
[286E] The Released Emergency Commissioned Officers and Short Service Commissioned Officers (Reservation of Vacancies) Rules, 1967 framed by the President of India under the proviso to Article 309 and clause (5) of Article 148 of the Constitution of India, contained similar provisions as to the seniority and pay of ECOS & SSCOs.
[286F] No invidious discrimination has been made between the ECOs & SSCOs on the one hand and the respondents on the other, both as regard the Indian Forest Service and Indian Police Service, as contended.
[290E] As soon as it is found that the ECOs and SSCOs have been classified into a distinct and separate class and that such classification is reasonable, no objection can be taken to the year of allotment given to them in accordance with the impugned rules.
Disagreeing with the High Court and the Tribunal, this Court is of the view that no illegality has been committed by the Government in framing the impugned rules with retrospective effect.
Held that the impugned rules are quite legal and valid.
[290G H; 291A] It is now a settled principle of law that if the statute under which a rule is flamed does not confer on the authori ty concerned the power to make such a rule with retrospec tive effect, the authority will have no power to frame any rule with retrospective effect.
[280F] A. Janaradhana vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
