The respondent, a retired Naval Officer, was apprehended at the Bombay International Airport when he was about to take a flight to New York.
On search of his luggage certain highly sensitive documents were found, and he was arrested for breach of the provisions of the Official Secrets Act, 1923 and the .
The respondent filed a number of applications for being released on bail inter alia on medical grounds.
This batch of applications were rejected by Puranik, J.
The attention of Puranik, J. was, however, not drawn to the pendency of one more such application, in which the respondent had prayed for grant of bail to facilitate yogic exercises under expert guidance at his residence.
The respondent had sought precisely the same relief in an earlier application which had been rejected by Puranik, J. Two days after the rejec tion of the group of bail applications by Puranik, J., the pending application was disposed of by Suresh J., who di rected that the respondent be enlarged on bail, on certain conditions which amounted to virtual house arrest.
Before this Court the appellant State has assailed the propriety of the order granting bail passed by Suresh, J. just two days after Puranik, J. had rejected the batch of bail applications.
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the respondent that this Court should refrain from exercising jurisdiction under Article 136 to cancel bail granted by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) It is true that ordinarily this Court does not interfere with an order granting bail, but in the facts of this case the Court feels that judicial discipline will be sacrificed at the alter of judicial discretion if the Court refused to exercise its jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution.
[322C] 316 (2) When the batch of bail applications were put up before Puranik, J., his attention was not drawn to the pendency of one more such application.
Even if the said application was filed after the hearing started before Puranik, J., the learned Judge could have been told about its pendency before he rendered his decision.
This conduct of the respondent has given rise to the argument that the respondent desired to keep the question regarding his en largement on bail alive, [320B C] (3) What is important to realise is that in the hail application before Suresh, J. the respondent made an identi cal request made earlier in an application placed before Puranik, J.
Once that application was rejected there was no question of granting a similar prayer.
That is virtually overuling the earlier decision without there being a change in the fact situation, which would mean a substantial change having a direct impact on the earlier decision and not merely cosmetic changes which are of little or no conse quence.
[321D E] (4) Judicial discipline, propriety and comity demanded that the impugned order should not have been passed revers ing all earlier orders including the one rendered by Pura nik, J., only a couple of days before, in the absence of any substantial change in the fact situation.
[321F] (5) In such a situation the proper course is to direct that the matter be placed before the same learned Judge who disposed of the earlier applications.
Such a practice or convention would prevent an impression being created that a litigant is avoiding or selecting a court to secure an order of his liking.
Shahzad Hasan Khan vs Ishtiaq Hasan Khan, [1987] 2 SCC 684, referred to.
