The Board of Governors of the respondent school entered into a contract for the grant of permanent lease of immova ble property of the school to the petitioner builder.
An association of the old students of the school resisted the agreement before the High Court but a learned Single Judge accorded sanction which was later stayed.
The petitioner preferred an appeal before the Division Bench of the High Court which made certain interim directions while disposing the appeal.
Hence this appeal by the petitioner.
During the pendency of the appeal, the parties entered into a compromise which was signed on behalf of all the parties, but the compromise deed was filed in this Court after a lapse of three years.
The Association of the old students resisted the compromise on the ground: (i) that there was a lapse of three years between the date of signing the compromise and its filing in the court; (ii) the Presi dent of the Old Association of students had no authority to enter the compromise.
Disposing the appeal, this Court; HELD: (1) If the compromise is genuine and lawful, the delay in presentation in court could at the most be in the realm of equity and would not be otherwise material.
In the instant case the resolution of the Board of the Association clarifies the position that all parties had agreed to the compromise and it was intended to be presented before this Court for permission to enter into compromise.
The President of the Old Association of Students had been authorised to associate himself for the purpose.
The agreement has been signed by the parties and is not unlawful.
The compromise is, therefore, in accordance with the provisions of Order XXIII, rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure and can be acted upon.
[448F H] 446 2.
Before the compromise is accepted it is for the court to be satisfied that the terms are in the interests of the Trust.
[449A] 2.1 In the instant case, under the agreement forming the subject matter of compromise the school would have space available for expansion in the near future.
It is not in the interest of the school to reject the agreement on the ground that there was scope of receiving better offers if adver tisement was made.
[449E C] 2.2 It is appropriate that the compromise should be accepted with certain variations viz. availability of extra area to the school, escalation of the ground rent and provi sion for automatic escalation of ground rent of 10% once in every 10 years.
The permission is accordingly accorded to the Board of Governors to enter into compromise on behalf of the school.
[449E & 449H; 450A B]
