Section 10(1) of the , does not confer on the appropriate Government the power to cancel or supersede a reference made thereunder in respect of an industrial dispute pending adjudication by the tribunal constituted for that purpose.
Nor can section 21 of the , vest such a power by necessary implication.
It is well settled that the rule of construction embodied in section 21 of the can apply to the provisions of a statute only where the subject matter, context and effect of such provisions are in no way inconsistent with such application.
So judged it is clear that that section cannot apply to section 10(1) of the .
Minerva Mills Ltd. vs Their Workmen, ; , held inapplicable.
1192 Strawboard Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs Gutta Mill Workers ' Union, ; , explained.
The Textile Workers ' Union, Amritsar vs The State of Punjab and others, A. I. R. 1957 pun.
255 and Hayendranath Bose vs Second Industrial Tribunal, , overruled.
South Indian Estate Labour Relations Organisation vs The State of Madras, , distinguished.
Consequently, where the appropriate Government by two notifications, issued one after the other, referred two industrial disputes between two batches of workmen and their employer for adjudication to the industrial tribunal constituted for that purpose and, thereafter, by a third notification superseded the two earlier notifications and the High Court, on the applications of both the workmen and the employer under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, issued a writ of certiorari quashing that notification and by a writ of mandamus required the tribunal to proceed expeditiously with the two references and the State Government appealed: Held, that the impugned notification was invalid and ultra vires 'and the finding of the High Court must be affirmed.
Held, further, that since a reference under section 10(1) of the was in the nature of an administrative act, the more appropriate writ to issue would be one of mandamus and not one in the nature of certiorari.
The State of Madras vs C. P. Sarathy, , referred to.
