The disputed property belonged to a joint Hindu family, governed by Mitakshra law of which one Bhiku and his son were coparceners.
Bhiku died leaving behind Parvati his widow and a son, Balu.
Soon after, Balu too died, leaving behind his widow Lilabai who gave birth to a posthumous daughter, the present appellant.
Sometime later Lilabai remarried.
Thereupon Parvati, Bhiku 's surviving wife adopted Vithal, the present respondent in this appeal.
The appel lant, Ashabai on attaining majority filed the present suit for a decree for possession of properties with mesne profits and a decree for money and challenged the power of her grand mother to adopt.
The trial court upheld the adoption of the defendant as valid and dismissed the suit.
The plaintiff Ashabai chal lenged the decision by an appeal.
The Appellate court al lowed the appeal and passed a decree in her favour granting the reliefs claimed.
Thereupon the defendants challenged the decree of the first appellate court in the High Court.
The High Court ruled that a Hindu widow 's power to adopt is revived the moment there is nobody to continue the line, and thus the adoption of the respondent was found legal and valid and the decree in favour of the plaintiff appellant was set aside and her suit dismissed.
Hence this appeal by special leave by the plaintiff.
Allowing the appeal in part by decreeing the suit for half share in the suit properties with mesne profits this Court, HELD: There does not appear to by any scope for holding that on the remarriage of the son 's widow the power of son 's mother to adopt revives.
[467F] In the instant case, on the death of Balu, the responsi bility for the continuance of the family line fell on his widow Lilabai by the power of adoption vesting in her and the power of Parvati to adopt was extin 465 guished permanently and is not revived even on Lilabai 's remarriage.
Consequently the adoption of the first defendant was invalid in the eye of law and he did not get any inter est in the suit properties.
[468B] The properties belonged to the joint family of which Bhiku was a coparcener.
On his death in 1942 his wife Par vati got under section 3(2) of the Hindu Women 's Rights to Property Act, 1937, the same interest as Bhiku had in the joint family properties.
[468C] The interest which initially devolved on Parvati, howev er, was limited in nature known as the Hindu Women 's estate.
On passing of the Hindu Succession Act, 1957 she became full owner thereof.
[468D] Ram Chandra vs Murlidhar, ; Gurunath vs Kamlabai, ; ; Amrendra Mansingh vs Sanatan Singh, [1933] L.R. 60 I.A. 242; Ramkrishna Ram chandra vs Shamrao, Bom.
526 and Bapuji vs Gangaram, [1941] I.L.R. Nagpur 178, referred to.
