Rule 64, Order XXI CPC empowers the Court executing a decree to bring to sale any property attached by it or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the decree.
The appellant 's land measuring 10 acres was brought to court sale in execution of a decree.
The respondent purchased the land for Rs. 17,000.
The sale was subject to a prior mort gage for Rs.2,000.
The appellant 's application under Order XXI, Rule 90 for setting aside the sale was rejected by the executing court on the ground that the sale was not vitiated by fraud or irregularity.
The appeal against the order was dismissed by the Subordinate Judge.
Before the appellate court the con tention taken on behalf of the appellant was that the exe cuting court ought to have sold only such portion of the land as would satisfy the decretal dues and the sale of the entire 10 acres was illegal and without authority.
The court rejected that contention on the ground that it was a single piece of land and could not have been divided into parcels.
The High Court also dismissed the revision.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, HELD: In all execution proceedings, the court has to first decide whether it is necessary to bring the entire attached property to sale or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the decree.
If the property is large and the decree to be satisfied is small, the court must bring only such portion of the property to sale the proceeds of which would be sufficient to satisfy the claim of the decree holder.
It is a mandate of the legislature which cannot be ignored.
Any sale held without examining this aspect and not in conformity with this requirement would thus be illegal and without jurisdiction.
[453H; In the instant case, the amount claimed in the execution petition was about Rs.2,400.
To realize that amount the land measuring 10 acres was sold for Rs.17,000.
The land is not indivisible.
Nor division is impracticable or undesirable.
Out of 10 acres, the court could have conveniently demarcat ed a portion and sold it.
[454E F] The sale must, therefore, be set aside being in contra vention of the provision of Rule 64, Order XXI CPC.
[454H] Takkaseela Pedda Subba Reddy vs Pujari Padmavathamma & Ors., at 340, referred to.
