Ravinder Kaur, daughter of Gurbachan Singh was married to Satpal Singh in November, 1962.
She died on 25th June, 1983 at about 2.30 P.M.
It was alleged, she committed sui cide because of the harassment, constant taunts and cruel behaviour of her in laws towards her and persistent demand for dowry and insinnuations that she was carrying an ille gitimate child.
It is alleged, provoked by the aforesaid conduct and behaviour she committed suicide.
The father in law, mother in law and the husband of the deceased have been the abetters of the crime and the deceased died of second to third degree burns.
The learned Additional Sessions Judge on the totality of evidence on record held that the accused were guilty of abetment to suicide and as such punishable under Section 306 of the I.P.C.
On appeal by the accused the High Court was of the view that the guilt of the accused had not been proved and as such acquitted them.
The complainant and father of the deceased aggrieved by the order of the High Court preferred these appeals by way of special leave to appeal.
This Court holding that the order of acquittal made by the High Court is not sustainable and affirming the conviction of the accused under section 306 of I.P.C. and the sentence imposed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Amritsar, HELD: (Per Sabyasachi Mukharji J. ) Abetment is a sepa rate and distinct offence provided the thing abetted is an offence.
Abetment does not involve the actual commission of the crime abetted; it is a crime apart.
[295G] Criminal charges must be brought home and proved beyond all reasonable doubts.
While civil case may be proved by mere preponderance of evidence, in criminal cases the prose cution must prove the 293 charge beyond reasonable doubt.
There must not be any 're asonable doubt ' of the guilt of the accused in respect of the particular offence charged.
The courts must strictly be satisfied that no innocent person innocent in the sense of not being guilty of the offence of which he is charged is convicted.
even at the risk of letting of some guilty per sons.
Even after the introduction of section 493A of the I.P.C. and section 113A of the Indian Evidence Act, the proof must be beyond any shadow of reasonable doubt.
There is a higher standard of proof in criminal cases than in civil cases, but there is no absolute standard in either of the cases.
[296C F] The standard adopted must be the standard adopted by a prudent man which, of course, may vary from case to case, circumstances to circumstances.
Exaggerated devotion to the rule of benefit of doubt must not nurture fanciful doubts of lingering suspicions and thereby destroy social defence.
Justice cannot be made sterile on the plea that it is better to let hundred guilty escape than punish an innocent.
Let ting guilty escape is not doing justice, according to law.
[296F] (Per B.C. Ray, J): Circumstantial evidence as well as the prosecution witnesses in the instant case clearly prove beyond doubt that the accused instigated and abetted Ravind er Kaur, deceased in the commission of the offence by com mitting suicide by burning herself.
[306G] The findings arrived at by the Trial Court after consid ering and weighing the entire evidences are unexceptional.
The findings arrived at by the High Court without consider ing properly the circumstantial evidence as well as the evidences of the prosecution witnesses cannot be sustained.
As such the findings of the High Court are liable to be reversed and set aside.
[306H; 307A] The suicide having been committed within a period of seven years from the date of her marriage in accordance with the provisions of Section 113A the Court may presume having regard to all the other circumstances of the case that such suicide had been abetted by the husband and his relations.
Therefore, the findings arrived at by the Additional Ses sions Judge are quite in accordance with the provisions of this section and the findings of the High Court that the accused persons could not be held to have instigated or abetted the commission of offence, is not sustainable in law.
[308C D] Section 113A of the Indian Evidence Act was inserted in the Statute Book by Act 46 of 1983 whereas the offence under Section 306, I.P.C. was committed on June, 23, 1983 i.e. prior to the insertion of the 294 said provisions in the Indian Evidence Act.
[308E] Bardendra Kumar Ghosh, Mancini vs Director of Public Prosecutions, Woolmington vs The Director of Public Prosecutions; , , Bater vs Bater, [1950] 2 AET 458 at 459.
Wazir Chand and Anr.
vs State of Haryana with State of Haryana vs Wazir Chand and Anr.
, [1989] I SCC 244, Sat Pal vs Delhi Administration, ; at 30.
Blyth vs Blyth, Herridge ' vs Herridge, [1966] I AER 93, Brij Lal vs Prem Chand & Anr.
, Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
& P. 574, refered to.
