The Respondent assessee used to manufacture talcum powder and face powder and were clearing the same on payment of excise duty.
The assessee claimed deduction of cost of packing for transportation in respect of small packings of powder ranging from 0.27 paise to 0.76 paise per dozen packings and the same was first approved by the Department but later the Department having noticed that the small packs were first packed in dozen, and thereafter packed in second ary packings for easy transportation to the wholesale deal er, disallowed the claim of deduction.
The Assistant Collector in view of this Court 's decision in postmanufacturing expenses cases took the view that the amount claimed by the Respondent was not deductible and accordingly issued a show cause notice to the Respondent raising a demand on the respondent to pay the differential duty on the cost of secondary packings which was stated to be Rs.3,46,151.92 P. for the period from 2.12.85 to 31.5.1986.
The Asstt Collector by his order dated 27.2.87 disallowed the Respondent 's claim for exclusion of the cost of packing for transportation and thus rejected the claim.
The Respondent preferred an appeal to the Collector of Customs but did not succeed and thus appealed to the Cus toms, Excise and (;old (Control) Tribunal.
The Respondent relied on the decision of this Court in Union of India vs Godfrey Philips India Ltd.; , and contended that in view of the decision of this Court, the cost of third stage packing, the outer cartons, intended for transport could be included in the assessable value only if packing was necessary for the sale of goods in the wholesale market.
The Tribunal however relying on the decision of this Court in Union of India & Ors.
vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd., ; held that the Cost of outer or bigger cartons in which the smaller cartons containing powder tins are 480 packed is not includible in the assessable value as the delivery of the goods can be taken in smaller cartons at the factory gate by a buyer in the course of wholesale trade.
Being aggrieved by that decision the Revenue came up in appeal to this Court under Section 35L(b) of the Act.
Allowing the appeal and remanding the case to the Tribu nal with directions, this Court, HELD: (Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. ) What is to be included in the value has to be determined in terms of Section 4(4)(d)(i) of the Act.
[485F] The question is not for what purpose a particular kind of packing is done but the test is whether a particular packing is one in order to put the goods in the condition in which they are generally sold in the wholesale market at the factory gate and if they are generally sold in the wholesale market at the factory gate in a certain packed condition, whatever may be the reason for such packing, the cost of such packing would be includible in the value of the goods for assessment to excise duty.
[490B C] In the present case, it has been factually found by the Collector that the talcum powder and face powder are packed either in metal containers or in plastic containers, and thereafter they are put in dozen packing also of cardboard packings, which are inner cartons, and contain one dozen.
The same are then put in the master carton for purpose of delivery to wholesale dealers.
[490C D] The correct position seems to be that the cost of that much of packings, be they primary or secondary, which are required to make the articles marketable would be includible in the value.
How much packing is necessary to make the goods marketable is a question of fact to be determined by application of the correct approach.
Packing which is pri marily done or mainly done for protecting the goods, and not for making the goods marketable should not be included.
[491H; 492A] The Tribunal was in error in approaching the problem before it by looking at the question whether the goods packed in the smaller cartons could be sold in a wholesale market in the course of wholesale trade at the factory gate without the outer cartons in which the smaller 481 cartons are packed.
The question is not whether these goods could be so sold but the question is whether these goods are so sold usually and as such used to become marketable in such manner.
[492B C] (Per section Ranganathan, J.) Section 4(4)(d)(i) of the Act lays down that where goods are delivered by the factory gate in a packed condition, the cost of the packing should be included in the assessable value.
The clause makes no distinction between primary and secondary packing or further subsequent packing.
[492G] There is therefore, much to be said for the view that, in judging the condition of packing whose cost is to be included in the assessable value, one should go by the conduct of the parties and the nature of the packing in which the goods generally are not, can be placed in the wholesale market.
[493H; 494A] M/s. Hindustan Polymers vs The Collector of Central Excise, case, referred to.
