The appellant/petitioner company Good Year India Limit ed a registered dealer both under the Haryana General Sales Tax Act, 1973 and , was manufac turing automobile tyres and tubes at Ballabgarh in the State of Haryana.
For the said manufacturing activity it was purchasing various kinds of raw materials both within the State and from outside the State of Haryana.
The Company was despatching these manufactured goods viz. tyres and tubes to its own branches and sales depots outside the State of Haryana.
The assessing authority imposed upon the appellant company the purchase tax under section 9 of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act, 1973 in view of the despatches made by it of the manufactured goods to its various depots out side the State.
The petitioner company filed writ petition in the Punjab and Haryana High Court challenging the validity of the Notification levying the tax.
A Division Bench of the High Court allowed the petition holding that disposal of goods being separate and 'distinct from despatch thereof, a mere despatch of goods out Of the State by a dealer to his own branch while retaining both 'the title and possession there of does not come within the ambit of the phrase "disposes of the manufactured goods in any manner otherwise than by way of sale", as employed in Section 9(i)(a)(ii) of the Act.
Accordingly the High Court set aside the assessment orders and quashed the impugned Notification as ultra vires of section 9 on the ground that whereas Section 9 provided only for the levy of purchase tax On the disposal of the manufac tured goods, the impugned Notification makes mere despatch of goods to the dealer themselves taxable.
To override the effect of the said judgment the Haryana Legislature enacted Haryana General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act 1983 where by Section 9 of the Act was amended with retro spective effect to include within its sweep the despatch of manufactured goods to a place outside the State in any manner otherwise than by way of sale.
The impugned Notifica tion and the con 513 sequential action taken thereunder were also validated.
The petitioner company filed writ petitions challenging the assessments.
The High Court allowed the petitions hold ing section 9(1)(b) of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act 1973 as amended by the Haryana General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1983 in so far as it levied a purchase tax on the consignment of goods outside the State in the course of inter State trade or commerce was beyond the legislative competence of the State of Haryana and was void and inoperative because it intruded and trespassed into an arena exclusively meant for taxation by the Union of India under Entry 92 B of List I of the Seventh Schedule.
Accord ingly the High Court set aside the amended provisions of section 9 as also the retrospective validation of the Noti fication and the consequential validation of all actions taken thereunder.
Against this decision of the High Court, State of Haryana preferred Special Leave Petitions in this Court.
During the pendency of these Special Leave Petitions, the assessing authority issued Show cause notices asking the petitioner company to show cause why in addition to the purchase tax, it should not be liable to penalty as well.
The Petitioner company again filed writ petitions in the Punjab & Haryana High Court challenging the validity of these notices.
In the meantime a Full Bench of the High Court decided the question again and overruling the decision of the earlier Division Bench held that the taxing event was the act of purchase and not the act of despatch of the consignment.
The Full Bench of the High Court held that section 9(1)(b) as amended was neither invalid nor ultra vires.
Against the aforesaid judgment of the Full Bench the Petitioner Company filed appeals in this Court.
All these questions are the subject matters of these appeals.
In the connected appeals, the Food Corporation of India was procuring food grains from the farmers through commis sion agents in tile mandis of Haryana and despatching them to its own branches in the deficit State of the country.
The Corporation branches in the recipient States were supplying these stocks to the State agencies/Fair Price Shops and were also paying tax as per the provisions of the Sales Tax law of the respective States.
Some of the stocks were distribut ed within the State of Haryana for the public distribution system for which sales tax was charged.
and deposited with the sales tax depots as per the Haryana General Sales Tax Act, 1973.
In respect of the inter State despatch of wheat and other food grains by the Food Corporation of India to its own branches tax was attracted at the time of despatch 514 under section 9(1)(c) of the Haryana Act.
The Food Corpora tion of India impugned the levy of tax.
In the other connected appeals the appellant companies Hindustan Lever Ltd. and Wipro Products were manufacturing vanaspati, soaps, chemicals and agro chemi cals.
For the said manufacturing activities, they were purchasing non essential vegetable oil (VNE oil) and other raw materials and were paying purchase tax @4% under section 3 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959.
The VNE oil was subse quently used by the appellant companies in the manufacture of vanaspati and soaps.
The finished products manufactured by the appellant companies viz. vanaspati and soaps used to be despatched outside the State of Maharashtra to their clearing and forwarding agents.
The assessing authority levied additional purchase tax @ 2% under section 13 AA of the Act on the purchase of said goods VNE oil.
The appellant companies filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging the orders of the assessing authority levying the additional tax of 2% and also the vires of section 13 AA of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 under which the additional tax was levied, contending that the addition al tax of 2% levied on raw materials, where the finished goods manufactured therefrom were despatched outside the State was in the nature of consignment tax which was not within the legislative competence of the State Legislature.
The High Court dismissed the petitions holding (i) the additional purchase tax levied under section 13 AA of the Act was on the purchase value of VNE oil used in the manu facturing of goods transferred outside the State and not on the value of the manufactured goods so transferred; (ii) the State Legislature was competent to levy the tax under Entry 54 of the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Consti tution, and (iii) Section 13 AA was not violative of either Article 14 or Article 301 of the Constitution of India.
Against the decision of the High Court appellant compa nies filed appeal in this Court.
Disposing of the matters, this Court, HELD: (Per Mukharji, J.) 1.
Analysing section 9 of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act, 515 1973 it is clear that the two conditions specified, before the event of despatch outside the State as mentioned in section 9(1)(b), namely, (i) purchase of goods in the State and (ii) using them for the manufacture of any other goods in the State, are only descriptive of the goods liable to tax under Section 9(1)(b) in the event of despatch outside the State.
If the goods do not answer both the descriptions cumulatively, even though these are despatched outside the State of Haryana, the purchase of those goods would not be put to tax under Section 9(1)(b).
The liability to pay tax under section 9(1)(b) does not accrue on purchasing the goods simpliciter, but only when these are despatched or consigned out of the State of Haryana.
The section itself does not provide for imposition of the purchase tax on the transaction of purchase of the taxable goods but when fur ther the said taxable goods are used up and turned into independent taxable goods, losing its original identity, and thereafter when the manufactured goods are despatched out side the State ' of Haryana and only then tax is levied and liability to pay tax is created.
It is the cumulative effect of that event which occasions or causes the tax to be im posed.
[539F H; 540A B] 1.1 A taxable event is that which is closely related to imposition.
In the instant section viz. section 9(1)(b) there is such close relationship only with despatch.
The goods purchased are used in manufacture of new independent commodity and thereafter the said manufactured goods are despatched outside the State of Haryana.
In this series of transactions the original transaction is completely eclipsed or cease to exist when the levy is imposed at the third stage of despatch of manufacture.
The levy has no direct connection with the transaction of purchase of raw materi als, it has only a remote connection of lineage.
The mere consignment of goods by a manufacturer to his own branches outside the State does not in any way amount to a sale or disposal of the goods as such.
The consignment or despatch of goods is neither a sale nor a purchase.
The tax imposed under Section 9(1)(b) is a tax on despatch.
The tax on despatch of goods outside the territory of the State cer tainly is in the course of inter State trade or commerce and amounts to imposition of consignment tax, and hence the latter part of section 9(1)(b) is ultra vires and void.
[540G H; 542H; 543A; 544E; 545A] Tata Iron & Steel Co. vs State of Bihar, ; , referred to.
Good Year India Ltd. vs State of Haryana, 53 STC 163 and Bata India Ltd. vs State of Haryana & Anr., 54 STC 226, approved.
516 Des Raj Pushap Kumar Gulati vs The State of Punjab, 58 STC 393, overruled.
Yusuf Shabeer & Ors.
vs State of Kerala & Ors., 32 STC 359; Coffee Board vs Commissioner of Commercial Taxes & Ors., 60 STC 142 and Coffee Board, Karnataka vs Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Karnataka, 70 STC 162, distinguished.
State of Tamil Nadu vs M.K. Kandaswami, 36 STC 191; Ganesh Prasad Dixit vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, M.P., [1969] 24 STC 343 and Malabar Fruit & Company vs Sales Tax Officer, Pallai, 30 STC 537, distinguished.
1.2 The effect of the Constitution (Forty sixth Amend ment) Act, 1982 is that the field of taxation on the con signment/despatch of goods in the course of inter State trade or commerce expressly comes within the purview of the legislative competence of the Parliament.
[543H] 2.
If section 9(1)(b) is ultra vires, the penalty pro ceedings would automatically go as they are in substance, based on the violation of section 9(1)(b) of the Act and the consequent proceedings flowing therefrom.
[545B] 3.
Section 24(3) of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act, 1973 without making any change in the substantive provision purports to give a direction to ignore the judgments in Goodyear and Bata India Ltd. cases.
This provision is void.
[546B] Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Broach Borough Munici pality, [1969] 2 SCC 283 and Dy.
Commissioner of Sales Tax (Law) Board of Revenue (Taxes) vs M/s Thomas Stephen & Co. Ltd. Quilon; , , followed.
In respect of inter State despatch of wheat and other food grains by Food Corporation of India to its own branch es, tax is attracted at the time of despatch under Section 9(1)(c) of the Haryana Act.
Section 9 is the charging sec tion for taxation in case where the goods are purchased for export.
There is no other provision for levy of purchase or sales tax in such cases of export.
[547B] 4.1 No tax is payable under the Haryana Act when exports outside the State take place either in the course of inter State sale or export out of the territory of India.
But the tax is payable for sale in the course 517 of inter State trade and commerce i.e. under the .
It is only when the goods are despatched/consigned to the depots of the FCI in other States that tax is levied under section 9 of the Haryana Act.
This is in addition to the sales tax paid by the FCI on the sale of grains in the recipient States.
In view of sections 14 & 15 of the , it becomes clear that wheat is one of the commodities specified as 'declared goods ' and in respect of which the intention is clear that the tax is payable only once on the declared goods.
In the case of inter State sale if any tax has been paid earlier on declared goods inside the State the same is to be refunded to the dealer who is paying tax on such inter State Sales.
On these transactions no tax is liable in the recipient State, while in case of inter State despatch es, the tax is leviable twice.
Section 9(1)(c), which inso far as it purports to tax, exports, is beyond the legisla tive competence of the State of Haryana.
[547E G] 5.
The incidence of the levy of additional tax of two paise in the rupee under Section 13 AA of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 is not on the purchase of goods, but such a levy is attracted only when (a) the goods which so pur chased on payment of purchase tax are used in the manufac ture of taxable goods; and (b) the goods so manufactured are despatched to his own place of business or to his agent 's place of business outside the State.
Therefore, the inci dence of tax is attracted not merely on the purchase but only when the goods so purchased are used in the manufacture of taxable goods and are despatched outside the State.
The incidence of additional tax has no nexus with the purchase of the raw materials.
[553A B; D] 5.1 Purchase tax under section 3 of the Act is attracted when the taxable event i.e. the purchase of goods occurs but the taxable event for the imposition of additional tax of two paise in the rupee occurs only when the goods so pur chased are used in the manufacture of taxable goods and such taxable goods are despatched outside the State by a dealer manufacturer.
The goods which are despatched are different products from the goods on the purchase of which purchase tax was paid.
It is therefore not possible to accept the argument that the chargeable event was lying dormant and is activated only on the occurrence of the event of despatch.
[553E; 556F; 557C] 5.2 The charging event is the event the occurrence of which immediately attracts the charge.
Taxable event cannot be postponed to the occurrence of the subsequent condition.
In that event, it would be the subsequent condition the occurrence of which would attract the Charge which will be taxable event.
Therefore the charge under 518 section 13 AA is a duty on despatch.
Accordingly this charge can not be sustained.[557D] The Bill to amend section 20 of the and section 3 of the Central Excises & Salt Act, [1944]; , ; M/s Guruswamy & Co. vs State of Mysore, ; Mukunda Murari Chakravarti & Ors.
vs Pabitramoy Ghosh & Ors., ; Kedar Nath Jute Mfg. Co. Ltd. vs C.I.T., 82 ITR SC 363; State of M.P. vs Shyam Charan Shukla, 29 STC SC 215; R.C. Jail vs Union of India, [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 436; Union of India vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd., ; and State of Karnataka vs Shri Ranganatha Reddy, ; , referred to.
Wipro Products vs State of Maharashtra, [1989] 72 STC 69 Bom.
, Reversed.
5.3 Imposition of a duty or tax in every case would not tantamount per se to any infringement of Article 301 of the Constitution.
Only such restrictions or impediments which directly or immediately impede free flow of trade, commerce and intercourse fail within the prohibition imposed by Article 301.
A tax in certain cases may directly and immedi ately restrict or hamper the flow of trade.
but every impo sition of tax does not do so.
Every case must be judged on its own facts and its own setting of time and circumstances.
Unless the court first comes to the finding on the available material whether or not there is an infringement of the guarantee under Article 301 the further question as to whether the Statute is saved under Article 304(b) does not arise.
[558B C] 5.4 In the instant case.
the goods taxed do not leave the State in the shape of raw material, which change their form in the State itself and there is no question of any direct, immediate or substantial hindrance to a free flow of trade.
Therefore Section 13 AA of the Bombay Sales Tax Act 1959 is not violative of Article 301.
[558D E] Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs The State of Assam & Ors., ; ; The Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. vs The State of Rajasthan, [1963] 1 SCR 491; Andhra Sugars Ltd. vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; ; State of Madras vs N.K. Nataraja Mudaliar, ; and State of Kerala vs A.B. Abdul Khadir & Ors., ; , referred to.
Kalyani Stores vs The State of Orissa & Ors., ; , relied on.
519 6.
The provisions of constitutional changes have to be construed not in a narrow isolationism but on a much wider spectrum and the principles laid down in Heydon 's case are instructive.
[529H; 530A] Black Clawson International Ltd. vs Papierwerke Waldhof Aschaffenburg, ; , referred.
Heydon 's case; , , relied on.
In construing the expressions of the Constitution to judge whether the provisions of a statute are within the competence of the State Legislature, one must bear in mind that the Constitution is to be construed not in a narrow or pedantic sense.
The Constitution is not to be construed as mere law but as the machinery by which laws are to be made.
[533F] James vs Commonwealth of Australia, ; The Attorney General for the State of New South Wales vs The Brewery Employees Union etc.
; , ; Re.
Central Provinces & Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubri cants Taxation Act 1938, A.I.R. 1939 F.C.I. and The Province of Madras vs M/s Boddu Paidanna & Sons, A.I.R. 1942 F.C. 33, referred to.
The nomenclature of the Act is not conclusive and for determining the true character and nature of a particular tax, with reference to the legislative competence of a particular Legislature, the Court will look into its pith and substance.
[543H; 544A] Governor General in Council vs Province of Madras, [1945] 72 I.A. 91 and Ralla Ram vs The Province of East Punjab, A.I.R. 1949 F.C. 81, referred to.
The doctrine of pith and substance means that if an enactment substantially falls within the power expressly conferred by the Constitution upon the Legislature which enacted it, it cannot be held to be invalid merely because it incidentally encroaches upon matters assigned to another legislature.
[555H; 556A] Kerala State Electricity Board vs Indian Aluminium Co., [1976] 1 S.C.R. 552 and Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee & Ors.
vs Bank of Commerce, A.I.R. 1947 PC 60, referred to.
9.1 The true test to find out what is pith and substance of the 520 legislation is to ascertain the true intent of the Act which will determine the validity of the Act.
[577B] 10.
There are three stages in the imposition of tax.
There is the declaration of liability, that is the part of the Statute which determines what persons in respect of what property are liable.
Next, there is the assessment Liabili ty does not depend on assessment, that exhypothesi has already been fixed.
But assessment particularises the exact sum which a person is liable to pay.
Lastly comes the method of recovery if the person taxed does not voluntarily pay.
[539B C] Whitney vs Commissioner of Inland Revenue, [1926] A.C. 37 and Chatturam & Ors.
vs C.I.T., Bihar, 15 I.T.R. F.C. 302, referred to.
While determining nature of a tax, though the stand ard or the measure on which the tax is levied may be a relevant consideration, it is not the conclusive considera tion.
[556C] Governor General in Council vs Province of Madras, [1945] 72 I.A. 91; R.R. Engineering Co. vs Zila Parishad Bareilly & Anr., ; ; In Re A reference under the Government of Ireland Act, 1920, and Navnitlal C. Javeri vs K.K. Sen, Appellate Asstt.
Commis sioner of Income Tax 'D ' Range Bombay; , , referred to.
The liability to tax would be determined with reference to the interpretation of the Statute which creates it.
It cannot be determined by referring to another Statute.
[555G] 13.
In fiscal legislations normally a charge is creat ed.
The. mischief of taxation occurs on the happening of the taxable event.
Different taxes have different taxable events.
A taxing event is that event the occurrence of which immediately attracts the levy or the charge of tax.
What is the taxable event or what necessitates taxation in an appro priate Statute must be found by construing the provisions.
The main test for determining the taxable event is that on the happening of which the charge is affixed.
[552H; 553A: 552G: 533E; 539B] 14.
Fiscal laws must be strictly construed.
n is not permissible to make assumptions and presumptions in a fiscal provision.
[536H; 538G] C.S.T., U.P. vs The Modi Sugar Mills Ltd., ; and Baidyanath Ayurved Bhawan (P) Ltd., Jhansi, vs Excise Commis 521 sioner, U.P. & Ors., ; , referred to.
While interpreting a Statute a reasonable construc tion should be followed and literal construction may be avoided if that defeats the manifest object and purpose of the Act.
[555F] Commissioner of Wealth tax, Bihar & Orissa vs Kripashan kar Dayashankar Worah, and Income Tax Commis sioners for City of London vs Gibbs, 10 I.T.R. (Suppl.) 121 H.L., referred to.
The Entries in the Constitution only demarcate and legislative fields of the respective legislatures and do not confer legislative powers as such.
[544H; 545A] 17.
A precedent is an authority only for what it actual ly decides and not for what may remotely or even logically follows from it.
[537E] Quinn vs Leathem, ; and The State of Orissa vs Sudhansu Sekhar Misra & Ors., ; , followed.
17.1 A decision on a question which has not been argued cannot be treated as a precedent.
[542B] Rajput Ruda Maha & Ors.
vs State of Gujarat, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 353, followed.
(Per Ranganathan, J.) (Concurring) 1.
Section 9 of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act, 1973 as well as section 13 AA of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 purport only to levy a purchase tax.
The tax, however, becomes exigible not on the occasion or event of purchase but only later.
It materialises only if the purchaser (a) utilises the goods purchased in the manufacture of taxable goods, and (b) despatches the goods so manufactured (other wise then by way of sale) to a place of business situated outside the State.
The legislation, however, is careful to impose the tax only on the price at which the raw materials are purchased and not on the value of the manufactured goods consigned outside the State.
[559G H; 560A] 2.
It is one thing to levy a purchase tax where the character and class of goods in respect of which the tax is levied is described in a particular manner and a case like the present where the tax, though described as purchase tax, actually becomes effective with reference to 522 a totally different class of goods and, that too, only on the happening of an event which is unrelated to the act of purchase.
[560D E] 2.1 The "taxable event", if one might use the expression often used in this context, is the consignment of the manu factured goods and not the purchase.
[560E] 2.2 The background of the Constitutional (Forty sixth Amendment) indicates that there were efforts at sales tax avoidance by sending goods manufactured in a State out of raw materials purchased inside to other States by way of consignments rather than by way of sales attracting tax.
This situation lends force to the view that the State, unable to tax the exodus directly, attempted to do so indi rectly by linking the levy ostensibly to the "purchases" in the State.
[560G H] Andhra Sugar Ltd. & Anr.
vs State, ; , re ferred to.
State of Tamil Nadu vs Kandaswami, [1975] 36 S.T.C. 191, distinguished.
