Four large industrial units owned by the respondent company were closed down with effect from September 9, 1984 resulting in denial of employment to about 10,000 employees.
In the writ petition, the workmen sought immediate payment of salary and wages for the period since closure and compen sation as per the amendment to the Industrial Disputes Act in 1984 and payment of dues under the provident fund ac count, gratuity etc.
The High Court had in the meantime on May 22, 1986 appointed a provisional liquidator under the Companies Act.
This Court on October 29, 1987 had directed the Central Government to make a reference to the Board constituted in terms of s.4 of the Sick Industrial Companies Act, 1985, which had come into force, to frame a scheme as contemplated under section 10 thereof for revival of the company and submit it for consideration of the Court within four months time.
On September 7, 1988, the Court took note of the fact that the State of Bihar was inclined for nationalisation of the company and directed a committee with the Industries Secre tary to the Union of India as its Chairman to be immediately constituted to work out the modalities of nationalisation.
On December 13, 1988 the Court considered the report of the committee indicating that three units, excepting paper and boards unit, were viable and could be revived, and adjourned the matter to give an opportunity to the parties to explore the possibilities of revival of the viable units.
Till August 8, 1989 no substantial progress had been made.
There after the State of Bihar and the Union of India filed their statements separately and the memorandum prepared by the Attorney General was also made available to the Court.
In this background the Court, HELD: 1.
Living to about 10000 families has been denied for over five years and apart from national loss, the work men have been 616 put to serious jeopardy.
There is a huge amount of wages outstanding to them.
Several financial institutions have large dues to recover from the company.
The Trustees of the Debenture Trust Deeds have also sought to intervene to maintain their claim.
Apart from these, the owners of the company have also pleaded that they are entitled to compen sation in the event of the properties of the company being taken away by way of nationalisation.
A lot of assets are fast becoming useless and will soon become junk.
If the company gets liquidated, the liabilities would turn out to be far in excess of the assets and notwithstanding first or second charge on the assets, the creditors may not apprecia bly benefit.
It is, therefore, of paramount importance that the company in respect of viable units should be revived and allowed to come into production.
[620D, A C] 2.1 The State of Bihar is directed to appoint an autho rised officer to be the Rehabilitation Administrator.
[620H] 2.2 The Provisional Liquidator appointed by the High Court shall hand over to the Administrator all the assets of the company which he had taken over under orders of that Court.
The assets of the company not yet taken over shall vest forthwith in the Administrator.
[621A] 2.3 The assets of the company encumbered with financial and other institutions shall not be available to be proceed ed against for a period of one year, and there shall be a moratorium for a period of one year in regard to proceedings taken and pending or to be taken against the company hereaf ter, and limitation shall remain suspended for the period.
[621D E] 2.4 The State Government of Bihar shall deposit within eight weeks an amount of Rs. 15 crores with the Administra tor against the cost of assets to be taken over.
A similar sum of Rs. 15 crores shall be advanced by the Union of India to the State from out of plan assistance.
The sum paid by the State shall be utilised, in due course for payment of arrears of wages of the workers and for disbursement of secured loans of financial institutions and other parties for which security of the company 's assets had been fur nished.
The Administrator shall open an account with the lead nationalised bank for the State operating at Dalmiana gar into which the two sums of money shall be credited.
[621F H] 2.5 The Administrator shah set up a Committee with a retired 617 High Court Judge, a retired District Judge and an Accounts Officer to examine the claims of the owners of the company and other parties including financial institutions within six months and to report the matter to the Court for direc tions.
[622A] 2.6 An inventory of all the articles shall be made within four weeks.
Steps shall be taken to form a new compa ny within four weeks.
Appointment of technical consultants and other competent officers shall be undertaken within two months.
The retrenched employees shall come back to work in phases.
Steps shall be taken to explore the viability of the paper unit within three months after the company is recom missioned in respect of the three units.
Liberty is given to the parties to apply in the event of necessity.
[622C D & E] 2.7 The case shall remain pending, to be called again on March 1, 1990.
[622H]
