Clause 3(e) of Para 4 of the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme of the Government of India entitles a freedom fighter to pension for having become permanently incapaci tated during firing or lathi charge in the freedom struggle.
The appellant applied for grant of pension on the ground that he had suffered permanent loss of vision in his left eye due to brutal lathi charge by the police against freedom fighters.
His claim of permanent loss of vision in the left eye was duly certified by Government doctors.
The District Collector after making a detailed enquiry, certified the claim of the appellant as a bona fide one and recommended his case for grant of pension.
The State Government also appended their recommendation.
The Ministry of Home Affairs, however, declined to grant pension on the view that loss of vision in one eye did not amount to permanent incapacita tion.
A single Judge of the High Court dismissed appellant 's writ petition and a writ appeal against the said order was also dismissed by a Division Bench.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended for the respondents that the incapacitation under clause 3(e) must not only be permanent but it must also be a total one, and since the appellant had not lost vision in both the eyes the incapacitation, though permanent, was only partial and not total; and that the petitioner had not been able to produce any documentary evidence from official records of the relevant period in support of his claim.
721 Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 The words used in clause 3(e) of Para 4 of the Pension Scheme are "permanently incapacitated" and not 'permanently totally incapacitated".
The measure of test thus laid down by the clause is the permanent nature of the incapacitation and not the total nature of the incapacita tion.
If clause (e) were to be interpreted to include total incapacitation then a freedom fighter who has lost a leg or an arm cannot claim payment of pension on the basis of permanent incapacitation inasmuch as the incapacitation suffered by him is not of both the legs or both the arms.
It would be height of injustice to freedom fighters to construe clause (e) in the said manner.
1724F; 725A B] 1.2 In view of the certificate issued to him by the Government doctors that the appellant had suffered permanent incapacitation of his left eye due to lathi blows received by him during the freedom struggle and the State Government authorities having, after due enquiry, accepted the bona fides of the appellant 's claim and recommended his case for grant of pension the respondents were not justified in refusing to grant him pension under clause (e) of the Scheme.
[724G, 726C, 725E] 2.
No one can really expect official records to have been preserved for a period of 40 years to prove the treat ment given to a freedom fighter for the injuries sustained by him during the freedom struggle.
Hence, the objection relating to non production of official records of the reley ant period by the appellant to prove the sustainment of injury by him .deserves outright rejection as well as out right condemnation.
[726B C]
