The appellant company used to manufacture cement and was granted mining lease for limestone and kankar by the Govern ment of Tamil Nadu in accordance with the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960.
The royalty was fixed under the Mines and Minerals (Regulation & Development) Act, 1957 which is a Central Act by which the control of mines and minerals had been taken over by the Central Government for the regulation and development of minerals.
Sub section 1 of section 115 of the Madras Panchayats Act, 1958 enjoins that there shall be levied in every pan chayat development block, a local cess at the rate of 45 paise on every rupee of land revenue payable to the Govern ment in respect of any land for every Fasli.
An explanation to the said section was added, and was deemed always to have been incorporated by the Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1964.
In this explanation a fiction was created whereby even the royalty payable had been included within the definition of "land revenue".
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the competence of the State legislature to levy cess on royalty.
A learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition holding that the cess levied 693 under section 115 of the Madras panchayats Act was a tax on land and, as such, fell under Entry 49 of the State List of Schedule VII of the Constitution.
The Division Bench dis missed the appellant 's appeal and held that local cess authorised by section 115 was not land revenue but was a charge on the land itself, and section 115 merely quantified the basis of the quantum of land revenue.
The learned Single Judge, as well as the Division Bench, relied on the decision of this Court in H.R.S. Murthy vs Collector of Chittoor, ; Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the levy of cess on royalty in this case was nothing but a tax on royalty and was therefore ultra vires the State legislature.
On the other hand, it was contended that the cess in the present case was a levy in respect of land and could be justified or sustained either under entry 49, 50 or 45 of List II of the 7th Schedule to the Constitu tion.
It was further submitted that the cess having been realised on the basis of the decision of this Court in "H.R.S. Murthy" case, if at all, the Court shall declare the said cess on royalty to be ultra vires prospectively.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (E.S. Venkataramiah, C J, Sabyasachi Mukharji, Ranganath Misra, B.C. Ray, K.N. Singh and section Natarajan, JJ. per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J.) (1) Courts of law are enjoined to gather the meaning of the Constitution from the language used, and although one should interpret the words of the Constitution on the same principles of interpretation as one applied to an ordinary law but these very principles of interpretation compel one to take into account the nature and scope of the Act which requires interpretation.
It has to be remembered that it is a Constitution that requires interpretation.
Constitution is the mechanism under which the laws are to be made and not merely an Act which declares what the law is to be.
[704B C] The Attorney General for the State of New South Wales vs The Brewery Employees Union of New South Wales; , , referred to.
(2) A Constitution must not be construed in any narrow or pedantic sense, and construction most beneficial to the widest possible amplitude of its powers, must be adopted.
A broad and liberal spirit should inspire those whose duty it is to interpret the Constitution, but 694 they are not free to stretch or pervert the language of the enactment in the interest of any legal or constitutional theory, or even for the purposes of supplying omissions or correcting supposed errors.
[704D E F] In re. ' C.P. Berar Sales of Motor Spirit & Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938, [1939] FCR p. 1 and James vs Common wealth of Australia, , referred to.
(3) It is well settled now that the various entries in the three lists are not powers but fields of legislation.
The power to legislate is given by Article 246 and other articles of the Constitution.
[704G] Calcutta Gas Co. vs State of West Bengal, [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 1, referred to.
(4) It is well settled that widest amplitude should be given to the language of these entries, but some of these entries in different lists or in the same list may overlap and sometimes may also appear to be in direct conflict with each other.
Then, it is the duty of the court to find out its true intent and purpose and to examine a particular legislation in its pith and substance to determine whether it fits in one or the other of the lists.
Each general word should be held to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be comprehended in it.
[705A B & D] H.R. Banthia & Ors. etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Union of India vs H.S. Dhillon, ; and D.C. Rataria vs Bhuwalka Brothers Ltd., ; , referred to.
(5) It is clear that over a period of centuries, land revenue in India has acquired a cannot active meaning of share in the produce of land to which the King or the Gov ernment is entitled to receive.
[707B] N.R. Reddy & Ors.
vs State of A.P., [1965] 2 Andhra Law Times 297 and State ofA.P.v.
N.R. Reddy & Ors., ; , referred to.
(6) There is a clear distinction between tax directly on land and tax on income arising from land.
[708C] Raja Jagannath Baksh Singh vs The State of U.P. & Anr.
, ; , referred to.
695 (7) Explanation to section 115(1) itself makes a dis tinction between land revenue as such and royalty which by amendment is deemed to be land revenue.
It is, therefore, recognised by the very force of that explanation and the amendment thereto that the expression 'royalty ' in sections 115 & 116 of the Act cannot mean land revenue property called or conventionally known, which is separate and dis tinct from royalty.
[707D E] (8) In the instant case, cess is not on land, but on royalty, which is included in the definition of 'land reve nue ', None of the three lists of the 7th Schedule of the Constitution permits or authorises a State to impose tax on royalty.
(9) Royalty which is indirectly connected with land, cannot be said to be a tax directly on land as a unit.
Royalty is payable on a proportion of the mineral extracted.
The Act does not use dead rent as a basis on which land is to be valued.
Hence, there cannot be any doubt that the impugned legislation in its pith and substance is a tax on royalty and not a tax on land.
[709E] New Manek Chand Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Allahabad & Ors.
, ; ; S.C. Nawn vs W.T.O. Calcutta & Ors., ; ; Asstt.
Commissioner of Urban Land Tax & Ors.
vs The Buckingham & Carnatic Co. Ltd. etc.; , ; Second Gift 'Fax Officer, Mangalore etc.
vs D.H. Nazareth etc.
; , ; Bhagwan Dass Jain vs Union of India, ; and The Western India Theatres Ltd. vs The Cantonment Board, Poona Cantonment, ; , referred to.
(10) Royalty is directly relatable only to the minerals extracted and on the principle that the general provision is excluded by the special one, royalty would be relatable to entries 23 & 50 of List II, and not entry 49 of List II.
[713D] (11) Royalty is a tax, and as such a cess on royalty being a tax on royalty, is beyond the competence of the State Legislature because section 9 of the Central Act covers the field and the State Legislature is denuded of its competence under entry 23 of List II.
In any event, cess on royalty cannot be sustained under entry 49 of List II as being a tax on land.
Royalty on mineral rights is not a tax on land but a payment for the user of land.
[713F G] 696 Waverly Jute Mills Co. Ltd. vs Raymon & Co. (1) Pvt. Ltd.; , ; Anant Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of Gujarat & Ors., ; The Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs The State of Orissa & Ors., ; ; State of Orissa vs M.A. Tulloch & Co., ; ; Baijnath Kedia vs State of Bihar & Ors., ; M/s. Laxminarayana Mining Co. Bangalore vs Taluk Dev Board, AIR ; M. Lal & Ors.
vs The State of Bihar & Ors.
, AIR 1965 Patna 491; Bherulal vs State of Rajasthan, AIR ; Dr. S.S. Sharma & Anr.
vs State of Punjab & Ors., AIR ; Saurashtra Cement & Chemi cals India Ltd. vs Union of India & Anr., ; L.N. Agarwalla & Ors.
vs State of Orissa, AIR 1983 Orissa 210 and M/s Hira lal Rameshwar Prasad & Ors.
vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors., M.P. High Court Misc.
Petition No. 410/83, referred to.
H.R.S. Murthy vs Collector of Chittoor & Anr., ; , overruled.
(12) The amounts of cess have been collected on the basis of the decision of this Court in H.R.S. Murthy 's case.
The Court is therefore justified in declaring the levy of the said cess under section 115 to be ultra vires the power of the State legislature prospectively only.
The respondents will not be liable for any refund of cess already paid or collected.
[714C D & E] Per G.L. Oza, J. (1) Sub clause (1) of Section 115 provides for levy of 45 naya paise for every rupee of land revenue payable to the Government.
In the explanation a fiction is created whereby even the royalty payable has been included within the defi nition of 'land revenue '.
[718A] (2) The language of Entries 23 and 50 in List II clearly subjects the authority or jurisdiction on the State Legisla ture to any enactment made by the Parliament.
Entry 23 talks of regulation and Entry 50 talks of taxes on mineral rights.
It therefore could not be disputed that if the cess imposed under section 115 of the Madras Panchayats Act is a cess or tax on mineral rights then that jurisdiction could be exer cised by the State Legislature subject to the law enacted by the Parliament.
[715D E] (3) Unit of charge of royalty is not only land but land + labour + capital.
It is therefore clear that if royalty is a tax or an imposition or a levy, it is not on land alone but it is a levy or a tax on mineral (land), 697 labour and capital employed in extraction of the mineral.
It therefore is clear that royalty if it is imposed by the Parliament it could only be a tax not only on land but on the three things stated above.
[718H; 719A] (4) When the Legislature included royalty, it went beyond its jurisdiction under Entry 49 of List II and there fore clearly is without the authority of law.
[719D] (5) This may lead to an interesting situation.
As this cess on royalty is without the authority, the result will be that the cess is levied so far as lands other than the lands in which mines are situated are concerned but lands where mines are situated this levy of cess is not in accordance with the law.
This anamoly could have been averted if the Legislature had used words 'surface rent ' in place of royal ty.
Even if the lands where mines are situated and which are subject to licence and mining leases, even for those lands there is a charge on the basis of the surface of the land which is Sometimes described as surface rent or sometimes also as 'dead rent '.
[719E F]
