Respondent No. 1 the Provident Fund Commissioner called upon the appellant Food Corporation of India to deposit contribution payable by it under the Employees ' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the scheme thereunder, in respect of workers employed by the contrac tors appointed by the appellant for handling storing and transporting food grains and other articles in its depots in Rajasthan.
On appellant 's non compliance, Respondent No. 1 made an order under Section 7A of the Act determining the amount payable by the appellant.
Against the aforesaid order, the appellant filed writ petition before the High Court, which dismissed the same.
Hence the appeal, by spe cial leave, by the appellant Corporation.
It was contended that the appellant was denied a reason able opportunity to produce actual proof of identification of workers in respect of whom contribution was payable inasmuch as Respondent No. 1 neither gave notice to contrac tors, who were in possession of the relevant lists of work ers, nor made them parties to the proceedings, despite its repeated requests.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The Commissioner, while conducting an inquiry under Section 7A of the Employees, Provident Fund and Mis cellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 has the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure for trying a suit.
Thus, the Commissioner is authorised to enforce attendance in person and also to examine any person on oath.
He has the power requiring the discovery and pro duction of documents.
This power was given to the Commis sioner to decide not abstract questions of law, but only to determine actual concrete differences in payment of contri bution and other dues by identifying the 756 workmen.
The Commissioner should exercise all his powers to collect all evidence and collate all material before coming to proper conclusion.
That is the legal duty of the Commis sioner.
It would be failure to exercise the jurisdiction particularly when a party to the proceedings requests for summoning evidence from a particular person.
[757H; 758A; F H] In the instant case, the appellant Corporation had some problems in collating the lists of all workers engaged in depots scattered at different places.
It requested the respondent Commissioner to summon the contractors to pro duce the respective lists of workers engaged by them.
Howev er, the appellant Commissioner did not summon the contrac tors, nor the lists maintained by them.
The matter is, therefore, remitted to the Commissioner for fresh disposal.
[757F; 759A]
