Respondent No. 1 is a public trust.
The trust owns several properties.
On the ground that the trust properties were improperly and fraudulently alienated, a suit was fried under Section 92 CPC for removing the trustee and appointing a new trustee and to recover trust properties alienated by the said trustee.
The sub judge permitted the trustees to continue and framed a scheme decree for the future manage ment and administration of trust.
The scheme also granted liberty to the parties to apply to the sub court for further directions as regards the administration of the trust.
The trustees filed an interim application before the sub court and obtained permission to sell two properties.
The appellants filed an interim application for setting aside the order granting permission to the trust for selling the two properties, alleging that the negotiated price was only about 20% of the market price.
The sub judge dismissed the application on the ground that the applicants had no locus standi to file the application under clauses 13 and 14 of the Scheme decree as they were not parties to the Origi nal suit.
On revision the High Court also came to the conclusion that the application was not maintainable.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the said judgment of the High Court.
On behalf of the appellants, it was contended that since the suit under section 92 CPC being a representative suit, the scheme decree binds not only the parties thereto, but all those who are interested in the trust.
The contention of the Respondents was that only the two persons 761 who filed the original suit can be considered as "parties" in terms of clause 14 of the scheme decree and since the appellants were not plaintiffs in the suit, they have no locus standi to file an application under clauses 13 and 14 of the scheme decree.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1 A suit under Section 92 of the Code is a suit of a special nature for the protection of Public rights in the Public Trusts and charities.
The suit is fundamentally on behalf of the entire body of persons who are interested in the trust.
It is for the vindication of public rights.
The beneficiaries of the trust, which may consist of public at large, may choose two or more persons amongst themselves for the purpose of filing a suit under Section 92 of the Code and the suit title in that event would show only their names as plaintiffs.
The named plaintiffs being the repre sentatives of the public at large which is interested in the trust all such interested persons would be considered in the eyes of law to be parties to the suit.
A suit under Section 92 of the Code is thus a representative suit and as such binds not only the parties named in the suit title but all those who are interested in the trust.
It is for that reason that explanation VI to Section 11 of Code constructively bar by res judicata the entire body of interested persons from reagitating the matters directly and substantially in issue in an earlier suit under Section 92 of the Code.
[766B C] 1.2 A suit whether under Section 92 of the Civil Proce dure Code or under Order 1 Rule 8 of Civil Procedure Code is by the representatives of large number of persons who have a common interest.
The very nature of a representative suit makes all those who have common interest in the suit as parties.
In the instant case all persons who are interested in the respondent trust are parties to the original suit and as such can exercise their rights under clauses 13 and 14 of scheme decree.
[766H; 767A] Raje Anandrao vs Shamrao and Ors., ; ; Ahmed Adam Sait and Ors.
vs Inayatullah Mekhri and Ors., ; relied on.
2.1 The property of religious and charitable endowments or institutions must be jealously protected because large segment of the community has beneficial interest therein.
Sale by private negotiations which is not visible to the public eye and may even give rise to public suspicion should not, therefore, be permitted unless there are special 762 reasons to justify the same.
Care must be taken to fix the reserve price after ascertaining the market value for safe guarding the interest of the endowment.
[767F G] 2.2 The orders of subordinate court dated October 27, 1984 and January 23, 1985 permitting the sale of the two properties and consequent sale in favour of the respondents, are set aside.
The properties in question may be sold by public auction by giving wide publicity regarding the date, time and place of public auction.
The offer of Rs. 10 lacs made in this Court will be treated as minimum bid of the person who has given the offer and deposited ten percent of the amount in this Court.
It will also be open to the re spondents/purchasers to participate in the auction and compete with others for purchasing the properties.
The respondents vendees from the trust shall be entitled to refund of the price paid by them with 10% interest from the date of payment of the amount till the date of auction of the property.
They will also be entitled to compensation for any superstructure put up by them in the properties includ ing compensation for any additions or improvements made by them to the building and the property.
[767H; 768A C] Chenchu Ram Reddy and Anr.
vs Govt.
of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
, [1986] 3 SCC 391, relied on.
