The respondent lodged certain fully paid up shares with the appellant company for transfer in his name.
The Board of Directors of the Appellant company disapproved the registra tion of the shares.
The respondent filed an application under section 155 of the for rectifica tion of the share register i.e. for inserting his name in the share register as a registered share holder which was allowed by a single judge of the High Court.
The Company preferred an appeal which was dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the company that (i) the Company had residuary inherent power to refuse the registration of the transfer of shares; (ii) the words "or otherwise" in Article 42 of the Articles of Association and section I 11(2) of the recognise the existence of an inherent power to refuse registration of the transfer of shares; (iii) the applica tion under section 155 was not maintainable as the transfer or had not been made parties therein; and (iv) the company was entitled to examine the correctness of transfer consi 83 deration shown in the transfer deeds and refuse registration of the transfer of shares if the transfer deeds were not duly stamped.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Unless there is any impediment in the transfer of a share of a public limited company, a shareholder has the right to transfer his share.
Correspondingly, in the absence of any impediment in this behalf the transferee of a share is entitled to have a rectification of the share register of the company by inserting his name therein as a registered shareholder of the share transferred to him.
To have such rectification carried out is the right of the transferee and can be defeated by the company or its Direc tors only in pursuance of some power vested in them in this behalf.
Such power has to be specified and provided for.
It may even be residuary but in that case too it should be provided for and traceable either in the Act or the Articles of Association.
Even if the power of refusal is so specified and provided for the registration of a transferred share cannot be refused arbitrarily or for any collateral purpose, and can be refused only for a bona fide reason in the inter est of the company and the general interest of the share holders.
If neither a specific nor residuary power of refus al has been so provided, such power cannot be exercised on the basis of the so called undeclared inherent power to refuse registration on the ground that the company or its Directors take the view that in the interest of the Company and the general interest of the shareholders, registration of the transfer of shares should be refused.
Indeed making a provision in the Act or the Articles of Association etc.
conferring power of refusal would become futile if existence of an inherent power is assumed, for the simple reason that the amplitude of the so called undeclared inherent power would itself take care of every refusal to register the transfer of share.
Assumption of such a power would result in leaving the matter of transfer of share and its registra tion at the mercy and sweet will of the company or its Directors, as the case may be.
[86E H; 87A B] 2.
The objects or purposes for which a company is creat ed should be distinguished from the powers which it can exercise.
So far as refusal to register the transfer of a share is concerned the power has to be specified and within the framework of the said specification.
There is no inher ent power in this behalf.
[90B] In re Smith Knight & Co., IV Chancery Appeal Cases 20; In re National Provincial Marine Insurance Company, V Chan cery Appeal Cases 559; Moffatt vs Parqunar, VII Chancery Division 591; In re 84 Cawley & Co., XLH Chancery Division 209; In re Discoverers Finance Corporation Ltd., [1910] 1 Chancery Division 312 and Sadashiv vs Gandhi Sewa Samaj, AIR 1958 Bom.
247 followed.
Palmer 's Company Law 24th Edn.
p. 121 referred to.
The Conservators of the River Tone vs Ash, 109 English Reports 479; Attorney General vs The Lord Mayor etc.
of the City of Leeds, [1929] 2 Chancery Division 291; E.M. Muthappa Chettiar vs Salem Rajendra Mills Ltd., XXV Company Cases 283; Life Insurance Corporation of India vs Escorts Ltd. & Ors., [1985] Suppl.3 S.C.R. 909 and Bajaj Auto Ltd. vs N.K. Firodia and Anr., 41 Comp.
Cases 1, distinguished.
In the context in which the words "or otherwise" have been used in sub section (2) of section 111, they only purport to cast a duty or impose an obligation of giving notice of refusal to register the transfer of a share irre spective of the fact whether such refusal is under the Articles of Association of the Company or de hors the Arti cles, which would include even a case where such refusal has been made arbitrarily or for any collateral purpose.
A fortiorari, this would be the interpretation of even Article 42 of the Articles of Association of the Company inasmuch as on its plain language which, except for the provision for punishment, is in pari materia with sub section (2) of Section 111 of the Act.
The purpose of this Article is the same as of the said sub section (2).
To introduce a concept of either conferment or recognition of a right to refuse registration of the transfer of a share in sub section (2) militates against and runs counter to the very texture and purpose of this subsection.
[88A C; 87E] 4.
The transferor is not a necessary party to an appli cation under section 155 of the Act unless the transfer was disputed by him.
[92B C] 5.
In the instant case, it has been found as a fact by the High Court that it had not been proved that the respond ent had paid higher prices for the shares than those stated in the transfer deeds.
Therefore, there is no justification for interfering with the said finding of fact.
On this finding the transfer deeds could not be termed as unduly stamped and power to refuse the registration of the transfer of shares contemplated by section 108 of the Act could not be invoked.
[92D E]
