The assessee, manufacturer of strawboard, claimed con cessional rates of income tax, development rebate at higher rate under section 33 and deduction under section 80 E of the Income Tax Act, 1961, for the assessment years 1965 66, 1966 67 and 1967 68, on the ground that the manufacture of strawboard was a priority industry.
The claim was rejected by the Income Tax Officer on the ground that the assessee could not be described as a priority industry and that the manufacture of strawboard was not covered by the words 'paper and pulp ' in the relevant Schedules pertaining to the assessment years 1966 67 and 1967 68.
The assessee 's appeals were dismissed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
In second appeals, the Appellate Tribunal accepted the assessee 's plea that the manufacture of strawboard was a priority industry and held that the assessee was entitled to the statutory rebates claimed by it.
On a reference made at the instance of the Revenue, the High Court held that the strawboard industry was covered within the expression 'paper and pulp ' appearing in the relevant Schedules of the income Tax Act.
Dismissing the appeals by the Revenue, this Court, HELD: When provision is made in the context of a law providing for concessional rates of tax for the purpose of encouraging an industrial activity, a liberal construction should be put upon the language of the statute.
[775E F] 773 The provision for rebate has been made for the purpose of encouraging the setting up of new industries, and the industries are those described in the Schedules relevant to the respective assessment years.
When the Schedules refer to 'paper and pulp ', they, in fact, intend to refer to the paper and pulp industry.
The expression has been used com prehensively.
[775D E] The expression 'paper and pulp ' in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 includes paperboard and strawboard.
Newsprint, paperboard and strawboard have been specifically mentioned in the relevant entry in order to make it clear that they are included within the meaning of the word 'paper '.
The process or ' manufacturing straw board is identical with the process of manufacturing paper.
[775G H; 776A] In the circumstances, there is no doubt that the straw board industry is part of the paper and pulp industry and the assessee, whose undertaking was registered in terms of section 10 of the Industries (Development and Regulation), 1951 is entitled to the rebates claimed by it.
[775E]
