Sub clause (iii) of cl.
(c) of section 24(1) of the entitles a person to be admitted as an advocate on a State roll if he has obtained a degree in law after 12th March, 1967 after undergoing three years ' of study in law.
Under sub cl.
(iii) of cl.
(c) a person is considered quali fied for admission as an advocate if he has obtained a degree in law after undergoing a course the duration of which is not less than two academic years commencing from the academic year 1967 68 or any earlier academic year.
Rule 1(1)(c) of of the Bar Council of India Rules, 1975 requires that the course of study in law should have been by regular attendance for the requisite number of lectures, tutorials and moot courts and practical training.
The petitioner had obtained his Bachelor of Laws (Aca demic) degree in 1980 as a private candidate.
He then pur sued the third year of law as a regular student from the Kanpur University and obtained the professional degree in 1982.
Thereafter, he applied to the State Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana for enrolment as an advocate under the Act.
The State Bar Council denied enrolment on the ground that he had not fulfilled the conditions laid down in Rule 1(1)(c) of the Rules.
Dismissing the writ petition, HELD: A candidate desiring enrolment as an advocate under the must fulfil the conditions mentioned in section 24(1)(c)(iii) or section 24(1)(c)(iiia) read with Rule 1(1)(c) of the Bar Council of India Rules, 1975.
In the instant case, the petitioner failed to do so.
His applica tion for enrolment was, therefore, rightly rejected.
[866C] Sub clause (iii) of section 24(1)(c) when read along with Rule 1(1)(c) 863 intends that the three years course of study in law must be pursued by maintaining regular attendance.
So also, in a case failing under sub cl.
(iiia) of section 24(1)(c) a course of study in law must be pursued for not less than two academic years and Rule l(1)(c) will apply to such a case also.
The petitioner had passed his two year 's law course as a private candidate and the third year law only by regular attendance.
He was, therefore, not entitled to be enrolled as an advo cate.
[865H 866A, 864E]
