The plaintiff respondent filed original suit No. 7667 of 1975 against the appellant Bank in the City Civil Court Madras for recovery of Rs.26,383.49 p. together with inter est and costs, being the amount of loss suffered by it on account of the negligence and conversion on the part of the appellant who negligently allowed one Sethuraman, Manager of the plaintiff 's firm to open a "fictitious account" in the name of "Industrial Chain Concern" as its proprietor and helped him to pay in stolen drafts and cheques drawn in favour of the plaintiff, and by collecting the same and paying the proceeds thereof to Sethuraman, and closing the account thereafter.
The plaintiff 's case was that it was doing extensive business in steel Roller chains and sprock ets with leading Industries and Government undertakings and had supplied goods to seven parties who sent to it drafts and cheques for Rs.26,383.49 p. which were received by Sethuraman, its Manager, who opened fictitious account in the name of the firm with the bank, and withdrew the amount defrauding the plaintiff.
According to the plaintiff the Bank was negligent and guilty of conversion in opening the account as also in collecting the cheques.
Hence it was liable to make good the loss suffered by it.
The appellant Bank denied the allegations of negligence levelled by the plaintiff.
It stated that Sethuraman, who was a Collegemate of the Manager of the Bank was known to him earlier and at the time of opening the account he had represented to the Bank that he, as proprietor, had started a firm under the name and style of "Industrial Chain Concern" and had shown in that connection some business papers on the basis of which the Manager gave the introduction necessary to open the Account but the manager declined to grant overdraft facility asked for by him.
The bank asserted that it acted in good faith throughout the dealings till the closure of the account.
The Trial Court held that the appellant bank had acted in good faith but not without negligence in opening the account and operating the same in the process of collection of cheques/drafts and that it was not 28 entitled to protection of section 131 of the Negotiable of Instruments Act.
Accordingly it decreed the plaintiff 's suit Bank 's appeal to the High Court against the decree of the trial Court was dismissed.
Hence this appeal by Special Leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: As a general rule a banker before accepting a customer, must take reasonable care to satisfy himself that the person in question is of good reputation, and if he fails to do so he will run the risk of forfeiting the pro tection under section 131 of the Negotiable Instruments Act.
What is "reasonable care", will depend on the facts and circumstances of the case.
[45F G] The courts have tended to accept the practices and procedures which bankers lay down for themselves, but that can by no means be decisive.
[45G] Till an account is opened, no banker customer relation ship exists between the bank and the person proposing to open an account.
Once the account is open, the relationship is created and with it mutual rights and obligations between the banker and the customer are created under law.
Opening an account by depositing cash is slightly different from opening one by a cheque as in that case, the Bank has to act according to the tenor of that instrument and its collection and payment involves the Bank 's avowed duty to its real owner if the proposer happens not to be its real owner.
Even when an account is opened by depositing cash but so soon after the opening of the account any cheque is paid into it as to make it part of the same transaction with the opening, the same duty may be implied by law.
[34D F] One of the tests of deciding whether the Bank was negli gent, though not always conclusive, is to see whether the Rules or instructions of the Banks were followed or not.
In the instant case, Sethuraman having been known to the Manag er who gave the introduction there was no violation of any instruction or Rules.
[35E; 36D] Except when circumstances of a case so justify in making inquiries the bankers attitude may be solicitious and not detective.
It is difficult to hold that the Bank was negli gent in opening the account, accepting the deposit of cash by a person known to the Manager of the Bank under the circumstances.
[37G; 38B] 29 The bank normally has an obligation to collect the customer 's cheques paid into his account.
[42H] In every case of opening an account bank takes a man date and, until changed, controls the operation of the account.
In the instant case having already opened the account the Bank was not concerned to question the custom er 's title to a cheque paid in by him, when a cheque was drawn in favour of 'industrial Chain Concern '.
[41A B] If a banker fails to present a cheque within a reason able time after it reaches him, he is liable to his customer for loss arising from the delay.
A banker receiving instruc tions paid in for collection and credit to a customer 's account may collect solely for a customer or for himself or both.
Where he collects for the customer he will be liable in conversion if the customer has no title.
However, if he collects in good faith and without negligence he may plead statutory protection under section 131 of the Act.
[41D E] To enable a bank to avail the immunity under sec tion 131 as a collecting banker he has to bring himself within the conditions formulated by the section.
Otherwise he is left to his common law liability for conversion or for money had and received in case of the person from whom he took the cheques having no title or defective title.
The conditions are: (a) that the banker should act in good faith and without negligence in receiving a payment, that is, in the process of collection, (b) that the banker should re ceive payment for a customer on behalf of him and thus acting as a mere agent in collection of the cheque and not as an account holder (c) that the persons for whom the banker acts must be his customer and (d) that the cheque should be one crossed generally or especially to himself.
The receipt of payment contemplated by the section is one from the drawee bank.
It is settled law that the onus of bringing himself within the section rests on the banker.
There is very little evidence relating to the deposit and particulars of cheques deposited and hence it is difficult to hold that the Bank ignored obvious indications and was negligent at that time.
[41G H; 42A; 48G] Commissioner of Taxation vs English Scottish & Austra lian Bank, ; Ladbroke & Co. vs Todd, ; Turner vs London & Provincial Bank, [1903] 2 Legal Decisions Affecting Bankers 33; Mariani & Co. vs Midland Bank, at 582; Lloyds Bank Ltd. vs E.B. Savory & Company, ; Capital & Counties Bank vs Gordon, [1903] AC 240; Barclays Bank Ltd. vs Astley Indus trial Trust Ltd. ; Arab 30 Bank Ltd. vs Ross, ; Karak Rubber Co. Ltd. vs Burden (No. 2), ; Penmount Estates Ltd. vs National Provincial Bank Ltd., ; Motor Traders Guarantee Corpn.
vs Midland Bank Ltd., ; Bharat Bank Ltd. vs Kishanchand Chel laram, AIR 1955 Mad. 402; Sanyasilingam vs Exchange Bank of India, AIR 1948 Bombay 1; Woodbrier vs Catholic Bank, AIR 1958 Kerala 316; Orbit Mining & Trading Co. vs Westminister Bank, ; Underwood vs Bank of Liverpool, ; Bapulal Premchand vs Nath Bank Ltd., AIR 1946 Bom.
482; Lloyds Bank Ltd. vs Chartered Bank of India, Australia & China, and Ross vs London County, Westminister & Parr 's Bank Ltd., , referred to.
