The appellant was charged with the murder of a girl Baisakhi.
On information given by Aghani, younger sister of the deceased, the headless body of the deceased was re covered.
The appellant absconded but was found in another village and was brought back by the village volunteer force.
On interrogation by the Mukhia, Sarpanch and a panch of the Gram Panchayat the appellant made an extrajudicial confession.
A blood stained cutting weapon was recovered from a room of the appellant.
At his instance some strands of hair were recovered from a place at a short distance 1337 from the place where the dead body had been recovered, which were stained with human blood and appeared to be scalp hair of a human female.
The appellant was convicted and sentenced to death and the High Court upheld the conviction and sentence.
The Courts took into consideration the statements made by Aghani to her mother and to other persons that the deceased was last seen in the company of the appellant.
Aghani, however, died before her statement could be recorded in a judicial proceeding.
It was contended by the appellant that the statements of Aghani were inadmissible, that the extra judicial confession was not relevant and that the circumstantial evidence was not sufficient to establish the guilt of the appellant.
Held, that the statements of Aghani were not admissible either under section 32 or section 33 Of the Evidence Act.
Section 33 had no application as her statement was not made in any judicial proceeding or before any person authorised by law to record the same.
The statements did not relate to the cause of her death or to any circumstances relating to her death but related to the death of her sister and did not fall under cl. 1 of section 32 which was the only clause which could have any bearing on the question.
Held, further, that though having regard to the Bihar Panchayat Raj Act, the Mukhia, Sarpanch and panch of the Gram Panchayat to whom the extra judicial confession was made were persons in authority within the meaning Of section 24 Evidence Act, no threat, promise or inducement for making the confession was proved.
The facts that the appellant was brought back to the Village by the village volunteer force and that it took two or three hours before he made the confession do not indicate that the confession was not voluntary.
There was nothing to show that the confession contained any untrue or inaccurate statement.
The circumstantial evidence may not be sufficient by itself to prove the guilt of the appellant, but it afforded sufficient corroboration to the confession and the corroboration was of such a nature as to connect the appellant with the murder.
