In a group of cases filed in this Court in connection with recruitment to the posts of Assistant District Attor neys by the State Public Service Commission.
The Respondent State had undertaken that if any post was to be filled up within one year, candidates who were selected by the Public Service Commission but had not been appointed, would be appointed in the order of merit.
However, the petitioner, who was selected by the Public Service Commis sion and, assigned 39th position in the order of merit, was not given the appointment, and a fresh notification was issued by the Public Service Commission for selecting candi dates for 27 posts.
Therefore, the petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court alleging that the respondents had arbitrarily and illegally denied him his right to appoint ment to the posts.
The respondent State contended that since only 37 posts were earmarked for general candidates and no vacancy had arisen before the expiry of one year, the petitioner could not be appointed as per the undertaking given by the State.
Disposing of the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: When this Court had given the direction on the undertaking given by the State that selected candidates would be appointed in vacancies that would arise within one year, it was expected that the State Government would comply with the spirit and substance of the direction, and not to avoid compliance on the technical plea of expiry of the one year period.
The Court would not permit the State to avoid implementation of the order made by it on any technical or unjustified stand.
[192E F] It is incredible to believe that within one year even one vacancy had not arisen when 27 posts were subsequently notified for direct 190 recruitment.
It would be obvious, and it is common knowl edge, that vacancies keep arising as and when the incumbents of such posts either retire or resign or new posts are created.
On the fact situation arising out of the record of the proceeding, it has to be concluded that some of these 27 vacancies did arise within the one year period set by this Court but the State Government delayed action to allow the year to run out and to free itself from the purview of the direction.
[192C, D F] The petitioner, therefore, became entitled to be consid ered for appointment to the post of Assistant District Attorney and given appointment in accordance with the rules.
The respondents would accordingly appoint the petitioner against one of the posts subject to physical fitness.
[192G]
