The appellant, a registered society, instituted a suit through its Secretary in respect of an immovable property.
Afterwards, the election of the office bearers for the Society was held and one 'X ' claiming to be the Secretary of the Society filed an application for withdrawing the suit and the trial court allowed the same.
In the subsequent election, one 'Y ' was elected as Secretary and he filed an application for recalling the order of withdrawal and for restoring the suit.
The applica tion was contested and the trial court rejected the applica tion.
The appellant challenged the order before the High Court by way of a petition under section 115 CPC.
The High Court observed that the trial court had committed several serious errors in deciding the question as to who was the elected Secretary of the Society on the relevant date in favour of the respondent but held that the mistake could not be corrected.
This appeal by special leave, is against the High Court 's judgment.
On behalf of the appellant, it was argued that the trial court failed to appreciate that 'X ' was not the elect ed Secretary of the Society, as was held by the Registrar of Cooperative Societies, and that 'X ' did not also succeed before the High Court in this regard.
And hence, he was not competent to withdraw the suit.
It has been contended that the error committed by the trial court ought to have been rectified by the High Court.
234 The respondents argued that the only remedy available to the appellant was to file a fresh suit.
It was contended that the High court rightly did not decide the dispute finally regarding election of 'X ' and left it to be settled by the Civil Court.
Allowing the appeal and remitting the matter to the trial court, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The position is well established that a court has inherent power to correct its own proceedings when it is satisfied that in passing a particular order it was misled by one of the parties.
[237D] 1.2 If a party makes an application before the Court for setting aside the decree on the ground that he did not give his consent, the court has the power and duty to investigate the matter and to set aside the decree if it is satisfied that the consent as a fact was lacking and the court was induced to pass the decree on a fradulent representation made to it that the party had actually consented to it.
However, if the case of the party challenging the decree is that he was in fact a party to the compromise petition filed in the case but his consent had been procured by fraud, the court cannot investigate the matter in the exercise of its inherent power, and the only remedy to the party is to institute a suit.
1237F G] 1.3 So far as the finding of the trial court that X was the elected Secretary of the appellant Society with authori ty to withdraw the suit is concerned, the same suffers from several errors and requires reconsideration.
Even in the view of the High Court that is the position, but it declined to exercise its revisional power on the assumption that it had no jurisdiction to do so.
The courts below were, there fore, not right in holding that the application of the appellant invoking the inherent jurisdiction of the court was not maintainable.
If the appellant 's case is factually correct that X was not its elected Secretary and was, there fore, not authorised to withdraw the suit, the prayer for withdrawing the suit was not made on behalf of the appellant at all and the impugned order was passed as a result of the court being misled.
Such an order cannot bind the appellant and has to be vacated.
High Court should have intervened in its revisional power on the ground that the trial court had failed to exercise ajurisdiction vested in it by law.
[238F G; D E] Sadho Saran Rai and Ors.
vs Anant Rai and Ors.
, AIR 1923 Patna 483; Vilakathala Raman vs Vayalil Pachu, 27 Madras Law Journal Reports 172 and Basangowda Hanmantgowda Patil and Anr.
vs 235 Churchugirigowda Yogangowda and Anr., I.LR 34 Bombay 408, approved.
