The respondent was sought to be retired compulsorily from service by an order dated August 21, 1984 on attaining the age of 55 years under Rule 56 of the Fundamental Rules, pursuant to the Screening Committee 's recommendation.
He challenged the said order in a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court quashed the said order on the finding that the participation of the Head of the Department in the deliberation of the Screening Committee had vitiated its recommendation, and order of the State Government on the doctrine of bias, since he had on an earlier occasion award ed adverse remarks against the respondent.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: 1. 'The presence of Head of Department in the Screening Committee did not vitiate its recommendation.
Consequently the State Government 's order could not be quashed.
[251E] 2.1 The object and purpose of Fundamental Rules 56 conferring power on the Government to prematurely terminate the service of a Government servant is to ensure efficiency in the administration by weeding out dead wood who may have outlived their utility.
In the instant case, while exercis ing this power the State Government had constituted a high powered Screening Committee consisting of senior officials of the State Government and the Head of the Department.
[250D F] 2.2 The Head of Department bad performed his duty in recording _ opinion in the respondent 's character roll as no other person was entitled under the rules to adjudge re spondent 's work and conduct.
As 249 a member of the Screening Committee he was performing duty assigned to him under the rules and Government order for screening records of the officers.
He was the best person to assess the efficiency and utility of employees working in his department.
He had no personal interest in the matter and there was no conflict between his personal interest and his duties as member of the Screening Committee.
Therefore, there could not be any question of bias or malice in law.
[250H, 251C, 250F] J.N. Sinha vs Union of India, [1971] 1 SCR 791, referred to.
A.K. Kraipak & Ors.
vs Union of India, , distinguished.
Since the respondent had been reinstated in service after the High Court order and he has now retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation, the State Government should not take any steps for reducing his pen sion by treating him to have retired with effect from August 21, 1984, [251F G]
