A, the owner of the land in question, conveyed posses sion of it to B under an oral agreement of sale.
A deed was drawn up within about a week, but before it could be regis tered, A died and his sons executed a sale deed in respect of the land, in favour of C. Aggrieved, B instituted a suit against C and A 's sons for specific performance.
B died during the pendency of the suit and his son D was impleaded as his legal representative.
The suit was decreed in favour of D.
Though the decree became final, it was not executed.
C filed a suit alleging that he was put in possession by D and that E and others trespassed into the property.
E contested the suit on the ground that D had orally trans ferred his rights and conveyed possession to him for valu able consideration.
The Trial Court decreed the suit.
On appeal, the first appellate court held that C was not enti tled to a decree.
On appeal to the High Court, the Learned Single Judge held that B 's possession was adverse to A on the assumption that a sale had been effected orally leaving only execution of the sale deed to be done later and so, C would not be entitled to add the period before the sale in his favour on 6.6.49 for the purpose of calculating the period of posses sion for 12 years, prior to the suit, and that such posses sion could not enure to his benefit under the .
However, the concurrent findings of the Trial Court and the first Appellate Court on the question of C 's title had not been challenged.
The Division Bench reversed the above judgment holding that the Learned Single Judge failed to apply the correct legal position on the assumption that the transaction of 10.7.46 was only an oral sale.
This appeal by special leave has been filed by E against the judgment of the Division Bench.
194 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
If a person is in actual possession and has a right to possession under a title involving a due recogni tion of the owner 's title his possession will not be regard ed as adverse in law, even though he claims under another title having regard to the well recognised policy of law that possession is never considered adverse if it is refera ble to a lawful title.
The purchaser who got into possession under an executory contract of sale in a permissible charac ter cannot contend that his possession was adverse.
Adverse possession implies that it commenced in wrong and is main tained against right.
When the commencement and continuance of possession is legal and proper, referable to a contract, it cannot be adverse.
[198F G; 199A] 2.1 In the case of an executory contract of sale where the transferee is put in possession of the property in pursuance of the agreement of sale and where the parties contemplate the execution of a regular registered sale deed and animus of the purchaser throughout is that he is in possession of the property belonging to the vendor and that the former 's title has to be perfected by a duly executed registered deed of sale under which the vendor has to pass on and convey his title.
The purchaser 's possession in such cases is of a derivative character and in clear recognition of and in acknowledgement of the title of the vendor.
The position is different in the case where in pursuance of an oral transfer or a deed of transfer not registered the owner of a property transfers the property and puts the transferee in possession with the clear animus and on the distinct understanding that from that time onwards he shall have no right of title to the property.
In such a case the owner of the property does not retain any vestige of right in regard to the property and his mental attitude towards the property is that it has ceased to belong to him altogether.
The transferee after getting into possession retains the same with the clear animus that he has become the absolute owner of the property and in complete negation of any right or title of the transferor, his enjoyment is solely as owner in his right and not derivatively or in recognition of the title of any person.
So far as the vendor is concerned both in mind and actual conduct, there is a total divestiture of all his right, title and interest in the property.
This applies only in a case where there is a clear manifestation of the intention of the owner to divest himself of the right over the property.
On the other hand in the case of an executory contract the possession of the transferee until the date of registration of the conveyance is permissible or derivative and in law is deemed to be on behalf of the owner himself.
[199B F] 195 2.2 In the instant case, the parties are concluded by the finding of the Division Bench that the transaction of 10.7.46 was only an agreement for sale and not an oral sale of the property.
[199G] Annamalai Chettiar and Another vs Muthiah Chettiar and Another, ILR 19651 Madras 254 approved.
