The plaintiff appellant had flied a suit against the defendentsrespondents for a declaration of its title and for possession of the suit property mentioned in the schedule to the plaint which consisted of two parts; the first part related to a large extent of vacant land known as parade ground and the second part pertained to survey Nos. 162 to 165 on which stood structures of old Lancer 's Lines and certain evacuees were occupying the same at the time of institution of the suit.
The second part is known both as Lancers Quarters and Rasala Lines.
In the suit the plaintiff also claimed damages for wrongful occupation of a portion of the property and rent for another portion for the period from 1st January 1964 till delivery of possession.
The Plaintiffs ' case was that by virtue of Resolution No. 37 dated 19.1.1984 and Resolution No. 77 dated 29.2.48 pub lished in Bhavnagar Darbar Gazette the entire suit lands vested in and belonged to the plaintiff who entered into and remained in possession thereof.
According to the plaintiff the Government of India claiming to be the owner of the Parade Ground, in or about June 1961, fixed the boundary marks and thus the entry of the Government of India consti tuted wrongful encroachment.
As regards the Lancers ' Quar ters, it was stated in the plaint that they did not belong to the plaintiff, that the same were occupied by the State Lancers and subsequently by the refugees and that the plain tiff allowed the land and the structures thereon to be used free by the Government.
However the plaintiff asserted that it was entitled to recover rent or compensation in respect thereof from 1.1.54 till delivery of possession.
The defendents denied the claim of the plaintiff and pleaded that consequent upon the Bhavnagar State acceding to the Indian Union and consequent on the Federal Financial Integration of State, the accommodation, lands and buildings in the use or occupation of the Ex State forces were trans ferred to the Government of India and became its property.
The defendents respondents denied that the suit land vested in the plaintiff on the strength of the Resolution afore said.
220 The Trial Court held that the plaintiff had proved its title to the suit land and that it was in possession of the suit property till 7.7.1952.
It also held that the suit having been filed on 3rd March 1964, the same was not barred under section 65 of the Limitation Act.
As regards Rasala Lines, the trial Court did not uphold the claim of the plaintiff, because of its admission that it did not own the buildings standing thereon.
As such the Trial Court decreed the suit for possession in respect of Parade Ground alone and dismissed the same in respect of Rasala Lines.
The first defendant Union of India preferred an appeal to the High Court against the decree of the trial Court and the plaintiff flied cross objections in so far as the suit was dismissed in respect of Rasala Lines.
The High Court dismissed the cross objection filed by the appellant but allowed the appeal of the Union of India holding inter alia that there was nothing on record to show that the Municipal ity was formally handed over 'he land in question and that its right over the land was never recognised by the Union of India or the State Government.
The High Court also held that the suit was liable to be dismissed as being time barred.
Hence this appeal by the plaintiff Municipality by Special Leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: With the accession and completion of territorial and financial integration and part 'B ' states forming part of Indian Union, the lands and buildings in the use or occupation of the former Indian State Government, as distin guished from the private properties of the Rulers, were transferred and vested in the Government of India and became its property.
[226D] The right to sell such lands of the State Government were with the Government concerned.
It is that right that was given to the Municipalities after the formation of the Union of the United States of Saurashtra.
It cannot be treated therefore, as a transfer of title in respect of those lands to the municipality but the right to execute the sale deed in respect of those lands of the Government was transferred or vested in the municipalities concerned.
This authorisation itself was later cancelled by the Government of Gujarat under Order dated 26.3.63.
[229C D; G] Possession of the land was also not taken by the munici pality at any time.
It is not open to the appellant to rely on the principle that possession follows title.
[232B] 221 Not only there is evidence to show that physical posses sion was with the defendants but also there could not be any legal possession with the plaintiff as the title to the land is not vested in them.
Since the suit itself is for posses sion based on title and the plaintiffs have not proved title it is not necessary for the defendent to plead or prove adverse possession.
1232C]
