This is a land lord 's appeal.
By an agreement in writing between the parties, the second floor of the premises bear ing No. 19/10, Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi was let out to the Respondent for a limited period of three years w.e.f.
June 8, 1980, with the permission of the Rent Controller obtained under section 21 of the Act.
The Respondent tenat having failed to deliver vacant possession of the premises in question, after the expiry of the stipulated period, the appellant moved an application before the Rent Controller for execution of his order by delivery of possession of the premises to him.
The Respondent tenant filed an objection to the said application to which the appellant replied duly.
The Rent Controller rejected the appellant 's application taking the view that the permission granted under section 21 of the Act was invalid and thus the tenant could not be evicted on the expiry of 3 years.
The Rent Controller there by upheld the tenant 's objection that the landlord 's son being aged only 19 or 20 years, on the date of the expiry of the period of limited tenancy while the minimum age pre scribed by law for marriage being 21 years the ground that the premises were needed for the son 's marriage was not tenable.
The Rent Controller accordingly held that creation of limited tenancy amounted to fraud and misrepresantation by the landlord which rendered the permission invalid.
The appellant 's appeal to the Tribunal as also to the High Court having failed, he has filed this appeal after obtaining Special Leave.
The Tribunal and the High Court affirmed the view of the Rent Controller treating the grant of permission by the Controller to be mechanical and without application of mind.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The object of enquiring into the validity of the Control 300 ler 's permission under section 21 is only to ensure that essentials of a limited tenancy existed and the same was genuine; and it is not meant to permit raising of frivolous pleas which would frustrate the very object of its enact ment.
This view protects the honest tenants and only curbs the frivolous and vexatious pleas.
[310H; 311A] Controller 's permission when granted to create a limited tenancy under sec.
21 of the Act is presumed to be valid unless declared otherwise.
It is, therefore, for the person assailing its validity to get such a declaration from a proper forum in a proper proceedings.
Unless this is done, the order remains enforceable.
The duty is clearly on the tenant himself to raise the pleas of invalidity and unless the order is declared invalid at his instance, its enforce ability cannot be doubted.
[31lB C] All that has to be seen is whether the period of limited tenancy was indicated by the landlord with reference to a foreseeable future event and the estimate of time of its occurrence was not unreasonable.
[312B] When the period of limited tenancy is stated on the basis of a future event the happening of which is reasonably certain at that time though the precise date of the future event cannot be predicted with precision, the landlord 's estimate of the period after which the event is expected to happen, unless unreasonable must be accepted for this pur pose as genuine.
This would satisfy the test of a genuine limited tenancy if there be no other factor indicating it to be a mere pretence adopted by the landlord.
[312C D] The enquiry contemplated under section 21 in this behalf is not the same as that for determining existence of ground of bona fide need of the landlord for an order of eviction under section 14 of the Act, and section 14 is expressly superseded by section 21.
The scope of enquiry is limited only to the existence of the jurisdictional facts at the time of grant of the permission when its validity is chal lenged subsequently.
[312F] The absence of existence of any jurisdictional fact not having been proved by the respondent tenant even after objecting to recovery of possession on expiry of the period of limited tenancy, there was no ground to refuse restora tion of possession to the landlord.
[313C] S.B. Naronah vs Prem Kumari Khanna, ; ; V.S. Rahi & Anr.
vs Smt.
Ram Chambeli, ; ; Smt.
Dhanwanti vs D.D. Gupta, [1986] 3 SCC 1; Inder Mohan Lal vs 301 Ramesh Khanna; , ; S.K. Lata vs R.C. Chhiba & Anr,, ; and J.R. Vohra vs India Export Hlouse (P) Ltd. & Anr.
, ; , referred to.
