Under section 72 of the : " A person to whom money has been paid . by mistake or under coercion must repay or return it ".
The respondent, a registered firm, paid sales tax in respect of its forward transactions in pursuance of the assessment orders passed by the sales tax officer for the years 1949 51, but in 1952, the Allahabad High Court having held in Messrs. Budh Prakash jai Prakash vs Sales Tax Officer, Kanpuy, , that the levy of sales tax on forward transactions was ultra vires, the respondent applied for a refund of the amounts paid, by a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
It was contended for the sales tax authorities that the respondent was not entitled to a refund because (1) the amounts in dispute were paid by the respondent under a mistake of law and were therefore irrecoverable, (2) the payments were in discharge of the liability under the Sales Tax Act and were voluntary payments without protest, and (3) inasmuch as the monies which had been received by the Government had not been retaine but had been spent away by it, the respondent was disentitled to recover the said amounts.
Held, that the term " mistake " in section 72 Of the Indian Con tract Act comprises within its scope a mistake of law as well as a mistake of fact and that, under that section a party is entitled to recover money paid by mistake or under coercion, and if it is established that the payment, even though it be of a tax, has been made by the party labouring under a mistake of law, the party receiving the money is bound to repay or return it though it might have been paid voluntarily, subject, however, to questions of estoppel, waiver, limitation or the like.
Shib Prasad Singh vs Maharaja Srish Chandra Nandi, (1949) L.R. 76 I.A. 244, relied on.
Where there is a clear and unambiguous provision of law which entitles a party to the relief claimed by him, equitable considerations cannot be imported and, in the instant case, the fact that the Government had not retained the monies paid by the respondent but had spent them away in the ordinary course 1351 of business of the State would not make any difference, and under the plain terms of section 72 Of the Act the respondent was entitled to recover the amounts.
Observations in Nagorao vs Governor General in Council, A. 1.
R. , 374, to the effect that where a party receiving money paid under a mistake has no longer the money with him, equitable considerations might arise, disapproved.
