The appellant was engaged in the manufacture of polyes ter fibre (man made) falling under tariff item 18 of the erstwhile Central Excise Tariff.
In its manufacture, the appellant was using, among other things, ethylene glycol and DMT (Dimethyle Tetraphthalate) duty paid ethylene glycol falling under tariff item No. 68.
During the course of manufacture of polyester fibre, two basic raw materials DMT and Glycol interact and thereby certain waste comes into existence.
This interaction also gave rise to methanol, a by product.
Notification No. 201/79 dated 4.6.1979 exempted all excisable goods on which duty of excise was leviable and in the manufacture of which any goods failing under tariff item 68 had been used, from so much of the duty of excise as was equivalent to the duty of excise paid on the imputs.
Exemption notification No. 201/79 was amended by notifi cation No. 102/81 with effect from 11th April, 1981.
By this amended notification, a second proviso was added which provided that the credit of the duty allowed in respect of inputs could not be denied or varied on the ground that part of the inputs was contained in any waste, refuse or by product arising during the manufacture, irrespective of the fact that such waste, refuse or by product was exempt from the whole of duty of excise leviable thereon or was charge able to nil rate of duty.
Earlier, in the case of proforma credit procedure under rule 56 A of the Central Excise Rules, clarification had been issued by the Collector of Central Excise, under trade notice dated 19.7.1980 to the effect that proforma credit was permissible even where at an intermediate state of manufacture, a final product which was fully exempt from duty came into being, provided that the fully exempted product was consumed in 263 the production or manufacture of the finished product.
This trade notice categorically stated that the clarification would also be applicable to exemption notification No. 201/79.
The appellant claimed set off of duty paid on ethylene glycol used in the manufacture of polyester fibre under notification No. 201/79.
The Assistant Collector of Central Excise held on 6.8.1980 that no proforma credit was allowa ble in respect of ethylene glycol used/consumed in the methanol, the ethylene glycol residual waste and polyester fibre waste.
The Collector of Central Excise (Appeals), however, allowed the appeals filed by the appellant and set aside the Assistant Collector 's order and the demands.
The Collector observed that the procedure under notification No. 201/79 was materially the same as the procedure under rule 56A of the Central Excise Rule.
The revenue went up in appeal before the Customs, Excise was contended on behalf of the revenue that prior to 11th April, 1981 there was no provision in notification No. 201/79 entitling the manufacturer to obtain credit of the duty of excise already paid on the inputs resulting in waste or by products or refuse which arose in the manufacture of excisable products which used the inputs; that the trade notice issued pertained to rule 56 A and not to the notifi cation; that the rule and notifications were different enactments and the provisions of one could not be read into another even after 11th April, 1981; that the exemption was only in respect of duty on inputs in the manufacture of excisable goods and their waste, by product or refuse; and that since methanol was not excisable, it was not eligible for set off of duty on the glycol content in its manufac ture.
On behalf of the appellant, however, it was contended that glycol was used totally in the production of polyester fibre; that methanol resulted out of the reaction of DMT and glycol; and that the Government always maintained parity between rule 56 A and notification No. 201/79.
The Tribunal was of the opinion that the Collector 's observation that the procedure under notification No. 201/79 was materially the same as the procedure under rule 56 A and consequently the amending notification deemed to have retro spective effect was not, in the absence of any such indica tion, acceptable.
In the premises, the Tribunal allowed the appeals, of the Revenue.
264 Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: (1) On an analysis and comparison of the notifi cations No. 201/79, No. 102/81 and the circulars, it is clear that the clarification in the form of trade notice issued in respect of rule 56 A was as much applicable to that rule as to notification No. 201/79.
[272D] (2) It is true that when in a fiscal provision, is benefit of exemption is to be considered, this ' should be strictly considered.
But the strictness of the construction of exemption notification does not mean that the full effect to the exemption notification should not be given by any circuitous process of interpretation.
After all, exemption notifications are meant to be implemented and trade notices in these matters clarify the stand of the Government for the trade.
[272E F] (3) The quantity of ethylene glycol required to produce a certain quantum of polyester fibre is determined by the chemical reaction.
It is not possible to use a lesser quan tum of the ethylene glycol to prevent methanol from arising for producing a certain quantity of polyester fibre.
It is not as if the appellants have used excess ethylene glycol wantedly to produce the methanol.
It is also clear that the appellants are not engaged in the production of methanol but in the production of polyester fibre.
[272H; 273A] (4) The Tribunal, in the instant case, failed to inter pret the words of the exemption notification No. 201/79 properly and fully.
The said notification exempted all excisable goods on which the duty of excise was leviable and in the manufacture of which any goods falling under Tariff Item No. 68 (i.e. inputs) had been used from so much of the duty of excise already paid on the inputs.
The excisable goods, namely, polyester fibre, were not wholly exempt from duty nor chargeable to nil rate of duty.
It cannot be read in the notification that the notification would not be available in case non excisable goods arise during he course of manufacture.
In fact, the Tribunal seems to have erred in not bearing in mind that exemption notification was pressed in service in respect of polyester fibre which is excisable goods and not in respect of methanol which arises as a by product as a part and parcel of chemical reaction.
It ap pears further on a comparison of the rule 56 a and the notification No. 201/79 that these deal with identical situations.
[272F; 273C D] Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd. & Anr.
A.K. Bandyopadhyay & Ors., , referred to.
