This case is concerned with a garden with temples and other buildings at Jaipur claimed to be the property of Darjee (Tailors) community popularly known as 'Bagichi Darjian '.
It was claimed by different persons at different intervals on different grounds.
One Narayan, Pujari on the temples was said to have sold the Bagichi in favour of one Khawas Bala Bux.
Darjee community filed a suit for cancella tion of that sale and declaration of its right to administer the property.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit but on appeal District Judge decreed it and this decree was af firmed by the Chief Court of Jaipur.
But after 23 years on the death of Narayan his eldest son Bhonrilal respondent No. 3 herein who became the Pujari attempted to get his name mutated in revenue records as owner of the Bagichi.
On behalf of the Darjee community the appellant herein together with one Khawas Suraj Narayan filed a suit in 1951 for his ejectment.
This suit was decreed in favour of the Darjee community.
Appeal against that decree by Bhonrilal was dismissed by the Senior Civil Judge, Jaipur.
Second appeal in the High Court too failed.
However, even before the disposal of the aforesaid Second appeal, Gangaram the younger brother of Bhonrilal started another round of litigation.
He filed a declaratory suit claiming the ownership of the Bagichi and temples on the basis of sale deed dated Baishakh Sudi 12th Samvat 1932 (about 1875 A.D.) and a Will purported to be executed in 1916 A.D. in his favour.
357 The Trial Judge decreed the suit in his favour.
The defendants ' appeal was dismissed by the District Judge upholding the validity of the said Sale Deed and the Will.
On further appeal, the High Court rejected the validity of the Sale Deed as well as that of the Will which formed the foundation of Ganga Ram 's title.
But instead of allowing the appeal and dismissing the suit the High Court declined to interfere with the decree of the Court below though holding that the plaintiff 's suit was a fruitless exercise.
Kalyan Singh the defendant challenged the decree of the High Court in this Court on two counts.
Firstly that the suit against Bhonrilal was of a representatives character which could not be nullified by the present suit against individuals.
Secondly the High Court after discarding the Sale Deed and the Will ought to have non suited the plain tiff since there was no other material whatever to support the title.
While allowing the appeal and modifying the judgment and decree of the High Court, this Court, HELD: In the absence of permission under Order I Rule 8 CPC to file a representative suit which is mandatory any member of the community may successfully bring a suit to assert his right in the community property or for protecting such property.
Such a suit need not comply with the require ments of Order I Rule 8 C.P.C. and the suit against Bhonri lal even if it was not a representatives suit on behalf of the Darjee Community would be a suit of this category.
[363D E] It is essential that trust worthy and unimpeachable evidence should be produced before the Court to establish genuineness and authenticity of the Will.
It must be stated that the factum of execution and validity of the Will cannot be determined merely by considering the evidence produced by the propounder.
In order to judge the credibility of wit nesses and disengage the truth from falsehood the Court is not confined only to their testimony and demeanour.
It would be open to the court to consider circumstances brought out in the evidence or which appear from the nature and contents of the documents itself.
It would be also open to the Court to look into surrounding circumstances as well as inherent improbabilities of the case of reach a proper conclusion on the nature of the evidence adduced by the party.
[366E F] The Will in the instant case, constituting the plaintiff as a sole legatee with no right whatever to the testator 's wife seems to be unnatural.
It casts a serious doubt on the genuineness of the Will.
The Will has not been produced for very many years before the Court or 358 public authorities even though there were occasions to produce it for asserting plaintiff 's title to the property.
The plaintiff was required to remove these suspicious cir cumstances by placing satisfactory material on record.
He has failed to discharge his duty.
This Court concurs with the conclusion of the High Court and rejects the Will as not genuine.
[368A B] Section 63 of the Evidence Act mentions five kinds of secondary evidence.
Clauses (1), (2) and (3) refer to copies of documents; clause (4) refers to counter parts of docu ments and clause (5) refers to oral accounts of the contents of documents.
Correctness of certified copies referred to in clause (1) is presumed under section 79 but that of other copies must be proved by proper evidence.
A certified copy of a registered sale deed may be produced as secondary evidence in the absence of the original.
[369B C] H. Venkatachala lyengar vs B.N. Thimmajamma & Ors., [1959] Supp.
I SCR 426; Rani Purnima Devi & Anr.
vs V. Kumar Khagendra Narayan Dev & Anr., ; Smt.
Indu Bala Bose & Ors.
vs Manindra Chandra Bose & Anr., ; and Mst.
Biro vs Atma Ram & Ors., AIR 1937 PC 101.
