The Respondent landlord filed a petition under section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 for an order of eviction of the appellant tenant from a shop situate at G.T. Road, Delhi on the ground that the tenant Duli Chand had sub let or parted with the possession of the said shop after the 9th of June 1952 to M/s Hira Lal Sri Bhagwan illegally and without the written consent of respondent landlord.
The contention of the appellant tenant was that he had not sub let or parted with the possession of the shop in ques tion.
According to him Hiralal was his relative who died sometime prior to 1958 and that Sri Bhagwan was his son and the name of the business as M/s Hiralal Sri Bhagwan & Compa ny was given in memory of the deceased Hira Lal.
In reply, the Landlord respondent had contended that it was true that Sri Bhagwan was the natural son of Duli Chand but since he had given him in adoption to Hiralal, he had gone out of the family of the appellant and as such it was a clear case of sub letting and parting with the possession of the rented premises.
The Rent Controller, held that the land lord had failed to prove parting with possession of the tenanted shop.
On appeal by the landlord, the Rent Control Tribunal held that the tenant had parted with the legal possession of the premises and in that view ordered the eviction of the appel lant tenant under section 14( 1 )(b) of the Act.
Thereupon the appellant tenant preferred second appeal before the High Court.
The High Court having affirmed the finding of the Tribunal that the appellant tenant had parted with the possession of the premises in dispute, dismissed the appeal.
Hence this appeal by the tenant.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Section 14(1)(b) requires a "Consent in Writing" of the landlord in order to avoid an eviction on the ground of sub letting, 466 assigning or otherwise parting with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises.
[472B] Mere permission or acquiescence will not do.
The consent shah also be to the specific sub letting or parting with possession.
The requirement of consent to be in writing was to serve a public purpose i.e., to avoid dispute as to whether there was consent or not.
[473C] If the words were "without consent of the landlord" it might mean without consent, express or implied and in that sense question of waiver may arise.
The question of implied consent will not arise, if the consent is to be in writing.
[473E] In the instant case, though there is some evidence to show that the sign board M/s Hira Lal Sri Bhagwan was seen in the premises since 1972 and the landlord had seen Shri Bhagwan sitting in the shop since the year 1968, there is no positive evidence to show when the landlord had come to know of Sri Bhagwan getting the exclusive possession and doing business in the premises.
[471G] Jagan Nath (deceased) through L. Rs. vs Chander Bhan & Ors., ; ; Lakshman Singh Kothari vs Smt.
Rup Kanwar, ; ; Bai Hira Devi & Ors.
vs The Official Assign ee of Bombay; , ; Associated Hotels of India Ltd., Delhi vs S.B. Sardar Ranjit Singh, ; and M/s Shalimar Tar Products L,d.
vs H.C. Sharma & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
