For selling an immovable property, respondent entered into an agreement with the appellant.
Appellant paid part of the consideration and he was put in possession of the property.
Since the respondent failed to execute the regis tered sale deed, the appellant filed a suit.
There was no specific averment in the suit that the appellant was and had always been ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement.
Respondent contended inter alia that the suit was not maintainable for non compliance with the provisions of Section 16(c) of the .
This issue was directed to be tried as a preliminary issue.
At that stage, the appellant applied for leave to amend the plaint by incorporating an averment that he was always and had been ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement.
The trial court rejected the application.
The revision petition filed in the High Court was dis missed.
The High Court took the view that the application for amendment was filed beyond the period of limitation and cannot be granted, as a vested interest of the respondent would be disturbed.
This appeal is against the judgment of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Amendments should be refused only where the other party cannot be placed in the same position as if the pleading had been originally correct, but the amendment would cause him an injury which could not be compensated in costs.
It is merely a particular case of this general rule that.
where a plaintiff seeks to amend by setting up a fresh 475 claim in respect of a cause of action which, since the institution of the suit, had become barred by limitation, the amendment must be refused; to allow it would be to cause the defendant an injury which could not be compensated in costs by depriving him of a good defence to the claim.
Courts would as a rule, decline to allow amendments, if a fresh suit on the amended claim would be barred by limita tion on the date of the application.
But that is a factor to be taken into account in exercise of the discretion as to whether application for amendment should be granted and does not affect the power of the Court to order it, if that is required in the interest of justice.
[477A D] 1.2 In the present case, no fresh cause of action was sought to be introduced by the amendment applied for.
All that the appellant sought to do was to complete the cause of action for specific performance and add an averment which required to be added in view of the provisions of sub sec tion (c) of Section 16 of the .
There was no fresh cause of action sought to be introduced by the amendment and hence, no question of causing any injustice to the respondent on that account arose.
[477E F] Pirgonda Hongonda Patil vs Kalgonda Shidgonda Patil and Ors., ; and L.J. Leach & Co. and Anr.
vs Messrs Jardine Skinner & Co., ; , relied on.
Ouseph Varghese vs Joseph Aley & Ors., , distinguished.
