The appellant firm, an unsuccessful applicant for a license for vending foreign liquor in New Delhi for the year 954 1955, moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for a writ of certiorari quashing the order granting the license to a rival applicant and impleaded the Chief Minister, the Excise Commissioner, the Secretary and the Under Secretary, Finance, of the State of Delhi, as it then was, as parties to the application.
Its case in substance was that the applications made for the grant of the licence were never placed before the Chief Commissioner who alone was the competent authority to grant it under Ch.
5, r. i of the Delhi Liquor License Rules, 1935, framed under section 59 Of the Punjab Excise Act (Punj. 1 of 1914), as extended to Delhi, and no order granting the license was ever made by him.
The said opposite parties respondents, although repeatedly called upon by the High Court to do so, did not produce the entire records and filed evasive affidavits and eventually produced a letter written by the Under Secretary, Finance, to the Excise Commissioner intimating that the Chief Commissioner had made the order for granting the license to the rival applicant and maintained that the order had in fact been made by the Chief Commissioner.
The High Court, under a misapprehension of fact and of the true nature and effect of that letter written by the Under Secretary, Finance, to the Excise Commissioner, held that the order had in fact been passed by the Chief Commissioner.
The production of the entire records in the 1425 Supreme Court made it clear, and the respondents also conceded, that the applications were never placed before the Chief Commissioner, nor any order granting the said license was ever made by him.
What had happened was that upon an order made by the Chief Minister on the file in accordance with a note put up by the Under Secretary, Finance, the latter wrote a letter to the Excise Commissioner in reply to a previous one of his, that the license might be granted to the said rival applicant.
That letter, on which the High Court had relied, was in the following terms, With reference to your letter No. 295/C/54 dated the 31st August, 1954, on the above subject, I am directed to say that the Chief Commissioner is pleased to approve under Rule 5. 1. of Delhi Excise Manual Vol.
11 the grant of L 2 license to Messrs. Gainda Mall Hem Raj, New Delhi, in place of the L 2 License surrendered by Messrs. Army & Navy Stores, New Delhi.
Necessary license may kindly be issued to the party concerned under intimation to this Secretariate ".
There was nothing on the record to show that the Chief Commissioner had ever concurred in the order made by the Chief Minister on the file.
Held, that the attempt of the official respondents to by pass the Court must be strongly deprecated, and the order of the High Court must be reversed.
When a superior Court issues a rule on an application for a writ of certiorari, it is incumbent upon the inferior Court or the quasi judicial body, to whom the rule is addressed, to produce the entire records along with the return so that the superior Court may satisfy itself that the inferior Court or the quasijudicial body has not exceeded its lawful jurisdiction.
Non production of such records, as in the instant case, must defeat the purpose which the writ has in view.
Held, further, that in view of the undisputed practice that such a license, once granted by the Chief Commissioner, was almost automatically renewed by the Collector year to year, it could not be said that the writ application and the appeal had become infructuous on the expiry of the period of the license in dispute and it was only proper that the appeal should be heard on merits.
In the facts and circumstances of the case it was impossible to hold that the letter of the Under Secretary embodied the order of the Chief Commissioner or that the Court could not be asked to go behind it.
The letter was clearly a communication of the sanction and could not be equated with the sanction itself.
Although an Under Secretary was competent to authenticate an order made by the Chief Commissioner, the letter in question did not purport to be made in the name of the Chief Commis sioner and therefore the letter could not be treated as a properly 1426 authenticated order to which the presumption raised by article 166 of the Constitution could properly attach.
Dattatreya Moreshwar Pangarkar vs The State of Bombay, , held inapplicable.
