In response to the charter of demands concerning the revision of pay scales, submitted by the officers of the Respondent Bank, called "NABARD Officers ' Association", the bank on 9.10.85 revised the pay scales of all its officers as per settlement with the Association and gave the said revision retrospective operation w.e.f.
1st February 1984, following the same date as was done in the Reserve Bank of India.
In order to fix the salaries of the employees, who were in employment of the Bank of 1 2 1984, the Respondent Bank prepared a refixation chart which was duly approved by the NABARD Officers ' Association.
The chart was made ap plicable to all the officers who were in service of the Bank on 1.2.1984.
The chart was a device to fit the salaries of the concerned officers in the new revised pay scales.
Thus it contained fitment increments for the employees in service prior to 1.2.84 to avoid reduction in emoluments and anamo lies which would otherwise have resulted.
These increments were to merge in the new scales in the course of time as they were not designed to grant higher emoluments to the old employees for all time to come but to avoid anamolies re sulting from refixation of salaries into new scales.
The Petitioners challenged the fitment increments granted to old employees.
It was their case that these increments gave undue benefit to the old employees as against them, and since they occupied the same posts they were also entitled to the same fitment increments.
They also invoked the theory the 'Equal pay for Equal work ' by alleging discrimination between them and the old employees.
It may be mentioned that the Association had 2284 members and except the present petitioners no body had made a grievance against the refixa tion chart.
Dismissing the Petition, this Court, 502 HELD: The revision of pay is always effected with a particular date prospectively or retrospectively.
Whatever the date from which it is effected, it necessarily involves fitment of the salaries of the existing employees in the new scales.
A retrospective operation of the new scales there fore involves, for the same purpose, a classification of employees into two categories viz., those who were in serv ice prior to the retrospective date, and those who entered the service thereafter.
If the benefit of the revised pay scales is to be conferred equitably on the old and the new employees, the fitment of salaries is in evitable.
To avoid it is to deny the equal benefit of the revised scales to the employees in service prior to the date from which the new sales came into effect.[506B C].
The fitment/adjustment in the new scales further, has to be done by revising the salaries upward.
This sometimes necessarily involves fitment in a higher stage in the pay scale than what the employee would be entitled to by a strict application of the stage to stage adjustment.
Some times the additional benefit is treated as personal pay till it gets merged in the next higher increment.
This is a known practice of equitable adjustment of the old pay scales to the new pay scales.
There is not other way of effecting the just and required adjustment.
[506D E] The adjustment increments granted to the old employees on such occasions automatically achieve the dual purpose of rewarding them for their past service and of adjusting their salaries in the new scale.
The adjustment, fitment incre ments are therefore not discriminatory but eminently just and valid.
[512F] K.N. Ananda & Ors.
vs The Karnataka State Financial Corporation, Bangalore & Anr., [1985] Labour & Industrial Cases Vol.
18 p. 1079; P. Savita S/o Shri P.L. Savita vs Union of India, Ministry of Defence (Deptt. of Defence Production) New Delhi & Ors., ; ; D.S. Nakara & Ors vs Union of India, ; ; State Government Pensioners Association & Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh, [1986] 3 SCC 501; Kanpur Suraksha Karamchari Union vs Union of India, ; Reserve Bank of India & Ors.
vs C.N. Sahasaranaman & Ors., ; ; Tarsem Lal Gautam & Anr.
vs State Bank of Patiala & Ors., AIR 1989 SC 30; C.R. Seshan & Anr.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, AIR 1989 SC 1287, referred to.
