The Karnataka General Service (Motor Vehicles Branch) Recruitment Rules, 1962 (as amended in 1976) laid down the minimum qualification of Diploma in Automobile Engineering or Mechanical Engineering for direct recruitment to the post of Motor Vehicle Inspectors.
The Karnataka Public Service Commission issued an advertisement on September 28, 1983 inviting applications for the said post stating specifically that the selection shall be made in accordance with the Recruitment Rules, 1976 and that the candidate must be holder of Diploma in Automobile Engineering or Mechanical Engineering.
After scrutiny of the applications the Commis sion issued letters for interview to the suitable candidates and commenced the holding of interviews in August, 1984.
The process of selection, however, could be completed only on June 2, 1987 on account of interim orders issued by the High Court at the instance of candidates seeking reservation for local candidates.
The result was declared on June 22, 1987 and published in the Karnataka Gazette dated 23rd July, 1987.
Thereafter, the selected candidates were given intima tion of their selection and the State Government took steps for imparting them three months training before appointing them as Motor Vehicle Inspectors.
In the meanwhile, the State Government amended the Recruitment Rules by a notification dated May 4, 1987 omit ting qualification of Diploma in Mechanical Engineering for the said post.
Thereupon some of the candidates who were unsuccessful at the selection preferred applications before the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal for quashing the select list and the notification dated September 28, 1983 inviting applications on the ground that after the amendment of Rules in 1987 no person holding Diploma in Mechanical Engineering was qualified for 386 appointment to the said post.
The State Government as well as the appellants both contested the applications and as serted that the 1987 amendment to the Recruitment Rules was not retrospective and that the amended rules did not affect the selections which were in the process of finalisation by the Commission.
Allowing the applications, the Tribunal held that after the amendment of the Recruitment Rules in May 1987 the Commission could not make selection or determine the result on the basis of the Rules which existed prior to May 14, 1987 and as such the selection of candidates holding Diploma in Mechanical Engineering was illegal as they had ceased to be eligible for appointment to the post of Motor Vehicle Inspectors with effect from the date of publication of the amending Rules.
Consequently it quashed the advertisement issued under the Notification dated September 28, 1983 as well as the select list published by the Commission and directed the Commission to invite fresh applications and to make selections in accordance with the amended Rules.
Allowing the appeal and the writ petition preferred by the selected candidates, the Court, HELD: 1.
The Tribunal was in error in setting aside the select list preferred by the Commission.
1397H] 2.1 If a candidate applies for a post in response to an advertisement issued by a Public Service Commission in accordance with the recruitment rules, he acquires a right to be considered for selection in accordance with the then existing rules.
This right cannot be affected by amendment of any rule unless the amending rule is retrospective in nature.
1397H] In the instant case, the advertisement issued by the Commission on September 28, 1983 was in accordance with the Recruitment Rules of 1976 under which the appellants were eligible for appointment.
The process of selection which had commenced on receipt of the applications, however could not be completed on account of the interim orders issued by the High Court.
The select list was finalised by June 2, 1987 and the result published in the Karnataka Gazette of July 23, 1987.
The selected candidates were also intimated by the Commission by separate letters.
If there had been no interim orders the appellants would have been appointed much before the amendment of Rules on May 4, 1987.
[395C; 390G; 391D] 387 2.2 Construction of amending Rules should be made in a reasonable manner to avoid unnecessary hardship to those who had no control over the subject matter.
Every statute or statutory Rule is prospective unless it is expressly or by necessary implication has retrospective effect.
Unless there are words in the statute or in the Rules showing the inten tion to affect existing rights the Rules must be held to be prospective.
If a Rule is expressed in language which is fairly capable of either interpretation it ought to be construed as prospective only.
In the absence of any express provision or necessary intendment the rule cannot be given retrospective effect except in matter of procedure.
[392A; 391E F] In the instant case, the amending Rule of 1987 does not contain any express provision giving the amendment retro spective effect nor there is anything therein showing the necessary intendment in enforcing the Rule with retrospec tive effect.
The amended Rule, therefore, could not he applied to invalidate the selection made by the Commission.
[391F G; 393E F] A.A. Calton vs Director of Education & Anr., , applied.
State of Andhra Pradesh vs T. Ramakrishna Rao, , referred to.
Y.Y. Rangaiah vs J. Sreenivasa Rao, and l.
J. Divakar vs Government of Andhra Pradesh, , distinguished.
The order of the Tribunal dated September 13, 1987 is set aside.
The State Government is directed to make appoint ment to the posts of Motor Vehicle Inspectors on the basis of the select list prepared and finalised by the Commission.
[398A]
