Mohd. Zainulabdeen and Yasin By filed a suit for decla ration that they were entitled to be in enjoyment and pos session of Saint Syeed Moosa Shah Khadiri Dargah in Madras for 27 days and to restrain the defendants from interfering with tile plaintiffs ' aforesaid right and management in the Dargah.
In reply the defendant No. 1 alleged that in the manage ment of the Dargah, female members had no right nor could they claim the right of Mujawar.
It was also alleged that Fathima Bee through whom the Plaintiffs were claiming never enjoyed the right to Hundial collection of the Dargah and share in the Mujawarship and even if she had any right the same was lost as she did not claim any right till her death and therefore the Plaintiffs were also not entitled to any relief.
Defendants 7, 8 and 10 however in their written statements admitted family members to be sharer in the income and management of the Dargah and they also admitted that they were paying such share to their sister Ahamadun nissa (10th defendant) in the Hundial collections and that the City Civil Court in suit No. 7518 of 1971 had also recognised the right of 7th defendant Anser Bi to management of the Dargah for 9 days in a year.
Thus it was false to contend that the females were not entitled to claim manage ment.
The trial court decreed the suit of the Plaintiffs and held that they were entitled to manage the Dargah 1or 27 days in a year.
Defendants 3 to 6 and 12 to 19 filed appeals against the judgment of the trial court.
The City Civil Judge, however, affirmed the judgment of the Trial Court with some modifications in the relief.
Different sets of defendant filed two second appeals before the High Court and both were disposed of by the High Court by its judgment and Order dated 17th November, 1981 whereby it reversed the 520 judgments and decrees of the courts below and dismissed the suit filed by the Plaintiffs.
This Court came to the conclusion that there is no controversy as regards the period of 27 days falling to the share of the Plaintiffs and the right of the females to the management of the Dargah according to Muslim law.
As regards the question of right of Fathima Bee having become barred by limitation by ouster and that as such the Plaintiffs too had lost that right, this Court, while setting aside the Judg ment and Decree of the High Court and restoring that of the Trial Court as modified by the First Appellate Court, HELD: It iS well settled that where one co heir pleads adverse possession against another co heir it is not enough to show that one out of them was in sole possession and enjoyment of the profits of the properties.
The possession of one co heir is considered in law as possession of all the co heirs.
The co heir in possession cannot render his pos session adverse to the other co heirs not in possession merely by any secret hostile animus on his own part in derogation of the other co heirs title.
[526G H; 527A] It is a settled rule of law as between co heirs that there must be evidence of open assertion of hostile title coupled with exclusive possession and enjoyment by one of them to the knowledge of the other so as to construe ouster.
[527A] The High Court in the instant case committed a serious error in reversing the finding of the lower Appellate Court and in taking a wrong approach in holding ouster on the basis of the judgment and decree given in Suit No. 116 of 1909 and on the ground that Fathima Bee had not made a demand or asked for her share of the hundial collections at any point of time till her death in 1957.
[527G] P. Lakshmi vs
L. Lakshmi Reddy; , , referred to.
