The detenu was arrested on May 2, 1989.
On the same date a bail application was moved on his behalf.
On May 3, 1989 he was detained under section 8 of the .
The detention order stated that the detenu was likely to be bailed out and there was every likelihood that after coming out of jail he would again indulge in criminal activ ities injurious to the maintenance of essential services and supplies required for public life.
The facts referred to in the grounds of detention were that on the basis of a com plaint of theft of electric wire lodged on February 15, 1989 an FIR was registered under section 379 IPC against three per sons, 'J ', 'S ' and 'M '.
Some of the stolen material was recovered from the house of 'J ' on March 3, 1989 and on the information provided by him about the purchase of such material the factory of the detenu was raided on the same day.
There 'M ', stated to be the servant of the detenu, was found in possession of about 20 kg.
of melted electric wire and that was seized under a recovery memo.
In the confes sional statement made by 'M ' and recorded in the recovery memo itself, he had stated that he had purchased the elec tric wire from 'J ' and 'S ' and that he had melted and sold the same to the detenu.
These facts led the detaining au thority to conclude that there was inherent criminal propen sity in the detenu.
Detenu 's representation was rejected by the Advisory Board.
The Order was confirmed by the Govern ment under section 12(1) of the Act.
In the writ petition seeking to quash the order of detention, it was contended that there was no evidence of detenu 's complicity with the crime linking him with the recovery of melted wire, that the criminal case filed under section 411 IPC was the first crime alleged against him, that he had no past criminal record from which it could be inferred that he was likely to indulge in such activity in future, and that there was an 480 unexplained delay from the date of the alleged crime and the date of detention vitiating the satisfaction and the deten tion order itself.
Allowing the writ petition, the Court, HELD: 1.
The detaining authority though can take into account the possibility of the detenu being released on bail in the criminal proceedings, have to be satisfied, having regard to his past activities or by reason of the credible information or cogent reasons, that if he is enlarged on bail, he would indulge in such criminal activities.
[487B] In the instant case, except the bald statement that the detenu would repeat his criminal activities after coming out of the jail, there were no credible information or material or cogent reasons apparent on the record to warrant an inference that the detenu if enlarged on bail would indulge in such criminal activities which were prejudicial to the maintenance of essential services.
There must be something more than what was found in the record to come to the con clusion that this was not a case of solitary incident but a case of the detenu indulging in business of receiving stolen electric wires.
Furthermore, the detention order seems to have been made in order to supplant the criminal prosecution which was not permitted.
[487B D] Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah, ; Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate, Burdwan & Anr.
, ; ; Kartic Chandra Guha vs The State of West Bengal & Ors., ; Alian Mian vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad & Ors., [1983] 4 SCC 301; Smt.
ShashiAg garwal vs State of U. P. & Ors., ; and N. Meera Rani vs Government of Tamil Nadu & Anr., ; , referred to.
In spite of the fact that the recovery statement itself was made as early as on March 3, 1989 no action was taken against the detenu till May 3, 1989.
Nothing more was stated in the detention order.
The delay had also not been satisfactorily explained in the counter statement of the respondents.
The ground therefore, could not be a proximate cause for a sudden decision to take action under the Nation al Security Act and this also vitiates the order.
[487F G]
