The appellant company which was incorporated in 1938 in the erstwhile State of Jind obtained certain concessions from the Ruler of the State under an agreement dated April 1, 1938, which, inter alia, provided that the State was to be allotted certain shares in the company without any payment and as regards income tax the company was to be assessed at concessional rates.
On May 5, 1948, the Ruler of jind along with the Rulers of seven other States entered into a Covenant for the merger of their territories into one State, Article VI of the Covenant provided, inter alia, that the Ruler of the Covenanting State shall make over the administration of his State to the Rajpramukh of the new State and that all duties and obligations of the Ruler of the Covenanting State shall devolve on the New State and shall be discharged by it.
In accordance with that Article the Rajpramukh took over the administration of jind on August 20, 1948, and immediately after assumption of office promulgated Ordinance No. , by section 3 of which all laws in force in the State of Patiala were made applicable mutatis mutandis to the territories of the New State and that all laws in force in the Covenanting States stood repealed.
On November 24, 1949, the Rajpramukh issued a proclamation accepting the Constitution of India and on April 13, 1950, the New State became a taxable territory of the Union of India.
730 The result of the constitutional changes was that the law relating to income tax applicable to the appellant, for the period prior to August 20, 1948, was that of Jind, for the period August 20, 1948, to April 13, 1950, that of the Patiala Income tax Act and after April 13, 1950, the Indian Income tax Act ; but the appellant contended that the income tax should be levied on him as provided in the agreement entered into with the Ruler of jind, dated April 1, 1938: Held, (1) that section 3 Of the Ordinance No. on its true construction extinguished the right to tax concessions conferred on the appellant under the agreement dated April 1, 1938, and that the appellant cannot rely on that agreement after August 20, 1948.
(2)The Covenant dated May 5, 1948, entered into by the Rulers of the States, is in whole and in parts an act of State and Article VI cannot be relied on by the appellant for the enforcement of the rights conferred on him under the agreement with the Ruler of jind as against the Rajpramukh of the new State, Per section R. Das C. J., Venkatarama Aiyar, section K. Das and Gajendragadkar JJ.
When a treaty is entered into by sovereigns of independent States whereunder sovereignty in territories passes from one to the other, clauses therein providing for the recognition by the new sovereign of the existing rights of the residents of those territories must be regarded as invested with the character of an act of State and no claim based thereon could be enforced in the municipal courts established by the new sovereign unless those rights have been recognised by him.
Secretary of State for India vs Bai Ralbai, (1915) L. R. 42 I. A. 229, Vajasingji Joravarsingji and others vs Secretary of State, (1924) L. R. 51 1.
A. 357, Sccretary of State vs Sardar Rustam Khan, (1941) L. R. 68 1.
A. 109, Cook vs Sprigg, and Hoani Te Heuheu Tukino vs Aotea District Maori Land Board , relied on.
Per Bose J. International opinion is divided about the effect that a change of sovereignty has on rights to immoveable property and this decision must not be used as a precedent in a case in which rights to immoveable property are concerned.
