The Petitioner landlord filed a suit No. 213 of 1970 for eviction against the first respondent and four others in the court of Civil Judge, Senior Division, Thane.
The suit was decreed by the Trial Court.
The first respondent alone filed an appeal before the District Court.
The appeal was dis missed confirming the eviction.
Thereafter the first re spondent filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of Bombay which was also dismissed.
The first respondent then filed Civil Appeal No. 2628 of 1980 in this Court which was dis missed by this Court on 18.8.1987.
However at the request of the appellant this Court had allowed him to continue to be in possession and carry on the business till 31.3.89 subject to the appellant and all his employees in the business filing an usual undertaking in the Court that they will hand over and deliver vacant possession of the premises on the expiry of the period mentioned above and will go on deposit ing the mesne profits until possession is delivered.
In pursuance of this order an undertaking was filed by the first respondent as also by persons shown as his employees and staying in the premises.
Sometime in the beginning of 1989 one Raghuram A. Shetty Second respondent in this Petition filed Civil Suit No. 306 of 1989 in the Thane Civil Court for a declaration that the decree for eviction obtained in respect of the premises in question in civil suit No. 213 of 1970 cannot be executed against him and for a permanent injunction against the Petitioner herein.
He also moved an application for a tempo rary injunction from executing the said decree.
The Thane Civil Court granted a temporary injunction as prayed.
That is how the Petitioner herein filed this contempt petition both against the original tenant K.M.M. Shetty and the second respondent the Plaintiff in Civil Suit No. 306 of 1989.
After discussing in detail the various developments of the case 562 brought about by the first respondent as well as by the 2nd respondent herein, this Court directed that the order grant ing injunction against the Petitioner from executing the eviction decree against the 2nd respondent shall not be operative and that the Petitioner is entitled to execute the decree for eviction against all persons who are in posses sion of the property.
While holding the first respondent guilty of committing contempt by wilful disobedience of the undertaking given by him in this court, the Court, HELD: Breach of an injuction or breach of any undertak ing given to a Court by a person in civil proceedings on the faith of which the Court sanctions a particular course of action is misconduct amounting to contempt.
[568F] The remedy in such circumstances may be in the form of a direction to the contemnor to purge the contempt or a sen tence of imprisonment or time or all of them.
[568F] When a court accepts an undertaking given by one of the parties and passes an order based on such undertaking, the order amounts in substance to an injunction restraining that party from acting in breach thereof.
[568D] The breach of an undertaking given to the Court by or on behalf of a party to a civil proceeding is, therefore, regarded as tantamount to a breach of injunction although the remedies were not always identical.
For the purpose of enforcing an undertaking that undertaking is treated as an order so that an undertaking, if broken, would involve the same consequences on the persons breaking that undertaking as would their disobedience to an order for an injunction.
[568D E] In the light of this Court 's finding in the instant case, that there was a breach of the undertaking mere impo sition of imprisonment or fine will not meet the ends of justice.
There will have to be an order to purge the con tempt by directing the first respondent contemnor to deliver vacant possession immediately and issuing necessary further and consequential directions for enforcing the same.
[568G]
