The respondents claimed to be the owners of the suit property by virtue of a registered sale deed in their favour by one Navinchand, who had purchased the property from his predecessor in interest Smt.
Raj Rani on 11.8.1952.
The appellant 's father Misri Lal was her tenant.
In 1959 a suit was filed by Navinchand for eviction of Misri Lal, which was resisted by the tenant on the ground that Smt.
Raj Rani had earlier transferred the house to a Trust and as such she could not later convey any title to Navinchand.
The Trial Court rejected the defence, and passed a decree against Misri Lal.
Misri Lal filed an appeal.
During its pendency, the parties resolved their dispute, by entering into a compromise.
A deed Ext.
P. 20 creating a fresh lease in favour of Misri Lal under Navinchand as lessor, was executed w.e.f. 1.12.1962.
A compromise petition exhibit P. 21 was filed and the case decreed in terms of the compromise exhibit P. 22 Misri Lal continued to occupy the house till he died in 1972 leaving behind his son, the appellant.
A fresh dispute started after Navinchand sold the suit property to the respondents plaintiffs on 4.1.73, who gave notice of the sale to the appellant on 14.3.73.
As the appellants refused to recognise them as owners, the respond ents terminated the tenancy and filed a suit for ejectment against the appellants.
This suit was resisted on the same old plea that Smt.
Raj Rani having transferred the suit property to a Trust was not competent to retransfer the property to Navinchand the vendor of the respondents.
The trial court disbelieved the defence version holding that although Smt.
Raj Rani had executed a trust deed in 1936, but the same was not acted upon and that the trust did not appear to have come into existence.
The suit was accordingly decreed.
535 On appeal, the first appellate court reversed the above finding and held that the defendant could not be estopped from challenging the title of the plaintiffs.
In second appeal, the High Court reversed the decree of the First Appellate Court, and held that the defendants were estopped from challenging the decree, Ext.
P. 22 which would bind the parties since it was founded on a compromise, and not on an adjudication by the court on the question of title.
It also observed that the statement made in the compromise petition exhibit P. 21 in the earlier suit supported the case of the plaintiffs independently of the compromise decree and that the defence plea had to be rejected in view of the deed Ext.
P. 20 creating a fresh lease.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that having regard to the limited scope of a second appeal under section 100 C.P.C., the High Court was not justified in setting aside the finding of the Appellate court on the question whether the property had been alienat ed in 1936 in favour of the trust or not, that having reached a conclusion against the defendant on the basis of the lease deed exhibit P. 20, the compromise petition exhibit P. 21 and the compromise decree Ext.
P. 22, it should not have proceeded to decide the dispute relating to title on merits on the basis of evidence.
It was further contended that the appellant/tenant cannot be estopped from challenging the derivative title of the plaintiffs as he was not inducted into the house by them.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The doctrine of estoppel ordinarily applies where the tenant has been let into possession by the plain tiff.
Where the landlord had not himself inducted the tenant into the disputed property and his rights are founded on a derivative title, for example, as an assignee, donee, vend ee, heir, etc., the position is a little different.
[539D] 2.
A tenant already in possession can challenge the plaintiff 's claim of derivative title showing that the real owner is somebody else, but this is subject to the rule enunciated by section 116 of the Evidence Act, which does not permit the tenant during the continuance of the tenancy, to deny that his landlord had at the beginning of the tenan cy a title to the property.
The rule is not confined in its application to cases where the original landlord brings on action for eviction.
[539E] 536 3.
A transferee from such a landlord also can claim the benefit, but that will be limited to the question of the title of the original landlord at the time when the tenant was let in.
So far as claim of having derived a good title from the original landlord is concerned, the same does not come under the protection of the doctrine of estoppel and is vulnerable to a challenge.
The tenant is entitled to show that the plaintiff has not as a matter of fact secured a transfer from the original landlord or that the alleged transfer is ineffective for some other valid reason, which renders the transfer to be non existent in the eye of law.
[539F G] 4.
In a case where the original landlord had the right of possession and was, therefore, entitled to induct a tenant in the property but did not have any power of dispo sition, the tenant can attack the derivative title of the transferee plaintiff but not on the ground that the trans feror landlord who had initially inducted him in possession did not have the right to do so.
Since the impediment in the way of a tenant to challenge the right of the landlord is confined to the stage when the tenancy commenced, he is not forbidden to plead that subsequently the landlord lost this right.
These exceptions, however, do not relieve the tenant of his duty to respect the title of the original landlord at the time of the beginning of the tenancy.
[539H; 540A B] 5.
The tenancy under section 116 does not begin afresh every time the interest of the tenancy or of the landlord devolves upon a new individual by succession or assignment.
[541E] 6.
In the instant case, the acquisition of title by the plaintiffs from Navinchand, if he be presumed to be the rightful owner, is not impugned, that is, the derivative title of the plaintiffs is not under challenge.
What the appellant wants is to deny their title by challenging the title of their vendor Navinchand which he is not entitled to do.
[540D] 7.
The appellant in the instant case does not contend that Navinchand had subsequently lost his title or that there is any defect in the derivative title of the plain tiffs.
His defence is that Navinchand did not own the property at all at any point of time, and this he cannot be allowed to do.
He cannot be permitted to question his title at the time of the commencement of the tenancy created by Ext.
P. 20.
[541F] Kumar Krishna Prasad Lal Singha Deo vs Baraboni Coal Concern Ltd. & Ors., ; Mangat Ram and Another vs Sardar Meharban Singh and Others, ; D. Satyanara 537 yana vs
P. Jagdish; , and Tej Bhan Madan vs 11 Addl.
District Judge & Ors., ; , distin guished.
