One Hariba Bhagwat had a son Appaji and daughter Baja bai.
Appaji in turn had a son Rakhmaji and a daughter Bhiku bai, the plaintiff who had flied a suit for possession and mesne profits of two houses.
The suit was decreed by the Trial Court but on appeal reversed by the High Court.
The Legal representative of the plaintiff then preferred this appeal by special leave confined to one of the houses, the parties having settled their dispute regarding the other house.
Bajabal and her husband Ganpat Rao Page being issueless had adopted Rakhmaji.
All of them belonged to villages situated in Ahmednagar District of Bombay Province, and are Dhangars (Shepards) by caste but had migrated to Indore.
On Rakhmaji 's death Sonubai his childless widow succeeded to the properties as limited owner.
She gifted the suit proper ty i.e. house No. 88 to Shanker Lanke a Brahmin, the first defendant by a registered gift deed dated October 31, 1944.
Shanker Lanke in turn hypothecated the House to one Hira Lal, the first respondent on September 21, 1948.
Sonubai died in 1947.
The case of the plaintiff was that the family is gov erned by the Bombay School of Hindu Law wherein female Bandhu is an heir and thereby she was entitled to succeed to the estate of Rakhmaji; Sonubai, the issueless widow of Rakhmaji as limited owner had no power to dispose of the properties, so the gift deed and mortgage are void and do not bind her and the respondents are in unlawful possession as trespassers.
The material defence relevant for the dis posal of this appeal is that the persons concerned are governed by the Banaras School of Hindu Law under which a female bandhu is not an heir.
Hiralal 's case was that he had no objection to hand over the possession provided he was paid the consideration of Rs. 12,000 borrowed by Shanker Lanke, the donee.
760 The Trial Court came to the conclusion that the parties are governed by the Bombay School and not the Banaras School ,of Hindu Law and the plaintiff is the heir of Rajkhmaji.
The gift deed was declared void and not binding on the plaintiff and the suit was decreed and the claim for refund of the mortgage money was rejected.
Hira Lal appealed.
It was contended before the High Court that the plaintiff 's family belonged to Dhangar caste, being migrants from U.P. (Mathura) to Aurangabad from where they had migrated to Central Province (now Madhya Pradesh) and were governed by the Banaras School of Hindu Law.
This contention found favour with the High Court which placing reliance solely on the recital of the Gazetteer concluded that the parties had migrated from Mathura and thereby they were governed by the Banaras School of Hindu Law under.
which the female Bandhu is not an heir to succeed to the estate of the last male holder.
Reversing the decree passed by the Trial Court, the suit was dismissed.
This Court in allowing the appeal by the legal represen tative of the plaintiff, HELD: In India a Hindu is governed by his personal branch of law which he carries with him where ever he goes.
But the law of the province wherein he resides prima facie governs him and in this case and to this extent only the law of domicile is of relevance or importance.
But if it is shown that a person came from another Province, the presump tion will be that he is governed by the law or the special custom by which he would have been governed in his earlier home at the time of migration.
[767B C] Migration is changing one 's abode, quitting one 's place of birth and settling permanently at another place.
The burden of proving migration lies on the person setting up the plea of migration.
Migration can not be presumed but it mast be established by abduction of evidence.
[764D G] Section 37 of the Evidence Act 1872 postulates that any statement made in Govt.
Gazette of a public nature is a relevant fact.
Section 57(13) declares that on all matters of public history, the Court may resort for its aid to appropriate books or documents of reference and section 81 draws a presumption as to the genuineness of Gazettes coming from proper custody.
[764H; 765A] The State of facts contained in the official Gazetteer made in the course of the discharge of the official duties on private affairs or on 761 historical facts in some cases is best evidence of facts stated therein and is entitled to due consideration but should not be treated as conclusive in respect of matters requiring judicial adjudication.
[766B C] The onus lies on the person alleging that the family had renounced the law of the origin and adopted that prevailing in the place to which he had migrated.
The plaintiff and her family on migration from Ahmednagar carried with them to Indore their personal law, namely the Bombay School of Hindu Law under which a Hindu female is recognised to be an heir to last male holder of the Estate and takes the property as an absolute owner.
The Plaintiff being the only nearest bandhu of Rakhmaji, is entitled to succeed to his estate as an heir and thus entitled to the possession of the House in question with mesne profits.
[767D; 768B; A] Keshao Rao Bapurao & Anr.
vs Sadasheorao Dajiba, AIR 1938 Nagpur 163; Rajah Mattu Ramalinga Setupati vs Peria nayagum Pillai, [1873 74] L.R. 11A 209 at p. 238; Martand Rao vs Malhar Rao, [1927 28] L.R. 551 A 45 at 48; Arunachel lam Chetty vs Venkatachellapathi Guru Swamigal, [1919] L.R. 46 IA 204; Narayan Bhagwantrao Gosavi Balajiwale vs Gopal Vinayak Gosavi & Ors., ; at p. 788; The Poohari Fakir Sadavarthy of Bomdilipuram vs The Commission er, Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments, [1962] Suppl.
2 SCR 276: Mahant Shri Srinivasa Ramanuj Das vs Surajnarayan Dass & Anr., [1966] Snpp.
SCR 436 at p. 447; Balwant Rao & Ors.
vs Bali Rao & Ors., AIR 1921 P.C. 59; Udebhan Rajaram vs Vikram Ganu, ; Bhagirathibai vs Kah nujirav, ILR 11 Bombay 285; Girdhari Lall Roy vs The Bengal Government, [1867 79] Moore 's Indian Appeals 448 and Muthus wami Mudaliyar & Ors.
vs Sunamedu Muthukumaraswami Muddali yar, [1895 96] LR 23 IA 83, referred to.
