The Defence of India Act, 1962 was passed by Parliament in the wake of the Chinese aggression to ensure public safety and interest in the Defence of India and Civil De fence and other connected matters.
It had been passed when the was already in force.
Under the provisions of both these Acts, immovable property could be requisitioned.
Under both Acts compensation on such requisition was determinable and payable and any person interested, being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so determined, could have an Arbitrator appointed to determine the same.
The award of the Arbitrator on such determination under Section 8 was appeal able under Section 11 of the Requisitioning Act before the High Court within whose jurisdiction the requisitioned property was situated.
The award of the Arbitrator made under Section 30 in pursuance of the requisition made under Section 29 of the Defence Act was apparently final, though specifically not provided, since no right of appeal against the award of the Arbitrator had been conferred thereunder on any authority.
The Defence Act ceased being applicable as it perished on January 10, 1968.
Simultaneously Section 25 in the Requi sitioning Act was substituted.
Some lands belonging to the first respondent in either of the two appeals were requisitioned by the Union of India under Section 29 of the Defence of India Act, 1962 by issu ing a notification to that effect on 5 April 8, 1963 and possession was taken by the military authorities on May 28, 1963.
The requisitioned property was not released before January 10, 1968 in terms of Section 25(1) of the Requisitioning Act.
The Deputy Commissioner, the competent authority fixed Rs.280 per acre per annum as crop compensation.
Respondent No. 1 not being satisfied sought a reference from the compe tent authority to an arbitrator.
The arbitrator went into the matter and made an award on June 30, 1971.
The Special Military Estates Officer being aggrieved with the award filed two appeals against the orders of the Arbitrator in the High Court, taking shelter under Section 11 of the .
Since the properties that had been requisitioned had not been released before January 10, 1968, it had to be treated seemingly to have been requisitioned by the competent au thority under the provisions of the Requisitioning Act for the purpose for which such property was held immediately before the said date and all the provisions of the said Act were to apply.
Objections to the maintainability of the appeals were taken relying on proviso (a) to Section 25(1) on the ground, that the word determination ' in the context meant determina tion only by the competent authority under the Defence Act and since such determination held the field and was in force immediately before January 10, 1968, no challenge thereto could be made by appealing against the same, on the premises that a provision amongst all the provisions of the Requisi tioning Act provided an appellate forum challenging the same.
The High Court upheld the objection and dismissed the ap peals.
The Special Military Estates Officer appealed to this Court by special leave.
Partially allowing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The right of appeal is a substantive right conferred on a party by the statute.
The conferring of such right is not circumscribed by the right being available at the time of the institution of the cause in the court of the first instance.
In a given situation it may already be available at the institution of the cause in the court of first instance or 6 may even be subsequently conferred.
In either situation, without any distinction, such right is conferred by statute. [10E F] 2.
The Legislature by enacting Section 25 of the Requi sitioning Act and on the perishing of the Defence Act has more than impliedly made available a right of appeal regard ing the rate of compensation for a property remaining under requisition for the post 10th January, 1968 period, recur ring as the rate of compensation would be.
[11G H] 3.
From the scheme of things and from the reading of Section 25 of the Requisitioning Act as a whole, it is discernible that for the period of requisition before Janu ary 10, 1968, the determination for payment of compensation under the Defence Act would remain untouched and unaltered for appeal had never been provided under the Act.
The reason is not far to seek because the order of the competent au thority under the Defence Act was for the purpose of Defence of India Act.
That purpose having gone with effect from January 10, 1968, the same determination for payment of compensation being applicable to the cost date period was seemingly a requisition by the competent authority under the Requisitioning Act and since all the provisions of the said Act applied to such a requisition, the payment of compensa tion as from January 10, 1968, became appealable as an appeal is provided under this Act.
[10H; 11A B] 4.
The word 'determination ' so far as it related to the period of requisition prior to January 10, 1968, was a determination, final in character whether it was right or wrong as having been made under the Defence Act.
But for the period thereafter, the word 'determination ' in the context would mean 'final determination ' i.e. the determination of the competent authority if unchallenged and becoming final, and if appealed against, final determination by the appel late forum.
[11C D] 5.
A harmonious construction of the proviso to Section 25(1) with the whole of parent section indicates that the rate of compensation as determined by the competent authori ty under the Defence Act was valid uptil the period January 10, 1968, but from that day onward the same rate of compen sation per annum would keep applying till upset or altered in appeal, because deemingly from that date it is a requisi tion under the other Act and of a different worth and cor rectable in appeal.
[11D E] 6.
The latter portion of proviso (a) cannot therefore be allowed to eat away the applicability of all the provisions of the Requisition Act, 7 inclusive that of appeal under Section 11 of the Act.
[11 D] 7.
In the instant case, the arbitrator passed both the awards on June 30, 1971, pertaining to the period commencing from May 28, 1963, the date on which the possession of the land requisitioned was taken.
Plainly the award was made covering a period not any prior to January 10, 1968 but to a period thereafter.
Having regard to section 25 the objection as raised before the High Court was valid for the period before January 10, 1968, but not beyond the period commenc ing thereafter.
The case has therefore to be remitted back to the High Court for disposal on merits.
[11F, 12A]
