A dispute between the appellants and respondent No. 1 was referred to an arbitrator who made an award and filed it before the civil court.
On objection by the appellants, the prayer for making the award a rule of the court was reject ed.
On appeal, the High Court confirmed the same.
This Court refused special leave and a petition for review was also dismissed.
Meanwhile, respondent No. 1 applied to the Collector for summoning the award and for realising the escaped duty and penalty.
The application was allowed.
The appellants moved the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority under Section 56 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 and the authority set aside the Collector 's order.
The respondents challenged the said order in a writ petition before the High Court which allowed the same and remanded the case to the Collector for deciding it afresh.
Aggrieved, the appellants filed this appeal by special leave, contending inter alia, that; (a) Respondent No. 1 had no locus standi to move the Collector for impounding the award: (b) the Collector had no authority to pass the im pugned order after a decade; and (c) the Collector did not have the power to enquire into the correct valuation of the property which was subject matter of the award.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 It is well settled that if a court acts with out jurisdiction, its decision can be challenged in the same way as it would have been challenged if it had acted with jurisdiction, i.e. an appeal would lie to the court to which it would lie if its order was with jurisdiction.
[532A] 530 1.2 There is no question of limitation arising and it cannot be said that what had to be done promptly in 1976 could not be done later.
The orders of the Collector dated 15.7.1983 and 22.7.1983 were passed as the follow up steps in pursuance of the civil court 's direction dated 18.3.76 and no valid objection can be taken against them.
The Col lector, therefore, shall have to proceed further for reali sation of the escaped duty.
[532G] 1.3 The Chief Controlling Revenue Authority had full power to interfere with the Collector 's order, provided it was found to be erroneous.
But this Court does not find any defect in the Collector directing taking of steps for reali sation of the stamp duty.
[532B] Janardan Reddy and Ors.
vs State of Hyderabad and Ors.
, ; , relied on.
The instant case comes from Uttar Pradesh where express provisions have been made by the insertion of Sec tion 47 A, authorising the Collector to examine the correct ness of the valuation.
Hence the Collector had the power to enquire into the valuation of the property which was the subject matter of the award.
[533A B] Himalaya House Co. Ltd., Bombay vs Chief Controlling Revenue Authority, , referred to.
It is clarified that on the strength of the present judgment it will not be open to the respondent to urge that the effect of the High Court decision dated 8.7.1981 and the order of this Court dismissing the special leave petition therefrom and later the review application have disappeared or have got modified.
[533D E]
