Respondent was recruited as a Senior Scientific Officer in the Defence Science Service which was subsequently tri furcated and reconstituted.
The Government of India enhanced the superannuation age of Scientific and Technical personnel of one of the newly constituted units upto 60 years by an order dated 24.12.1985.
The respondent who was working in one of the other units of the reconstituted service, filed an application in the Central Administrative Tribunal seeking a direction that he was entitled to the benefit of enhanced age of superannua tion upto 60 years as made applicable to the other unit which allowed the application.
Hence this appeal by the Union of India.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In view of Rule 12 of the Defence Aeronautical Quality Assurance Service Rules, 1979 the benefit of en hanced age of superannuation given to the members of one unit was also available to the members of the other unit since the said condition of service was not expressly pro vided for in the Service Rules.
At the time of reconstitu tion of the service no option was given to the employees working in the different units to opt for one or the other of the units.
Those who were already working in either of the three units were deemed to belong to the respective newly constituted service.
Therefore their service condi tions will have to run parallel and no discrimination can be made between them by an unilateral action.
The classifica tion made between them further has no rational basis and no nexus of such classification to 21 the object sought to be achieved has been shown.
In the circumstances, the denial of the benefit of the enhanced superannuation age to the members of one unit while the same is granted to the members of the other units amounts to discrimination, violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
[23A, F, G, H, 24A] 2.
The decision of the Tribunal is both proper and valid.
The appellants are directed to reinstate the respond ent in service, who would continue in service till he at tains the age of 60 years.
[24A, C D]
