Three police personnel were charged with offences aris ing out of the death of one Ram Dhiraj Tiwari in police custody.
Rafiuddin Khan (accused No. 1) was the Sub Inspec tor of Police Station Kure Bhar, Shamsher Ali (accused No. 2) was a Beat Constable, and Gauri Shankar Sharma (accused No. 3) was the Head Moharrir.
The prosecution version was that AI directed A2 and two police chowkidars, to apprehend Ram Dhiraj, deceased, who was a suspect in a dacoity case.
Pursuant thereto, Ram Dhiraj was arrested from his residence on 19.10.1971 at about 11.00 a.m. and brought to the police station.
The prosecution case against A1 was that he was responsible for having beaten the suspect Ram Dhiraj in the presence of two other constables, whose identity was not established, which resulted in as many as 28 injuries to which he ultimately succumbed.
It was also alleged that A1 had demanded a bribe of Rs.2000 to desist from meeting out third degree punish ment to the suspect.
The case against A3 was that he delib erately and wilfully posted false entries in the General Diary to help A1.
The defence version on the other hand was that the deceased was arrested on 20.10.1971 by A2 and his companions from near a culvert in the village and he was beaten up by them as he resisted arrest.
The Trial Court accepted the prosecution version and convicted A1 under section 304 (Part II) section 330, sec tions 201 and 218/34 and 161, IPC, and under section 5(1)(d) read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
Accused No. 2 was acquitted of all charges.
Accused No. 3 was convicted under sections 201 and 218, IPC.
The High Court, however, accepted the defence version that A1 was not at the police station on 19.10.1971 till 7.30 p.m.
The High Court found that the three prosecution witnesses were not eye witnesses 29 30 to the incident and hence their story about beating in the police station and the demand of bribe could not be accept ed.
The High Court accepted the evidence of DW 1, Jaswant Singh, Station Officer, Machilishahr Police Station, who claimed to have come to Kure Bhar Police Station on 19.10.1971 for investigation of another offence.
According to DW 1, AI was not at the police station till about 7.30 p.m.
While dismissing the appeal filed by accused No. 3, and allowing the State appeal against the acquittal of accused No. 1, and restoring his conviction recorded by the trial court by setting aside his acquittal by the High Court, this Court, HELD: (1) Both the courts have recorded a concurrent finding of fact that the deceased was arrested on 19.10.1971 at about 11.00 a.m. from his village Khajapur.
That means that the entry in the general diary that the deceased was arrested on 20.10.1971 and was brought to the police station later can be brushed aside as false.
The need to make a false entry speaks for itself.
[36E F] (2) It is true that PW 5 and PW 8 were the brother in law of the deceased and PW 10 his neighbour, but that by itself, without anything more, was not sufficient to doubt their tastimony which receives corroboration from medical evidence.
Unless there are sound grounds to reject their evidence it would not be proper to brush aside their evi dence on the specious plea that they are interested witness es.
[37F G] (3) It is difficult to understand how the learned Judge could persuade himself to accept the evidence of DW 1 on the specious plea that if he did not tell the truth he ran the risk of losing his job.
The High Court should have realised that cases are not unknown where police officers have given inaccurate accounts to secure a conviction or to help out a colleague from a tight situation of his creation.
[41B] (4) The High Court should have realised that it is generally difficult in cases of deaths in police custody to secure evidence against the policemen responsible for re sorting to third degree methods since they are in charge of police station records which they do not find difficult to manipulate as in this case.
It is only in a few cases, such as the present one, that some direct evidence is available.
[41F G] (5) After carefully considering the reasons given by the High Court for setting aside the conviction of AI, this Court is satisfied beyond any manner of doubt that the High Court had completely misdi 31 rected itself and hence interference by this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution, was justified.
[42A B] (6) The offence is of a serious nature aggravated by the fact that it was committed by a person who is supposed to protect the citizens and not misuse his uniform and authori ty to brutally assault persons in his custody.
Death in police custody must be seriously viewed for otherwise we will help take a stride in the direction of police raj.
It must be curbed with a heavy hand.
The punishment should be such as would deter others from indulging in such behaviour.
There can be no room for leniency.
This Court does not think it would be justified in reducing the punishment imposed by the trial court.
[42D E]
