The appellant company was engaged in the manufacturing of airconditioning and refrigeration equipment under a proper licence.
On January 21, 1970 the appellant cleared from the factory cooling coils, condensers and compressors and supplied the same to M/s. Ravi Cold Storage, Ahmedabad for putting up a cold storage and paid duty of Rs.13,547.20 P in respect thereof.
Again on January 21, 1969, the appel lant cleared from the factory various parts of refrigerating and air conditioning appliances and machinery for an Ice factory plant to one M/s. Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation Ltd., Ahmedabad and paid a duty of Rs. 19,336.87P.
Both the aforesaid goods were manufactured at the appellant 's factory.
Thereafter the appellant filed two refund applications of the said excise duty before the Assistant Collector of Customs, contending that the refrig erating and air conditioning appliances which they had removed on the aforesaid dates were not excisable goods failing under Tariff Item No. 29A(3).
The Assistant Collec tor of Customs rejected both the applications holding that the assessment was correctly made.
The appellant company preferred two appeals against these orders before the Col lector of Customs and Central Excise, Chandigarh, who dis missed both the appeals.
Thereupon the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The learned single Judge who heard the petition dismissed the same holding that the goods supplied are parts of a refrigerating and air condi tioning appliances, that a complete cold storage plant was not supplied to M/s. Ravi Cold Storage, Ahmedabad or M/s. Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation Ltd., Ahmedabad and that they would fail clearly within the purview of Tariff sub item (3) of Tariff Item 29 A.
An appeal preferred against this judgment was dismissed by a Division Bench in limine.
Hence this appeal.
Before this Court also the appellant inter alia contended that 571 though in its sweep sub item (3) may appear to cover all and every part of refrigerating and air conditioning appliances and machinery of all sorts, the words "and parts thereof" in the heading controlled the meaning and restrict it in the context only to parts of a completed unit which as such completed unit would have come under sub items (1) and (2) of item 29 A. Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The legislative history and the notifications of the Government show that sub item (3) of item 29 A is a comprehensive provision encompassing within it all sorts of air conditioning and refrigerating appliances and machinery and the Government of India was issuing notifications of exemptions on the understanding that such parts are covered by sub item (3).
The language used in sub item (3) is also wide and comprehensive in its application and could not be given a restricted meaning.
Sub items (1), (2) and (3) are independent of each other and mutually exclusive.
The scope of sub item (3) is neither restricted nor controlled by the provisions of sub items (1) and (2).
[576C D] Whether the manufacturer supplies the refrigerating or airconditioning appliances as a complete unit or not is not relevant for the levy of duty on the parts specified in sub item (3) of item 29 A. [576F G] Complete plants which are covered by items (1) and (2) cannot be considered as parts of machinery and such complete plants would not be classifiable under sub item (3) of Item 29 A. [580B C] Mother India Refrigeration Industries Pvt. Ltd. vs Supdt.
of Central Excise and Ors., All, overruled.
Blue Star Ltd. vs Union of India and Anr., Bom.
; Joy Ice Cream, Bombay vs Union of India, Bom.; Calicut Refrigeration Co. vs Collector of Customs & Central Excise, Cochin and Ors.
, Ker.; Chhibramau Cold Storage vs CEGAT, ; Goptal Cold Storage & Ice Factory vs Union of India and Ors., and Anil Ice Factory & Anr.
vs Union of India and Ors., , referred to.
