The appellant was a protected lessee or tenant of the agricultural land in dispute, under the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region) Act, 1958.
The respond ent became the landlady of the land on June 29, 1959 when her father effected a partition of his ancestral lands between himself, on the one hand, and his wife and his two minor daughters, including the respondent, on the other.
This was the third partition effected by the respondent 's father, who had earlier also twice partitioned the same lands.
Sometime in 1962, the respondent initiated proceedings against the appellant for recovery of possession of the suit land on the ground of default.
The Tehsildar dismissed the application holding that the respondent was not a landlady since the partition in question was illegal.
The Deputy Collector in appeal confirmed this decision, and the Maha rashtra Revenue Tribunal rejected the respondent 's revision.
In the Writ Petition filed before the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution against the above decision of the three authorities below, the High Court remanded the matter to the Tehsildar for investigation into the validity of the partition.
On remand, the Tehsildar held that the partition effected on June 29, 1959 was bogus.
Thereafter, in a different proceeding the Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal had held that the said partition was bind ing.
Therefore, in the appeal against the decision of the Tehsildar, the Deputy Collector following the said decision of the Revenue Tribunal, held the partition valid and al lowed the respondent 's application for eviction.
The Revenue Tribunal, in revision, confirmed this order of the Deputy Collector.
67 The appellant preferred a writ petition before the High Court.
It was, inter alia, contended before the High Court that: (1) the partition was contrary to the provisions of Hindu Law; and (2)even assuming that the partition deed of June 29, 1959 was a valid document, the same had to be ignored since it could not confer the title of ownership on the respondent transferee in view of the provisions of section 38(7) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region) Act, 1958.
The High Court however dis missed the petition holding that what was produced before the courts below was a family settlement.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) A partition of the property can only be among the parties who have a pre existing right to the property.
Under the Hindu Law, a female, major or minor has no share in the ancestral property.
A female is given a share either in the self acquired property of the husband or the father, or in the share of the husband or the father in the coparce nary property after the property is partitioned.
There cannot, therefore, be a partition and hence a family settle ment with regard to the ancestral property so long as it is joint, in favour of either the wife or the daughter.
[70C D] (2) The position that obtain under section 38(7) after the Amending Act of 1963, is that any transfer of land effected after 1st August 1953 whether by way of partition or otherwise, has no effect of conferring on the transferee a right to terminate the tenancy of the tenant who was a protected lessee and whose right as such protected lessee had come into existence before such transfer or partition.
This amendment is admittedly retrospective in operation.
[71G H; 72A] (3) The appellant was tenant since prior to 1st August 1953 and had also continued to be such tenant till April 1, 1961.
Hence he became a statutory owner under section 46 of the Act on and from April 1, 1961.
Any proceedings for evicting him on the ground that he was a tenant and, there fore, had fallen in arrears of rent could not have, there fore, been adopted in 1962.
[72C D]
