Respondent No. 2, a scheduled caste, filed a case for restoration of lands sold to respondent Nos. 1, 3 and 4, non scheduled castes, on the ground that the sale was in viola tion of section 22 of the Orissa Land Reforms Act, 1960 as the requisite permission of the Revenue Officer was not obtained.
In the sale deed the transferor Respondent was described as 'Rajaka ' while in the caste certificate he was mentioned as ' Dhoba '.
The Revenue Officer rejected the ease.
Respondent No. 2 filed an appeal which was allowed by the Additional District Magistrate.
Against the order of Additional District Magistrate a revision was preferred by respondent No. 1 which was dismissed by the Special Officer, Land Reforms by holding that merely because the word 'Raja ka ' does not find mention in the Scheduled Caste Order, 1950 does not exclude it from the purview of such an order.
In the connected appeal respondent No. 5 filed a case for restoration of land sold to respondent No. 1 which was allowed by the Revenue Officer.
The appeal filed by respond ent No. 1 was dismissed by the Additional District Magis trate.
A Revision preferred by Respondent No. 1 was also dismissed by the Special Officer Land Reforms.
Respondent No. 1 filed writ petitions in the High Court which quashed the orders made by the Special Officer, hold ing that the Revenue Authorities committed a serious error of law in holding that 89 'Rajaka ' caste was included within the notified caste/commu nity of Dhoba '.
In these appeals it was contended on behalf of transfer ee respondents that the Caste 'Rajaka ' mentioned in the sale deeds cannot be taken to be synonym of caste 'Dhoba ' men tioned in Item 26 of the List in Scheduled Castes Order, 1950.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
Though the respondent Nos. 2 and 5 i.e. the transferors mentioned in the deeds of transfer their caste as 'Rajaka ' there is no such caste mentioned in the Consti tution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
In such circum stances, it is necessary and also incumbent on the Court to consider as to what caste they belong to.
[96B] B. Basavalingappa vs D. Munichinnappa, [1965] 1 S.C.R. 316, followed.
2. 'Rajaka ' is the literal synonym for the word 'Dhoba ' and according to the Purna Chandra Oriya Bhasakosh a which is a recognised authority, the definition of 'Dhoba ' is Rajaka washerman.
Therefore the submission that the caste 'Rajaka ' is different from caste 'Dhoba ' is not at all sustainable.
[96A] 3.
In the record of rights as well as the various cer tificates issued by the revenue authorities and the local M.L.As the transferors have been described as belonging to 'Dhoba ' community.
The irresistible conclusion that follows is that the respondent transferors belong to 'Dhoba ' caste which is one of the Scheduled Caste in the State of Orissa.
[96H, 97A] 3.1 Therefore the transfers made by respondent Nos. 2 and 5 in favour of respondent No. 1, who admittedly belongs to Brahmin caste, are hit by the provisions of Section 22 of the Orissa Land Reforms Act, 1960 in as much as the previous permission in writing of the Revenue Officer had not been obtained to the alleged transfers.
[95C] [The transferee respondents directed to restore the lands in question to the possession of the transferor respondents forthwith.] [97C]
