Respondent No. 1 obtained a money decree against the original appellant, who has been substituted by legal heirs, on the basis of a promissory note.
The appellant appealed to the High Court but could not get the decree stayed because he was unable to furnish security for the decretal amount.
The decree was put into execution notwithstanding the pend ency of the appeal, and two items of appellant 's properties were purchased by respondent No. 2 at the court sale.
Later, the High Court allowed the appellant 's appeal on merits and set aside the decree.
Thereupon, the appellant moved the executing court for setting aside the court sale inter alia on the ground that (1) the sale was vitiated by material irregularities and properties were deliberately sold for under value; (2) the sale was collusive between decree holder and the auction purchaser; the latter, being the sambandhi of the former, was just a name lender; and (3) since the decree had been reversed, the sale should be nullified and restitution should be ordered.
The executing court rejected these con tentions and held that subsequent reversal of the decree could not be depended upon since the sale had been confirmed in favour of the auction purchaser who was a stranger to the litigation.
The learned Single Judge of the High Court, however, allowed the appellant 's appeal and held inter alia that (a) the sale was vitiated by material irregularities resulting in fetching a low price; and (b) the decree holder and auction purchaser were close relatives and the sale seemed to be collusive.
But on appeal, the Division Bench reversed the decision of the learned Single Judge.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) A distinction is maintained between the decree holder who purchases the property in execution of his own decree which is 79 afterwards modified or reversed, and an auction purchaser who is not party to the decree.
[84E] (2) Where the purchaser is a decree holder, he is bound to restore the property to the judgment debtor by way of restitution but not a stranger auction purchaser.
The latter remains unaffected and does not lose title to the property by subsequent reversal or modification of the decree, and could retain the property since he is a bona fide purchaser.
This principle is also based on the premise that he is not bound to enquire into correctness of the judgment or decree sought to be executed.
He is thus distinguished from an eonomine party to the litigation.
[84E F] Janak Raj vs Gurdial Singh, ; and Sardar Govindrao Mahadik vs Devi Sahai, ; , referred to.
(3) The true question in each case is whether the stranger auction purchaser had knowledge of the pending litigation about the decree under execution.
If it is shown by evidence that he was aware of the pending appeal against the decree when he purchased the property, it would be inappropriate to term him as a bona fide purchaser.
Indeed, 'he is evidently a speculative purchaser and in that respect he is in no better position than the decree holder purchas er.
[85B C] Chhota Nagpur Banking Association vs C.T.M. Smith, [1943] Patna 325 and Jamnomal Gurdinomal vs Gopaldas, AIR 1924 Sind 101, referred to.
R. Raghavachari vs M.A. Pekkiri Mahomed Rowther, AIR 1917 Mad 250, overruled.
(4) Similarly, the auction purchaser who was a name lender to the decree holder or who has colluded with the decree holder to purchase the property could not also be protected to retain the property if the decree is subse quently reversed.
[86B] (5) The Code of Civil Procedure is a body of procedural law designed to facilitate justice and it should not be treated as an enactment providing for punishment and penal ties.
The laws of procedure should be so construed as to render justice wherever reasonably possible.
[87A B] Rodger vs The Comptoir De Paris, [1869 71] LR 3 PC.
465 at 475 80 and A.R. Antulay vs R.S. Nayak, ; , referred to.
(6) The evidence on record is sufficient to hold that the auction purchaser was not a bona fide purchaser.
The auction sale in his favour must, therefore, fall for resti tution.
The Court cannot lend assistance for him to retain the property of the judgment debtor who has since succeeded in getting rid of the unjust decree.
[87D E]
