Steel pipes and tubes (including blanks therefore) all sorts, whether rolled, forged, spun, cast, drawn, annealed, welded or extruded were dutiable under Item 26AA(iv) of the First Schedule to the .
The Department, however, sought to classify 'pipe fittings ' such as elbows, bends and reducers, manufactured by the appellants, from out of the steel pipes purchased from the open market on payment of excise duty, under Item 68 which was a residuary entry, on the ground that they were known in the market differently as pipe fittings, a totally different commercial commodity.
The appellants ' claim that the process undertaken by them did not amount to manufacture as the products turned out were nothing but pipes and tubes, and that they were being virtually asked to pay duty twice over on the same product, was rejected by the Appellate Tribunal.
Allowing the appeal under section 35L(B) of the Act, the Court, HELD: 1.
Unless the Department could establish that the goods in question could by no conceivable process of reason ing be brought under any of the tariff items, resort could not be had to the residuary item.
This has not been done in the instant case.
[62F] 2.1 The use of the words 'all sorts of ' and the refer ence to the various processes by which the excisable items could be manufactured set out in Entry 26AA(iv) are compre hensive enough to encompass all sorts of pipes and tubes.
[64F] 2.2 The expression "pipe fittings" merely denotes that it is a pipe or tube of a particular length, size or shape.
Pipe fittings do not cease to be pipes and tubes; they are only a species thereof.
In order to achieve 61 fully the purpose for which the pipes and tubes are manufac tured, it is necessary to manufacture smaller pieces of pipes and tubes and also to manufacture them in such a shape that they may be able to conduct liquids and gases, passing them through and across angles, turnings, corners and curves or regulating their flow in the manner required.
This is done by a process of forging, welding, hammering and so on applied to the longer tubes.
There is no change in their basic physical properties and there is no change in their end use.
They are merely intended as accessories or supple ments to the larger pipes and tubes.
It could not, there fore, be said that pipe fittings, though they may have a distinctive name or badge of identification in the market, were not pipes and tubes.
[63B C, 62G 63A, 64E] Indian Aluminium Cables Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
No doubt "tubes and pipes" and "pipe fittings" fall under different sub items under the Harmonised Code as well as under the Customs Cooperative Council Nomenclature where two expressions are used in contrast and the sub classifica tion is more detailed.
That dichotomy could not be imported into the instant case where there was only one comprehensive and generic entry.
[65B C]
