One Motilal who owned Goyal Talkies entered into a partnership with respondent Ratanlal representing the joint family firm of M/s. Ratanlal Damdoolal and Bros., for the purpose of running the cinema business.
Later, the said Motilal together with his wife and children filed a civil suit for dissolution of partnership, rendition of accounts, etc., against respondent Ratanlal, as defendant No. 1, the firm "M/s Damdoolal and Bros." as defendant No. 2, and one Puranmal as defendant No. 3.
Motilal subsequently filed an application for correction of the description of defendant No. 2 firm, which was allowed.
The suit was compromised.
According to one of the terms of the compromise, plaintiff was to pay to defendant Nos.1 and 2 a sum of Rs.15,700 in full satisfaction of their claim, subject to final accounting.
The plaintiff paid this sum within the specified period and thereupon the receiver gave possession.
Subsequently, the Court passed a final decree dated 16.11.1959 stating that the partnership stood dissolved, and directing defendant Nos. 1 and 2 to refund to the plaintiff the amount of Rs.5,470 which was the excess amount paid by the plaintiff to them.
Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 filed an appeal against the final decree which was dis missed, and their second appeal in the High Court was also dismissed on 2.12.1972.
Thereafter, Civil Suit No. 1699 of 1980 was filed by Ratanlal, respondent herein, against the appellants, who are the legal representatives of Motilal, assailing the consent decree after taking the entire benefit thereunder.
The reliefs claimed were for a declaration that the final decree dated 16.11.1959 was a nullity, and for possession of Goyal Talkies, etc.
The appellants resisted the suit inter alia on the ground that it was barred by res judicata, and further that the suit was also barred by virtue of Rule 3A Order 23, C.P.C. The Trial Court framed a 173 preliminary issue regarding maintainability and held the suit to be maintainable.
The High Court dismissed the civil revision against that order.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the suit was barred by virtue of Rule 3A of Order 23 and even otherwise tile plaint averments did not disclose any cause of action in order to raise a triable issue.
In reply, it was contended that Rule 3A of Order C.P.C., had no application since the decree assailed in the suit was a date much prior to insertion of Rule 3A by amend ment with effect from 1.2.1977; and that the question of examining the frame of the suit to determine its maintain ability on any other ground did not arise since the appel lant 's case was based on the bar under Order 23, Rule 3A, and no specific objection for rejection of the plaint under order 7 Rule 1 t C.P.C., was taken earlier.
During the course of hearing of the appeal, the respond ent filed an application for amendment of the plaint.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) On the admitted facts appearing from the record itself, counsel for the respondent was unable to show that all or any of the averments in the plaint disclose a cause of action giving rise to a triable issue.
[179F] Since the plaint suffers from this fatal defect, the mere issuance of summons by the Trial Court does not require that the trial should proceed even when no triable issue is shown to arise.
Permitting the continuance of such a suit is tantamount to licensing frivolous and vexatious litigation.
This can not be done.
[179G H] (3) It being beyond dispute that the plaint averments do not disclose a cause of action, the plaint is liable to be rejected under Order 7 Rule i 1, C.P.C. without going into the applicability of Order 23 Rule 3A, C.P.C. to the present suit.
[180A] There is no ground to allow the application for amend ment of the plaint which apart from being highly belated, is clearly an afterthought fur the obvious purpose of averting the inevitable consequence of rejection of the plaint on the ground that it does not disclose any cause of action or raise any triable issue.
Moreover, the proposed amendments in the plaint are to raise two grounds which are concluded 174 by the earlier adjudication ending with dismissal of Ratan lal 's Second Appeal against the impugned decree.
[177E F]
