The plaintiff respondent claimed that before the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 came into force, his father was a sub tenant under defendants 3 to 25 and after his father 's death, the other 3 sons separated from the plaintiff and consequently he has become the sole tenant.
According to him, his father was recorded occupant of Khasra 1356 Fasli (1.7.1948 to 30.6.1949) and was in cultivatory possession in Khasra 1359 Fasli (1.7.1951 to 30.6.1952) as a result of which he had acquired adhivasi rights and sirdari rights, and the rights of defendants 3 to 25 extinguished under section 240 A of the said Act.
He alleged that in 1968, defendants I and 2 obtained fictitious sale deed from defendants Nos. 3 to 25 in respect of the said land and started interfering with his possession.
He, therefore, filed a suit for permanent injunction.
The suit was contested by some of the defendants who pleaded that neither the plaintiff nor his father was in possession of the said land at any point of time and there was no question of sub tenancy or acquiring of adhivasi/sirdari rights.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
The appeal preferred by the plaintiff respondent was dismissed by the first appellant court.
The trial court as also the first appellate court held that the respondent was not entitled to become an adhivasi under section 20(b)(i) of the Act since his father died in 1951 before the date of vesting i.e. 1.7.1952.
Both the courts also held that his father was not in cultivatory possession of Khasra 1359 Fasli and, therefore, he could not get adhivasi rights under section 3 of the U.P. Land Reforms (Supple 165 mentary) Act, 1952.
It was also held that there was no contract or sub tenancy in the name of his father.
The plaintiff respondent preferred an appeal before the High Court which allowed the appeal and granted a decree reversing the decision of the courts below.
Aggrieved, the appellants have flied the present appeal contending inter alia that since there were concurrent findings of facts by the trial court and the first appellate court, and in the absence of any substantial question of law, the High Court had no jurisdiction under section 100 C.P.C. to disturb the concurrent findings of facts.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Section 100(1)(c) of the Code of Civil Proce dure refers to a substantial error or defect in the proce dure.
The error or defect In the procedure to which the clause refers is not an error or defect in the appreciation of evidence adduced by the parties on the merits.
Even if the appreciation of evidence made is patently erroneous and the finding of fact recorded inconsequence is grossly erro neous, that cannot be said to introduce a substantial error or defect in the procedure.
If in dealing with a question of fact the lower appellate court has placed the onus on wrong party and its finding of fact is the result substantially of this wrong approach that may be regarded as a defect in procedure.
When the first appellate court discarded the evidence as inadmissible and the High Court is satisfied that the evidence was admissible that may introduce an error or defect in procedure.
So also in a case where the court below ignored the weight of evidence and allowed the judg ment to be influenced by inconsequent matters, the High Court would be justified in reappreciating the evidence and coming to its own independent decision.
[168H; 169A C] Madan Lal vs Gopi, ; relied on.
V. Ramachandra Ayyar & Anr.
vs Ramalingam Chettiar & Anr., AIR 1963 SC 302 referred to.
Section 20(b)(1) of the Act eliminates enquiries into possession in accepting the record in the Khasra.
In the instant case the Khasra entry for 1356 Fasli showed that the appellant 's father was the subtenant.
It is not for the appellant to prove that this entry Is incorrect.
It was for the defendants to show that the entry had been introduced 166 surreptitiously out of ill will of hostility.
In the absence of such proof, the genuineness has to be presumed and the entry accepted as evidence of the sub tenancy in favour of the appellant 's father.
The Khasra entry of 1371 Fasli and 1372 show the appellant 's name as person in possession.
It is clear indication that possession of the sub tenant con tinued with the appellant.
The rent receipts of the year 1929 and subsequent years are not required to be proved by the appellant as pointed out by the learned Judge.
These furnish evidence of possession as sub tenant.
The lower appellate court was not justified in ignoring these docu ments.
The High Court was, therefore, well within its power in appreciating the evidence and arriving at its own conclu sion.
[170B, E G] Amba Prasad vs Abdul Noor Khan & Ors., ; and Nath Singh & Ors.
vs The Board of Revenue & Ors., ; relied on.
Though the revenue courts had exclusive jurisdiction, the civil court had jurisdiction to try the suit for injunc tion when the question of title arose only incidentally.
[171B] 4.
The High Court was right in holding that the appeal did not abate on account of non filing of substitution application after the death of certain defendants.
[170H] The State of Punjab vs Nathu Ram, ; relied on.
