Mr. Kubic Dariusz a Polish national was arrested on 29.4.89 by the Customs Department on the ground that he was in possession of foreign gold weighing about 70 tolas.
On 30.4.89 he was produced before the Chief Judicial Magistrate who remanded him to jail custody till 15th May 89.
His bail application was rejected by the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
While still in custody he was served with the impugned Detention Order dated 16.5.89 under the COFEPOSA Act along with the grounds of detention.
On 24.5.89 he was granted bail by the Calcutta High Court but the same could not be availed of because of the detention order which the peti tioner challenged by preferring the Writ Petition before this Court.
The detention order is assailed on two grounds, namely that the detenu did not know English wherefore he was unable to read and be informed of the grounds of detention to enable him to defend himself and secondly that the represen tation submitted by him through the Superintendent of Jail to Central Advisory Board, COFEPOSA was neither considered nor acted upon or replied to at all by the detaining author ity wherefore the detention order was liable to be quashed as violative of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
On behalf of the respondent it is contended that the detenu was 99 conversant with the English language as would appear from his replies to the questions put to him in the course of interrogation.
Hence there was no question of furnishing the grounds to him in Polish language.
Refuting the second contention it was stated that after hearing the detenu the Advisory Board found sufficient cause for his detention.
It was also urged by the respondent that the so called repre sentation of the detenu dated 13.6.89 was not a representa tion to the appropriate Govt.
against the detention and could not be treated as such.
Allowing the Writ Petition and setting at liberty the detenu, this Court, HELD: Continued detention of the detenu has been ren dered illegal by non consideration of his representation by the appropriate government according to law, resulting in violation of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
[114F] Where the grounds are couched in a language which was not known to the detenu, unless the contents of the grounds were fully explained and translated to the detenu it would tantamount to not serving the grounds of detention and would thus vitiate the detention ex facie.
It is the settled law that the detention order, the grounds of detention and the documents referred to and relied upon are to be communicated to the detenu in a language understood by him so that he can make effective representation against his detention.
To ascertain whether the detenu knew the language in which the grounds were served or was reigning ignorance, it is open to Court to consider the circumstances and facts of the case.
The detenu is not required to write an essay or pass any language test.
A working knowledge of English enabling him to understand the grounds would be enough for making a representation.
He could very well send his representation in the language known by him.
[103G; 106E H; 107A E] No hesitation there is in the instant case in holding that the detenu understood the English Language, had the working knowledge of it and was reigning ignorance of it.
[109E] Though the representation was addressed to the Chairman Central Advisory Board, the same was forwarded by the Jail authorities and it must be taken to have been a representa tion to the appropriate government which was to consider it before placing it before the Advisory Board and the same having been not done, Article 22(5) of the Constitution has to be held to have been violated.
Delay in disposing of 100 the representation when inordinate and unexplained the detention would be rendered bad and the detenu must be ordered to be released forthwith.
[111A B; 110E] Preventive detention of a foreign national who is not resident of the country involved an element of international law and human rights and the appropriate authorities ought not to be seen to have been oblivious of the international obligation in this regard.
The universal declaration of human rights include the right to life, liberty and security of person, freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention; the right to fair trial by an independent and impartial tribunal and the right to presume to be innocent until proved guilty.
[112G H; 113A] When an act of preventive detention involves a foreign national, though from the national point of view the munici pal law alone counts in its application and interpretation, it is generally a recognised principle in national legal system that in the event of doubt the national rule is to be interpreted in accordance with the States ' international obligations.
[113A B] The fundamental rights guaranteed under our Constitution are in conforming line with those in the Declaration and the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Covenant, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to which India has become a party by ratifying them.
Crimen Trahit personam.
The crime carries the person.
Smuggling may not be regarded as such a crime.
[113C D] There may, therefore, be cases where while a citizen and resident of the country deserves preventive detention apart from criminal prosecution, in the case of a foreign national not resident of the country he may not be justifiably sub jected to preventive detention in the event of which no international legal assistance is possible unlike in cases of criminal prosecution and punishment.
[114D E] Harikisan vs The State of Maharashtra, [1962] 2 Suppl.
SCR 918; Razia Umar Bakshi vs Union of India, ; Nainmal Partap Mal Shah vs Union of India, ; Surjeet Singh vs Union of India, ; ; Lallubhai Jogibhai Patel vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Hadibandhu Das vs District Magistrate, ; ; [brahim Ahmad Batti vs State of Gujarat, ; ; Prakash Chandra Mehta vs Commissioner and Secretary, Government of Kerala & Ors., ; ; Smt.
Shalini Soni vs Union of India, ; ; John Martin vs State of West 101 Bengal; , ; Chandroo Kundan vs Union of India, AIR 1980 SC 1123; Pabitra N. Rana vs Union of India, ; ; Saleh Mohammed vs Union of India, ; Kamla Kanyalal Khushalani vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Rattan Singh vs State of Punjab & Ors., ; ; Kirit Kumar Chaman Lal Kundaliya vs Union of India & Ors., [1981] 2 SCC 426; Santosh Anand 's case, ; B. Sundar Rao & Ors.
vs State of Orissa, ; Vimalchand Jawantraj Jain vs Shri Pradhan & Ors., ; ; Jolly George Verghese vs The Bank of Cochin, ; and Rex vs Halliday, , referred to.
