The appellant was a manufacturer of motor vehicle parts failing under Item 34 A, and components for I.C. Engines failing under Item 68, of the Central Excise Tariff.
The marketing pattern of the appellant was that they sold goods in the wholesale to O.E. manufacturers, Transport Undertakings and Government Bodies, and the requirements of the replacement market were met by sale in the wholesale to other persons who were met by sale in the wholesale to other persons who were designated by them as distributors/ primary wholesale buyers on the basis of agreements with such dis tributors.
The Department took the view that sales by the appellant to its distributors would be considered as sales to 'related persons ' on account of the amendment to sec.
4 of the Cen tral Excises and Salt Act, 1944, which came into force from October 1 1975, and directed the filing of revised price lists showing a discount of 12 1/2% from the price at which the goods supplied by the appellant were sold by its dis tributors to independent buyers.
The appellant complied with this direction under protest taking up the contention that the distributors were also a class of independent buyers, which was however rejected by the Assistant Collector.
On appeal the Collector (Appeals) took the view that distributors were not related persons relying on this Court 's decision in Union of India vs Bombay Tyres Interna tional Ltd., [19831 The appellant then claimed refund of the excess amount of excise duty paid.
This was rejected by the Assistant Collector on the ground that except in respect of sales to wholesale distributors/primary wholesellers and O.E. manu facturers, the excise duty had been paid by the appellant voluntarily.
The Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribu nal dismissed the Appellant 's appeal.
158 In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the language of section 4(1) of the Central Excises Act, indicates that there could be only one normal price for sales to independent distributors, and that as the letter of protest sent by the appellant covered the entire payment of excise duty in those cases where the normal price was fixed on the footing that the distributors of the appellant were related persons, no question of limi tation would arise in considering the application of the appellant for refund.
On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that the protest made by the appellant must be read as limited to the cases of sales by the appellant to the wholesale distribu tors/primary wholesellers and to O.E. manufacturers and that the other categories of sales must be held not to be covered by the protest.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) In view of the fact that the distributor of the appellant were finally held not to be related persons, the excise duty collected in respect of the difference between the price at which the goods were sold by the appel lant to the distributors and the price to which the said goods were sold by the distributors to independent buyers calculated as aforesaid, must be held to be excess duty.
[162D E] Indian Oxygen Ltd. vs Collector of Central Excise, , Collector of Central Excise, Madras vs Ashok Leyland Ltd., Madras, referred to.
(2) The protests flied by the appellant clearly took up the contention that its distributors could not be regarded as related persons and hence the protests lodged by the appellant must be held to cover all cases where the price at which the appellant sold its goods to its distributors was not regarded as the normal price on the ground that the distributors were related persons.
[162E F] Indian Cements Ltd. vs Collector of Central Excise, ; referred to.
(3) Rule 233B of the Excise Rules does not prescribe any particular form of protest and hence it is not possible to say on the basis of this rule that the appellant assessee in this case must he deemed to have paid the duty without protest.
[ 163E F]
