The appellant cooperative societies consisting of 1739 low paid Government servants had acquired certain land in Ghaziabad for the purpose of providing residential accommo dation to their members.
Subsequently, the said land was notified for acquisition under sections 4(1) and 7(1) of the Land Acquisition Act for the Ghaziabad Development Authori ty.
Representations made by the appellants under section 5A of the Act were rejected.
In the writ petitions, filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, it was contended for the appellant societies that the Development Authority constituted by the State for the same purpose should not have been permitted to acquire the said land to their prejudice, and that there was no justification for depriving them of their right to represen tation under section 5A of the Act.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
Allowing the appeals by special leave, the Court, HELD: 1.
The members of the appellant societies should not be denied residential accommodation for which they had taken effective steps before the acquisition for the Ghazia bad Development Authority was notified.
[205G] 2.1 Keeping in view the number of eligible members, the total area which they had acquired and entrusted to the societies for construction, the capacity of the members to pay for the construction now charged by the Development Authority, the need for planned development of the area and all other relevant facts, it would be sufficient if each one of them was provided with an area of 80 sq. yards.
[205G H; 206A] 204 2.2 High rise construction for the poor sections of the society would not be convenient.
If the double storey con struction with an area of 80 sq.
yards is adopted about 20 acres of land, inclusive of land for laying of the roads and other requirements contemplated under the development scheme, would be necessary.
For convenience and adjustment two more acres of land shall be made available to the socie ties to be shared by amicable adjustment by them.
Thus, from the acquisition notification 22 acres of land shall stand deleted and shall be released inaccordance with the extent indicated for each of the societies.
The identification of the land to be so released shall be made within four weeks from the date of pronouncement of the order by mutual ar rangements.
The order of release bearing appropriate de scription to follow and sketch maps to be signed by the parties.
[206D; 207C E] 3.
The development charges for sewerage, electricity, road connections and the like shall be provided to the Development Authority at the rate of Rs.100 per sq. yard and internal development shall be done by the societies them selves.
In raising the construction, the bye laws and regu lations of the Development Authority shall be strictly followed, (207G)
