The appellant defendants fell in arrears of rent for the months of February and May to August 1974 for the demised premises.
The respondent plaintiffs sought their eviction under section 11(1)(d) of the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1947 on the grounds of default.
Decreeing the suit, the trial court found that rent for the said five months had not been paid.
The decree was affirmed by the appellate court in part, that is, in respect of May and June, 1974.
That finding was affirmed by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: The Supreme Court does not ordinarily interfere in proceedings under Article 136 of the Constitution particu larly when all the courts below had reached the same conclu sion.
But where the finding of fact is based on no evidence or opposed to the totality of evidence and contrary to the rational conclusion to which the state of evidence must reasonably lead, then the Court will in the exercise of its discretion intervene to prevent miscarriage of justice.
[154C D] In the instant case, there was no reliable oral evidence on the side of the plaintiffs to support the allegation that rents were in arrears.
Nor was there any documentary evi dence in support of their case.
Neither the first plaintiff, the widow nor the other two plaintiffs, her children, testi fied in support of the allegation PW 4, who verified the plaint on behalf of the plaintiffs admittedly had no person al knowledge that the defendants were in arrears of rent or whether the first plaintiff or anybody else had demanded rent from the defendants.
[156F G] On the other hand, DW 8, one of the defendants, stated that for the months of May and June 1974 he had paid the rent in June 1974 by 153 handing over the amount to the first plaintiff 's daughter when she went to his shop tO collect the rent.
Since she was a minor he accompanied her to her house to make sure that the amount was received by her mother, the first plaintiff.
This evidence has been supported by DW 7.
He was the Ac countant of the first defendant firm.
DW 6 also spoke of the fact that in June 1974 the defendants had given Rs.200 as rent to the younger daughter of the plaintiff.
These state ments of defence witnesses were categoric and clear.
There was no contradiction in term for there was no evidence on the side of the plaintiffs to the contrary.
The conclusion arrived at by the courts below that rents remained in ar rears was, therefore, perverse and totally unjustified.
[155A B, E; 156D, F, G]
