On the completion of construction of the demised prem ises in 1967, the appellant landlord had let it out to the respondent tenant in the same year.
Later, on 27th May, 1972 the landlord filed the eviction suit against the tenant.
On 15th July, 1972 the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act.
1972 came into force.
The tenant deposited in the Court on 2nd September, 1977 an amount of Rs.4005 being the arrears of rent inclusive of interest and cost.
This payment was made within one month after the expiry of the period of ten years stipulated in section 2(2) of the Act to take advantage of section 39 of the Act.
Section 2(2) inter alia provided that nothing in the Act shall apply to a building for a period of ten years from the date on which its construction was completed, while section 39 dealt with pending suits for eviction relating to building brought under the regulation for the first time.
The Trial Court gave the benefit of section 39 and refused to order ejectment of the tenant.
The landlord 's revision application was rejected by the Additional District Judge, and his further revision was dismissed by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court.
, HELD: (1) In order to secure the benefit of Section 39 or 40 it must be shown that the suit, appeal or revision was pending on the date of commencement of the Act.
Secondly, if the suit is rounded on the allegation of non payment of rent, the tenant must, within one month from the date of commencement of the Act or from the date of knowledge of the pendency of the suit, deposit in court the entire amount of rent and damages for use and occupation of the building with interest as prescribed and landlord 's entire cost of the suit, to take the benefit of 187 the said provision.
If both these conditions are satisfied, the law, section 39, mandates that no decree for eviction shall be passed except on any of the grounds specified in the proviso to sub section (1) or clauses (b) to (g) of sub section (2) of section 20 of the Act.
Similarly, section 40 lays down that if an appeal or revision (arising out of a suit for eviction of a tenant from any building to which the old Act does not apply) is pending on the date of commence ment of the Act, the benefit of section 39 will be available to the tenant.
[199B E] The legislature intended to give the benefit of sec tions 39 and 40 to suit, appeals or revisions which were pending on 15th July, 1972 and in which the deposit came to be made within one month from that date.
The expression 'such ' preceding the word 'commencement ' is clearly sugges tive of the fact that it has reference to the date of com mencement of the Act and the payment must be made within one month from such commencement.
unless such a restricted meaning to the section is given, it would not be able to advance the legislative intent to relieve the landlords of new buildings from the rigours of the Act.
[200F H] (3) The Legislature desired to limit the scope of the application of sections 39 and 40 to suits, appeals and revisions pending on the date of commencement of the Act, i.e., 15th July, 1972, relating to buildings to which the old Act did not apply and to which the new Act was to apply forthwith and not at a later date.
This is clear from the fact that the section contemplates deposit of arrears to rent and damages together with interest and cost within one month from 'such date of commencement ' meaning the date of commencement of the Act.
[200B C] R.D. Ram Nath & Co. & Anr.
vs Girdhari Lal & Anr., ; Ram Swaroop Rai vs Lilavathi, ; 3 SCC 452; Om Prakash Gupta etc.
vs Dig Vijen drapal Gupta etc.
; , ; Vineet Kumar vs Mangal Sain Wadhera, ; ; Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu vs Motor and General Traders, ; A.K. Gupta & Sons vs Damodar Valley Corporation, [1966] I SCR 796; Nand Kishore Marwah vs Samundri Devi, ; and Atma Ram Mittal vs Ishwar Singh Punia, ; , referred to.
(4) The Courts below committed an error in giving the benefit of section 39 of the Act to the tenant since admit tedly the tenant could not and had not made the deposit within one month from the date of commencement of the Act on 15th July, 1972 but had made the deposit 188 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1990] 1 S.C.R. within a month after the moratorium period expired in 1977.
[201F]
