The Income Tax Appellate TribUnal in appeals preferred before it the revenue held that the entirety of interest paid by a firm to its partner was disallowable under Section 40(b) of the Income Tax Act without reference to tile inter est that might, in turn, have been paid by the partner to the firm on his borrowings.
On appellants assessees ' appli cation under Section 256(1) of the Act, the Tribunal de clined to state a case and refer a question of law for the opinion of the High Court.
The appellants assessees then moved Tax case petitions under Section 256(2) of the Act before the High Court.
The High Court rejected the applica tions on the view that there was no referable question of law arising out of the appellate order of the Tribunal having regard to its earlier decision in C.I.T. vs O.M.S.S. Sankaralinga Nadar & Co., , on which the Tribunal had relied.
The appellants assessees filed special leave petitions in this Court.
Treating the special leave petitions as directed against the main appellate order of the Tribunal, and allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: It is now settled by the pronouncement of this Court in Keshavji Ravji & Co. vs C.I.T., ; that where two or 269 more transactions on which interest is paid to or received from the partner by the firm are shown to have the element of mutuality and are referable to the funds of the partner ship as such, Section 40(b) should not be so construed as to exclude in quantifying the interest, if any, paid to a partner by the firm in excess of what was received from the partner.
[270F] Keshavji Ravji & Co., ; , followed.
C.I.T. vs O.M.S.S. Sankaralinga Nadar & Co., , over ruled.
In the instant case, the appeals were directed against the High Court 's orders rejecting the assessee 's applica tions under Section 256(2) of the Act.
However, remitting the cases to the High Court In the normal course for neces sary action would be an idle, time consuming and avoidable formality.
Further, as the position is settled on the point raised, interests of justice would be served by treating the appeals as directed against the main appellate orders of the Tribunal and remitting the cases to the Tribunal for dispos al.
[270B; 271A B] Accordingly, the orders of the Tribunal and of the High Court are set aside, and the appeals remitted to the Tribu nal for disposal afresh on the extent of disallowance of interest under Section 40(b) of the Act in the light of pronouncement of this Court in Keshavji Ravji & Co. vs C.I.T., [1990] 1 S.C.R.243.
[271E F]
