The petitioner aggrieved by the award of a contract by the respondent in favour of Mysore Construction Company (M.C.C.) filed a Writ Petition and a further Writ Appeal in the Karnataka High Court.
Being unsuccessful there he came up in appeal before this Court by way of special leave.
The single judge of the High Court had taken the view that prerequisites for the supply of tender forms were contained in Para I of the Notification Inviting Tender (NIT) and the details called for in Para V could be supplied any time.
The Division Bench on appeal did not express any opinion regarding the requirements set out in para V but was of the view that there was nothing unfair or arbitrary about the award of the contract to the MCC.
In appeal before this Court the plea of the petitioner is that the Karnataka Power Corporation should not have accepted the tender of MCC, as the MCC did not fulfil certain preliminary requirements contained in Para I and V of the NIT which according to him have to be fulfilled before the forms of tender could be supplied to any intending contractor.
Dismissing the appeal of the petitioner, the Court, HELD: Para V cannot but be read with para I. The supply of some of the documents referred to in para V is indispens able to assess whether the applicant fulfills the prequali fying requirements set out in para I.
It will be too extreme to hold that the omission to supply every small detail referred to in para V would affect the eligibility under para I and disqualify the tenderer.
[240E F] 230 If a party has been consistently and bona fide inter preting the standards prescribed by it in a particular manner, this Court should not interfere though it may be inclined to read or construe the conditions differently.
[241E] Assuming for purposes of argument that there has been a slight deviation from the terms of the NIT, it has not deprived the appellant of its right to be considered for the contract.
On the other hand its tender has received due and full consideration.
If, save for the delay in filing one of the relevant documents, MCC is also found to be qualified to tender for the contract.
no injustice can be said to have been done to the appellant by the consideration of its tender side by side with that of the MCC and in the KPC going in for a choice of the better on the merits.
[242E G] The comparative merits of the appellant ViS a vis MCC are, however, a matter for the KPC to decide and not for the Courts.[243C D] Ram Gajadher Nishad vs State of U.P., (C.A. 1819/89); Ramana Dayaram Sherry vs The International Airport Authority of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
