In pursuance of a Housing Scheme the Tamil Nadu Housing Board, Madras had allotted residential plots over the land acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, to different groups of applicants including the low income group on terms and conditions stipulated in the lease deed Exh.
B 3 sometime in the year 1963.
After a lapse of more than a decade of the allotment, fresh demands were made from the allottees in 1975.
Objecting to the same, the respondent herein filed a suit for self and on behalf of all the allottees of low income group settled in the Colony named Ashok Nagar, pray ing for a permanent injunction restraining the Board from enforcing the demand.
The defendant Board questioned the very maintainability of the suit in a representative capacity and also pleaded that it was entitled to finally determine the correct prices for the plots after taking into account the final award of the compensation for acquired land and until then the prices were tentative.
The trial court negatived the objection to the maintainability of the suit but dismissed it on merits.
The first appellate court confirmed the decree.
On second appeal, the High Court reversed the finding on merits.
The High Court held that it was open to the Board to determine within a reasonable time what portion of the demand included the excess on account of compensation awarded by the courts for acquisition of the land and realize the same after serving fresh demand notices.
But since the impugned demand included both the excess amount of compensation as also the additional developmental charges injunction was granted in regard to the entire demand as the two amounts were not separately mentioned.
Dismissing the appeal of the Board, this Court, HELD: The provisions of Order 1 of Rule 8 have been included in the Code in the public interest so as to avoid multiplicity of litigation.
The condition necessary for application of the provisions is that the 273 persons on whose behalf the suit is being brought must have the same interest.
In other words either the interest must be common or they must have a common grievance which they seek to get redressed.
[276C D] The Court, while considering whether leave under the Rule should be granted or not, should examine whether there is sufficient community of interest to justify the adoption of the procedure provided under the Rule.
[276E] Persons who may be represented in a suit under Order I, Rule 8 need not have the same cause of action.
[277F]
