The appellant along with his father and mother, were the joint owners of the suit property.
After the death of the appellant 's mother, he and his father executed an agreement dated 23rd August, 1951 by which they severed their status as joint owners and agreed to hold the property as tenants in common.
On 16th April, 1952 the appellant 's father trans ferred his undivided half share in the suit property in favour of his another son Sohrab.
Thus, the appellant and his brother Sohrab came to hold an equal undivided one half share each as tenants in common in respect of the said property.
After Sohrab 's death, his widow, the first respondent, and his minor sons, the second and third respondents, sold on 16th April, 1987 their undivided one half share in the property to the fourth respondent and his wife.
On 18th April, 1987 the appellant filed a suit under section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act against the respondents inter alia on the ground that the suit property was a dwelling house belonging to an undivided family and therefore the.
fourth respondent who was a stranger to the family had no right to have joint possession or common enjoyment of the property on the basis of purchase of undivided share.
The appellant also took out a notice of motion in the suit in which it was claimed that he was entitled to inter im/perpetual injunction restraining respondents 1, 2 and 3 from parting with possession of the suit property.
He fur ther claimed that if the said relief was not granted irrepa rable loss and great prejudice will be caused to him which could not be compensated in terms of money, and that the equity and balance of convenience was in his favour.
The, Trial Court granted interim injunction the same day but when the order was sought to be executed, it was report ed that the 4th respondent had already taken possession.
333 The suit and the notice of motion were resisted on the grounds that the appellant and respondents 1, 2 and 3 were owners of the property in equal moity but the property was not joint family property or property belonging to an undi vided family; that there had already been a partition as to the user of the property with the result that Sohrab 's family were in exclusive possession of ground floor and a garage in the building, and that the fourth respondent had already taken possession of that portion of the property.
It was further contended that the respondents would suffer irreparable loss and great prejudice if the injunction was granted, and that the balance of convenience was not in favour of the appellant.
The Trial Court found that the suit property was a dwelling house belonging to an undivided family, that there was no partition of the same by metes and bounds; that so far as the suit property was concerned the appellant and his family and the family of respondents 1, 2 and 3 were joint and undivided; that the case would fail within the scope of the second paragraph of section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act; and that respondent No. 4 and his wife as strangers were not entitled to joint possession of the said dwelling house.
Since the 4th defendant had claimed that he had already entered into possession, the Court granted interim mandatory injunction to the effect that the fourth respondent, his servants and agents were restrained from remaining in possession or enjoyment of the suit property.
On appeal, the High Court was of the view that prima facie the facts indicate that throughout the parties have lived separately; that there appears to have been a sever ance in status and it is not possible to give a finding that there has been no partition between the parties, that the matter requires evidence on either side as to what extent the ground floor could have ever been considered as a family dwelling house; that granting of interim mandatory injunc tion will have the effect of virtually deciding the suit without a trial; and that the plaintiff has not made out a prima facie case that he would suffer irreparable damage if injunction was not granted or that the balance of conven ience was in his favour.
In that view, the learned Single Judge allowed the appeal and set aside the order granting the injunction.
Before this Court it was also contended on behalf of the appellant that the fourth respondent was fully aware of the limited and restrictive title of respondents 1, 2 and 3 and the bar for joint possession provided in the second para graph of section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act, and having purchased with such full knowledge he tried to over reach 334 the Court by keeping the whole transaction secret and taking possession Of the property purchased before the appellant could get legal redress from the Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The courts can grant interlocutory mandatory injunction in certain special circumstances.
[340E] (2) The relief of interlocutory mandatory injunction is granted generally to preserve or restore the status quo of the last non contested status which preceded the pending controversy until the final hearing when full relief may be granted.
But since the granting or non granting of such an injunction may cause great injustice or irreparable harm to one of the parties, the Courts have evolved certain guide lines.
[343F H] (3) Generally stated, the guidelines are: (1) The plain tiff has a strong case for trial.
That is, it shall be of a higher standard than a prima facie case that is normally required for a prohibitory injunction; (2) It is necessary to prevent irreparable or serious injury which normally cannot be compensated in terms of money; (3) The balance of convenience is in favour of the one seeking such relief.
[344A B] Shepherd Homes Ltd. vs Sandham, ; Evans Marcgall & Co. Ltd.
Bertola SA, ; Films Rover International Ltd. & Ors.
vs Cannon Film Sales Ltd., ; Rasul Karim & Anr.
vs Pirubhai Amirbhai, ILR ; Champsey Bgimji & Co. vs The Jamna Flour Mills Co. Ltd., ILR 1914 (16) Born.
566; M. Kandaswami Chetty vs P. Subramania, ILR ; Israil vs Shamser Rahman, ILR and Nandan Pictures Ltd. vs Art Pictures, AIR 1956 Cal.
428, referred to.
(4) Being essentially an equitable relief, the grant or refusal of an interlocutory mandatory injunction shall ultimately rest in the sound judicial discretion of the Court to be exercised in the light of the facts and circum stances in each case.
[344C] (5) In considering the question of interim mandatory injunction in a suit filed under section 44 of the Act, the Court has also to keep in mind the restriction on the rights of the transferee to joint possession under that section.
[344D] 335 (6) In order to attract the second paragraph of section 44 of the Act the subject matter of the transfer has to be dwelling house belonging to an undivided family and the transfer is of a share in the same to a person who is not a member of the family.
[345A] Sultan Begam and Ors.
vs Debi Prasad, All 324; Khirode Chandra Ghoshal & Anr.
vs Saroda Prasad Mitra, ; Nil Kamal Bhattacharjya & Anr.
vs Kamakshya Charan Bhattacharjya & Anr., ; Sivaramayya vs Benkata Subbamma, AIR 1930 Madras 561; Bhim Singh vs Ratnakar, AIR 1971 Orissa 198 and Udayanath Sahu vs Ratnakar Bej, AIR 1957 Orissa 139, referred to.
(7) The ratio of the decisions rendered under section 4 of the Partition Act equally apply to the interpretation of the second paragraph of section 44 as the provisions are complementary to each other and the terms "undivided family" and "dwelling house" have the same meaning in both the sections.
[349B] (8) Even if the family is divided in status in the sense that they were holding the property as tenants in common but undivided qua the property, that is, the property had not been divided by metes and bounds, it would be within the provisions of section 44 of the Act.
[350D] (9) In the absence of a documents evidencing partition of the suit house by metes and bounds and on the documentary evidence showing that the property is held by the appellant and his brother in equal undivided shares, the plaintiff appellant has shown a prima facie case that the dwelling house belonged to an undivided family consisting of himself and his brother.
Therefore, the transfer by defendants 1 to 3 would come within the mischief of second paragraph of section 44 of the Act.
[350B C] (10) Clause 6 of the agreement to sell clearly shows that the fourth respondent knew that respondents 1 to 3 had only a limited right to transfer their undivided one half share to a stranger purchaser and they comtemplated litiga tion in this regard.
The said sale was itself hurriedly executed in a hush hush manner keeping the entire transac tion secret from the appellant.
The purchasers were also inducted in the premises in a manner which clearly suggests that the respondents were attempting to forestall the situa tion and to gain an undue advantage in hurried and clandes tine manner defeating the appellant 's attempt to go 336 to court for appropriate relief.
The respondents in such circumstances cannot be permitted to take advantage of their own acts and defeat the claim of the appellant in the suit by saying that old cause of action under section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act no longer survived in view of their taking possession.
(11) The facts in the instant case clearly establish that not only a refusal to grant an interim mandatory in junction will do irreparable injury to the appellant but also balance of convenience is in favour of the appellant for the grant of such injunction.
[352F]
