Sub section (1) of section 33 B of the provides that the appropriate Government may, by order in writing and for reasons to be stated therein, withdraw any proceedings pending before a Labour Court or Tribunal and transfer it for disposal to another Labour Court or Tribunal.
Respondent No. 4, a workman of the appellant company at Dhanbad, was caught red handed while stealing certain goods.
The domestic enquiry found him guilty of committing theft.
Consequently,.
he was dismissed from service.
The dispute arising therefrom was referred to the Labour Court, Dhanbad under section 10(1)(c) of the Act for adjudication.
When the matter was pending consideration the respondent sought transfer of the case to the Labour Court at Patna on the plea that since he was residing at his village near Patna it would be difficult for him to attend the proceedings at Dhanbad.
That application was made without intimation to the management.
The Government, however, without giving opportu nity to the management transferred the case to Patna by a notification dated August 8, 1988 issued under section 33B of the Act.
The writ petition filed by the management seeking to quash the notification was dismissed by the High Court on the view that no prejudice was being caused to the manage ment and no allegation of mala fide had been made against the presiding officer.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court.
HELD: 1.1 The power to transfer a pending case under section 33B of the is not a mere administra tive but quasijudicial power and the appropriate Government cannot transfer a case on the basis of allegations of one party without giving a reasonable opportunity to the other party to represent its point of view.
Such 291 allegations may not be valid or relevant or may not be true at all.
That could be tested only if the other party has notice of the same.
[296A C] Punjab Worsted Spinning Mills, Chheharta vs State of punjab & Ors., [1965] II LLJ 218 and Management of Sri Rani Lakshmi Ginning & Weaving Mills Ltd. vs State of Madras, , referred to.
Jay Engineering Works Ltd. vs Fourth Industrial Tribu nal, Calcutta, [1977] (Lab) I.C. 1739; Muthe Steels (India) Ltd. vs Labour Court, Hyderabad, [1979] (Lab) I.C. 325 and Pioneer Ltd. vs Labour Court, Gorakhpur, [1983] (Lab) I.C. 335, overruled.
1.2 What is important in the modern administration is the fairness of procedure with elimination of element of arbitrariness, for fairness is a fundamental principle of good administration.
It is a rule to ensure that vast power in the modern State is not abused but properly exercised.
The State power is used for proper and not for improper purposes.
The authority is not misguided by extraneous or irrelevant consideration.
Fairness is also a principle to ensure that statutory authority arrives at a just decision either in promoting the interest or affecting the rights of persons.
The concept that 'justice should not only be done but be seen to be done ' is the essence of fairness and is equally applicable to administrative authorities.
Fairness is thus a prime test for proper and good administration.
It has no set form or procedure.
It does not necessarily re quire a plurality of hearings or representations and counter representations.
It depends upon the facts of each case.
[297C, 299C E] Ridge vs Baldwin, ; ; A.K. Kraipak & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. vs Union of India; , ; Pearlberg vs Varty, , 547; Mohinder Singh Gill vs Chief Election Com missioner; , ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union Of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; Swadeshi Cotton Mills vs Union of India, ; Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; ; Union of India vs Tulsi Ram, [1985] (Supp.) 2 SCR 131; Charan Lal Sahu & Ors.
vs Union of India, JT ; Natural Justice by Paul Jackson, 2nd ed.
p. 11 and Pannalal Binjraj & Anr.
vs Union of India, , referred to.
1.3 In the instant case, the State had withdrawn the pending reference from the Labour Court, Dhanbad and trans ferred it to another Labour Court at the distant District of Patna, on the represen 292 tation of the workman without getting it verified from the management.
The State in fairness ought to have got it verified by giving an opportunity to the management which was a party to the pending reference.
The management was not required to establish particular prejudice for want of such opportunity.
The non observance of natural justice was itself prejudice to the management and proof of prejudice independently of proof of denial of natural justice was unnecessary.
Denial of the opportunity to the management was thus a fatal flaw to the decision of the Government.
[300H 30 IA, B D] S.L. Kapoor vs Jagmohan, ; and Altco Ltd. vs Sutherland, , referred to.
The expression 'may ' in Sub section
(1) of section 33B of the Act only makes it discretionary in so far as the appropriate Government taking a decision as to whether the power con ferred thereunder has to be exercised or not.
But when once a decision has been taken to transfer a pending case then the requirement of giving reasons becomes mandatory.
The authority would be under legal obligation to record reasons in support of its decision.
Failure to give reasons or giving reasons not germane would thus be fatal to the deci sion.
[295C D] Associated Electrical Industries (P) Ltd. vs Its Work men, [1961] II LLJ 122 and Ajanta Industries vs Central Board of Taxes, ; , referred to.
2.2 In the instant case, the Government has stated that the workman was having his residence at his village near Patna and it would be, therefore, inconvenient for him to attend the Labour Court regularly at Dhanbad.
Most of the factors, however, do not point that way.
The workman and his family members seem to be still residing in the colony quarter at Dhanbad.
His two sons are studying in a school at a nearby village.
The letter dated September 8, 1988 of the Headmaster of the said school speaks of that fact.
The letter from the Assistant Electrical Engineer in proof of the electricity supplied to the quarter occupied by the workman at Dhanbad is also relevant.
As against these mate rials, the workman has not produced any proof in support of his allegation that he has been residing in a village home near Patna.
He has not denied the documents annexed to the special leave petition and not seriously disputed the factum of his residence in the colony quarter at Dhanbad.
The Government was, therefore, misled by the representation of the workman.
[301E H] 293 3.
The notification dated August 8, 1988 is quashed.
The Labour Court, Dhanbad shall proceed to dispose of the matter as expeditiously as possible.
[302A]
