In a suit filed by the Respondent for recovery of a certain amount from the appellants and others, on the basis of an agreement between the parties, appellant entered appearance and prayed for the production of original docu ments, since photostat copies were not clear, so that writ ten statement may be filed.
Thereafter the appellant moved the Court under Section 34 of the for stay of the suit on the ground that there was an arbitration clause in the suit agreement covering the matter in dispute.
Though the Re spondent Corporation admitted the existence of such a clause, it opposed the prayer for stay of the proceedings on the plea that the appellant had taken steps in the proceed ings of the suit, in that an adjournment was taken for filing written statement.
Staying the proceedings, the trial court observed that there was no prayer for adjournment of the case for filing the written statement.
On appeal by the Respondent Corporation, the First Appellate Court vacated the stay order passed by the trial court.
The Revision petition filed by the appellant was dismissed by the High Court.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the High Court 's order.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The expression "a step in the proceeding" which would disentitle the defendant from invoking section 34 of the is not every step taken by him in the suit.
It should be a step to abandon the right to have the suit stayed.
It should be a step in aid of the progress of the suit.
The step must have been consciously taken with a view to submit to the jurisdiction of the Court for the purpose of adjudicating the controversy on merits.
[356C D] 354 1.2 Before the trial court, the defendants only sought a direction to the plaintiff to produce the original agreement and other documents so that they may file written statement.
It was not stated that they would file the written state ment.
They never took any other step submitting to the jurisdiction of the court to decide the case on merits.
The right to have the dispute settled by arbitration has been conferred by agreement of parties and that right should not be deprived of by technical pleas.
The Court must go into the circumstances and intention of the party in the step taken.
The court must examine whether the party has aban doned his right under the agreement.
In the light of these principles and looking to the substance of the application dated January 4, 1985, one cannot form an opinion that the defendants have abandoned their right to have the suit stayed and took a step in the suit to file the written statement.
[357B D] State of U.P. vs Janki Saran Kailash Chandra, [1974] 1 SCR 31; Food Corporation of India vs Yadav Engineer, ; and General Electric Co. vs Renusagar Power Co., ; , relied on.
