The respondent landlord filed an eviction petition against the appellants under section 13 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 on the grounds of arrears of rent, sub letting and making material alterations impair ing the utility of the building.
On the first date of hear ing before the Rent Controller the appellants tendered the arrears of rent but the respondent landlord refused to accept it on the ground that the tender of rent was not valid since it included rent on behalf of a disputed tenant.
Accepting the case of unauthorised subletting the Rent Controller allowed the eviction petition holding that the rent tendered was not in terms of the proviso to sub section (2)(i) of section 13 because only the undisputed tenant alone ought to have tendered the rent.
The appellate authority dismissed the appeal on the preliminary point of validity of tendering of rent, holding that the rent deposited by the appellants was not valid, since one of the appellants was a stranger.
The High Court confirmed the order of the appellate authority by dismissing the tenant 's revision in limine.
In the appeal to this Court on the question, whether the word 'tenant ' included a person claiming to be a tenant, allowing the appeal, this Court, 279 HELD: 1.
When a word has been defined in the interpreta tion clause, prima facie that definition governs wherever that word is used in the body of the Statute unless the context requires otherwise.
The context is both internal and external.
The internal context requires the interpreter to situate the disputed words within the section of which they are part and in relation to the rest of the Act.
The exter nal context involves determining the meaning from ordinary linguistic usage (including any special technical meanings) from the purpose for which the provision was passed, and from the place of the provisions within the general scheme of statutory and common law rules and principles.
[286E G] Cross: Statutory Interpretation, 2nd ed.
p. 48, referred to.
1.1 Even where the definition is exhaustive in as much as the word defined is said to mean a certain thing, it is possible for the word to have a somewhat different meaning in different sections of the Act depending upon the subject or context.
[287B] Vanguard Fire and General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs M/s Fraser and Ross & Anr., , followed.
The opening sentence in the definition of Section 2 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 states "unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or con text".
In view of this qualifications, the Court has not only to look at the words but also to examine the context and collocation in the light of the object of the Act and the purpose for which a particular provision was made by the Legislature.
[286G H] 3.
The apparent purpose of the proviso to Section 13(2)(i) was to relieve the defaulting tenant from the extreme penalty of eviction.
The provision is analogous to Section 114 of the which confers discretion on the Court to grant relief against forfeiture for non payment of rent.
But the proviso goes a step further and leaves no such discretion to the controller or Court even if the tenant is a constant defaulter.
If the arrears and other amounts specified are paid or tendered on the first date of hearing, the default as a ground for eviction disappears and the Controller is precluded from passing a decree for eviction.
The governing principle of the proviso is that the tenant could pay and stay an action for eviction on default.
At the same time, the landlord is ensured payment of arrears, interest and the costs that he has incurred without the necessity of going to civil court to 280 recover it.
The proviso affords a real and sanctified pro tection to tenant against eviction on the ground of default.
It should not be given a hypothetical or literal construc tion, but should be meaningfully construed.
The legislative protection concerning the tenants should not be narrowly tailored.
Indeed, it should be given wider meaning and broader concept.
[287G H; 288A; D] Court should try to understand the spirit of the text and not be bound by letter.
[288D] Mangat Rai vs Kidarnath, ; , followed.
Hudson County Water Co. vs Me Carter, ; , referred to.
Taking into account the intention of the legislature and the purposes for which the proviso was enacted, it is clear that the obligation to tender the rent under the proviso to Section 13(2)(i) on the first hearing date does not depend upon the existence of admitted jural relationship of landlord and tenant.
When an action for eviction is brought by the landlord or the ground of default, the provi so stands attracted.
The benefit of the proviso could be availed of by the tenant and also by those who claim to be the tenant.
[289D E] Ram Gopal & Ors.
vs Ram Prakash & Ors., [1963] RLR 1112 and Punjab Rajasthan Goods Carriers & Ors.
vs Onkar Mal, [1977] RLR 1195, overruled.
Law as creative response should be so interpreted to meet the different fact situations coming before the Court.
For, Acts of Parliament were not drafted with divine pres cience and perfect clarity.
It Is not possible for the legislators to foresee the manifold sets of facts and controversies which may arise while giving effect to a particular provision.
Indeed, the legislators do not deal with the specific controversies.
When conflicting interests arise or defect appears from the language of the Statute, the Court by consideration of the legislative intent must supplement the written word with 'force and life '.
[287E F] Seaford Estate Ltd. vs Asher, , referred to.
