The appellant on behalf of his firm, which is engaged in processing of stone slabs, placed an order for calcareous stone (other than marble) with the exporter in Italy, and asked the exporter to certify that the said goods were not marble.
The appellant further obtained from the foreign exporter a sample tile and had the same tested by a reputed geologist who confirmed that the sample was not marble.
The goods were imported under OGL Appendix 6, Item I of Import and Export Policy for April 1988 March 1991.
The Customs Department sent sealed samples of the im ported goods for testing to various technical authorities, and on the basis of some of these reports/opinions/visual observations issued a show cause notice to the appellant alleging that the calcareous stone were nothing but marble only as per the commercial definition of marble and there fore governed by Entry 62, Appendix 2, Part B of the Import lant 's contention was that the said goods could not be regarded as 'marble ' in terms of the expression 'marble ' appearing in heading 25.15 in Schedule 1.
Appendix I B, Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 1985.
The Collector of Customs however passed an order that the goods imported were marble requiring a specific import licence.
The Collector further ordered confiscation of the goods and imposition of fine and penalty.
The Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal dismissed the appellant 's appeal but reduced the penalty amount.
370 Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appel lant that: (1) for the purpose of understanding the meaning of 'marble ' occurring in Appendix 1 B, Schedule I of the Im ports (Control) Order, 1955 it is necessary to refer to Mineral Products, in Chapter 25, Tariff Entry No. 25.15.
the term 'marble ' therein does not occur by itself or in isolation bal as an inseverable part of a Tariff Entry which deals with five items (a) Marble (b) Travertine (c) Ecaussine (d) Other calcareous stone Alabaster; the Tariff Entry draws a clear line of distinction between each of these five items and regards them as five distinct products; (4) the term 'marble ' has to be given a meaning which fits in and harmonises in the above mentioned statutory context, so that 'marble ' continues to remain distinct and different from the said other four items: though the general principle of interpretation of tariff entries occurring in a tax statute is that of commer cial nomenclature or understanding in the trade, the said doctrine or commercial nomenclature or trade understanding can and should be departed from in a case where the statuto ry context in which the tariff item appears, requires such a departure; (6) the principles of interpretation are never embodied rules and the same must always yield to the context of the particular statute; (7) as the word 'marble ' has not been defined and the tariff item refers to calcareous stone of an apparent spe cific gravity of 2.5 or more, has to be taken to be used in a technical and scientific sense and as such the same cannot be interpreted in the popular commercial sense; the end use of the particular product is irrelevant and of no consequence for determining its classification; and (9) if the term 'marble ' is to be given the commercial meaning as relied upon by the Customs Authorities then the inevitable consequence would be that the term 'marble ' in Chapter Heading 25.15 would automatically include within it the other four items thereby rendering the rest of the Tariff Entry otiose, redundant and meaningless.
371 On behalf of the Revenue it was contended that: (1) the word 'marble ' has not been defined in the Tariff Act and as such in interpreting the word 'marble ' as men tioned in Tariff Item No. 25.15 in Appendix 1 B, Schedule 1 to the Import (Control) Order, 1955, the test in commercial and trade parlance has to be applied i.e. how the said product came to be commercially known by the trading people; (2) it is not a scientific or technical word and as such it does not require to be interpreted in its scientific and technical sense; (3) the word 'marble ' if so interpreted will include calcareous stone of 2.5 or more specific gravity; (4) marble is the genus and all other four items of stone mentioned in Tariff Entry 25.15 which are of apparent specific gravity of 2.5 are included within marble as they are commercially and in trade parlance known as marble; and (5) the end use of the product i.e. marble and calcare ous stone has to be taken into consideration in the determi nation of the other items of stone mentioned in that Entry.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) According to a number of reports as well as the ISI specification the slabs of rocks that have been imported by the appellant and claimed to be calcareous stones are not 'marble ' in the scientific and technical sense of the term 'marble '.
[387F G] (2) Calcareous stone as mentioned in ITC Schedule has to be taken in scientific and technical sense as therein the said stone has been described as of an apparent specific gravity of 2.5 or more.
Therefore, the word 'marble ' has to be interpreted in the scientific or technical sense and not in the sense as commercially understood or as meant in the trade parlance.
[388D E] 4.
The general principle of interpretation of tariff entries occurring in a tax statute is that of commercial nomenclature or understanding in the trade.
The said doc trine of commercial nomenclature or understanding can and should be departed from in a case where the statutory con tent in which the tariff item appears requires such a de 372 parture.
If the application of the commercial meaning of trade nomenclature runs counter to the statutory context then the said principle of interpretation cannot and should not be applied.
[388E F] (5) Trade meaning or commercial nomenclature would be applicable if a particular product description occurs by itself in a Tariff Entry and there is no conflict between the Tariff Entry and any other Entry requiring to reconcile and harmonise that Tariff Entry with any other Entry.
[388G] Union of India vs Delhi Cloth & General Mills, [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 586; Dunlop India Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Commissioner of Sales Tax, M.P. vs Jaswant Singh Charan Singh, ; ; Grenfell vs Inland Revenue Commissioner, , 248; Holt & Co. vs Collyer, , 720; K.V. Varkey vs Agri cultural Income Tax and Rural Sales Tax Officer, [1954] 5 STC 384; Cannanore Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd. vs Col lector of Customs and Central Excise Cochin, ; ; Collector of Central Excise, Kanpur vs Krishna Carbon Paper Co., ; ; Collector of Customs, Bombay vs Hargovindas & Co., [1987] 29 LET 975 and Collector of Cus toms, Bombay vs Swastic Woollens (P) Ltd. and Ors., [1988] Supp SCC 796, referred to.
(6) The commercial nomenclature or trade meaning cannot be given to marble in as much as such a meaning if given will render otiose and redundant the terms travertine, ecaussine, alabaster and other calcareous monumental or building stone of an apparent specific gravity of 2.5 or more whether or not roughly trimmed or merely cut by sawing.
[397F G] (7) In interpreting a product its end use is of no relevance in determining the classification because in interpreting a term appearing in the Tariff Item which has not been defined either in the Tariff Schedule or in the Import Control Order, the same is to be interpreted in such a way which is in consonance with the Items specified in the ITC Schedule without leaving out any part of the Items mentioned therein.
[399A B] (8) Considering all the reports, and since the term 'marble ' has not been defined in the Imports Control Order as well as in the ITC Schedule it has to be taken in a scientific and technical sense as well as in the context the word has been used, and the slabs of calcareous stones imported by the appellant from Italy cannot be held to be marble as they have not been recrystallised and metamor phosed in the geological and petrological sense of the term.
[398F] 373 (9) The slabs of calcareous stone imported by the appel lant are not marble as mentioned in Entry No. 62 of Appendix 2 of the Import and Export Policy for April 1988 March 1991 and so it is covered by Open General Licence.
[399G] (10) The imported goods cannot be confiscated by the Government under Section III(d) of the Customs Act, 1961 nor the appellant can be given the option to clear the said goods for home consumption on payment of fine in lieu of confiscation under Section 125 of the .
[399H; 400A] (11) The appellant cannot be said to have imported calcareous stones without an import licence and as such there being no violation of the Import Control Policy the imposition of penalty under Section 112 of the is unwarranted and not sustainable.
[400A] (12) Even if it is taken for arguments sake that the imported article is marble falling within Entry 62 of Appen dix 2, the burden lies on the Customs Department to show that the appellant has acted dishonestly or contumaciously or with the deliberate or distinct object of breaching the law.
In the instant case, in view of the finding arrived at by the Appellate Tribunal that the said product was imported on a bona fide belief that it was not marble, the imposition of such a heavy fine is not at all warranted and justified.
[400B C; 401A B] Merck Spares vs Collector of Central Excise & Customs, Delhi, ; Shama Engine Valves Ltd. Bombay vs Collector of Customs, Bombay, ; Madhusu dan Gordhandas & Co. vs Collector of Customs, Bombay, and Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs State of Orissa, [1970] 1 SCR 753, referred to.
