The appellant land owner held lands in excess of 30 standard acres as on 6.4.1960.
He filed a return as required by the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961 and an enquiry was initiated by the Authorised Officer concerned under Section 9(2)(b) of the Act.
Several objections raised by the appellant were rejected and the Authorised Officer came to the conclusion that the family of the appellant could be reckoned to be of five members be tween 6.4.1960 and 2.10.1962 and thus the appellant was entitled to 30 standard acres; his wife and daughter however could hold 10 and 7.71 standard acres respectively as strid hana.
The appellant was asked to elect which lands he wished to be included in his holding and state which lands should be treated as surplus.
Feeling aggrieved by the said deter mination, the appellant preferred an appeal under Section 78(1) to the Land Tribunal.
The appellant contended (i) that the Authorised Officer had wrongly included the lands of his minor sons, unmarried daughter and wife gifted to them long before 1960; (ii) that subsequent to the filing of the appeal, the Act was amended as a consequence whereof his rights and liabilities with regard to the fixation of ceil ing area were required to be worked out on the basis of the revised date of commencement of the Act i.e. 15.2.1970; notified date being 2.10.1970.
It was also urged by the appellant that the lands of his eldest son Laxminarayanan could not be included in his holding.
On those grounds amongst others relating to the effect of subsequent transac tions the appellant prayed that the matter ought to be remanded to the Authorised Tribunal for a de novo considera tion.
The appellant authority rejected all the contentions and dismissed the appeal, whereupon the appellant preferred a revision application before the High Court.
Before the High Court his plea regarding subsequent transactions was confined to the documents executed between 15th February 1970, the date of commencement of the 359 Act, and 2nd October 1970, the notified date; contentions regarding other transactions were not pressed.
The High Court accepted this contention and took the view that even in respect of proceedings which commenced prior to the coming into force of the Amending Act, an affected person can take advantage of the provisions contained In Section 2 IA.
The High Court held that while Section 2 of the Amending Act reduced the ceiling area to half, benefit was conferred by Section 21A and hence both the provisions had to be read together.
On that reasoning the High Court opined that the three documents relating to subsequent transactions executed between the said date, could not be ignored in fixing the ceiling area unless it was found that the documents were executed to defeat the provisions of the Act, in which case the transactions may be declared void under Section 22 of the Act.
The High Court accordingly directed the Authorised Officer to make further inquiries regarding the three trans actions in question and pass appropriate orders.
The High Court rejected the other contentions.
The appellant being aggrieved with the rejection of other points raised before the High Court has preferred this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The proceedings in this case had started and concluded before the Authorised Officer long before the Amending Act saw the light of the day.
Under Section 3(1) of the Amending Act, any action taken (including any order made, decision or direction given, proceeding taken, etc.) under the provisions of Act before the date of publication of the Amending Act, can be continued and enforced after the said date in accordance with the provisions of the Act as if the Amending Act had not been passed.
This is however, subject to subsection (2) which carves out an exception to sub section (1) insofar as the reduction of the ceiling area from 30 standard acres to 15 standard acres is concerned.
[367E G] B.K.V. Radhamani Ammal vs Authorised Officer, Land Reforms, Coimbatore, , referred to.
