In August 1982 the Government of Madhya Pradesh decided to abolish the Madhya Pradesh Lift Irrigation Corporation.
It was also decided to merge the surplus staff of the Corpo ration in the equivalent posts of the Irrigation Department of the State Government.
Accordingly, with effect from 8.10.1982 the appellants, who were serving as Senior Techni cal Assistants (S.T.As.) in the Corporation, became Junior Engineers in the Irrigation Department but their seniority therein was fixed below the erstwhile Junior Engineers of the State Department.
For this purpose, an equivalent number of posts were deemed to have been created in the dying cadre of Junior Engineers.
Similarly, the Junior Technical Assist ants in the Corporation were absorbed in the lower cadre of Sub Engineers.
The Junior Engineers of the State Department on comple tion of two years ' service as Junior Engineers, were enti tled to be considered for promotion to the gazetted post of Assistant Engineers.
Sometime in 1984, the appellants who were at the bottom of the seniority list of Junior Engineers became eligible for promotion as Assistant Engineers.
Their legitimate claims in this regard were being stalled by the State, and so the appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in 1986.
Later, the whole scheme of merger, as envisaged in the order dated 8.10.1982, was sought to be upset to the detri ment of the appellants, and towards that end the order issued on 8.10.
1982 was amended on 1.3.1986.
The effect of this amendment was that the Senior Technical Assistants were to be absorbed in the lower posts of Sub Engineers retro spectively with effect from 8.10.82.
The amendment however, provided that they shall be eligible for promotion to the posts of Assistant 425 Engineers from the quota of Graduate Sub Engineers.
This amendment vitally affected the interests of the appellants in so far as their status and chances of promotion were concerned.
Having failed before the High Court, the appellants have come to this Court by way of special leave.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that they having been given the right at the time of absorption in 1982 that they will be eligible for promo tion in the same way as the erstwhile Junior Engineers of the State Department, this right could not be done away by invoking an earlier amendment of the rules.
On behalf of the respondent State it was inter alia contended that (1) the decision of the State Government to absorb the appellants as Junior Engineers had overlooked the fact that on 8.10.1982 there was no cadre of Junior Engi neers because that cadre had been abolished in July 1979, and therefore this mistake was rectified on 1.3.1986 by absorbing the appellants in the lower cadre of Sub Engi neers;.(2) the appellants when they opted to join as Junior Engineers were aware that according to the rules prevailing on that date there was no avenue of promotion for them as Assistant Engineers; (3) after 27.7.81 the relevant recruit ment rules had been amended which made it clear that after that date there could be no promotion to the posts of As sistant Engineers from amongst Junior Engineers; and (4) the Junior Engineers belonging to the State Service had a right of promotion earlier and this was continued even after the amendment whereas the appellants became Junior Engineers at a time when there was no further promotion available to them and this made all the difference.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The assumption of the respondents that the cadre of Junior Engineers had ceased to exist long before the absorption of the appellants into the Department is incorrect.
Though the decision to abolish the cadre was taken in 1979 and the existing posts were converted into those of Assistant Engineers/sub Engineers on 27.5.1980, the cadre did not die, for the Junior Engineers of the Depart ment who were then functioning continued to function as before until they were promoted in due course as Assistant Engineers.
[438E F] (2) It is also not correct to say that this crucial fact had been overlooked at the time of passing the merger order of 8.10.82.
On the 426 contrary, the State was fully conscious of its earlier decision and the order of 8.10.82 specifically mentions that the posts of Senior Technical Assistants will be merged in the posts of Junior Engineers and an equivalent number of posts shall be deemed to have been created in the dying cadre of Junior Engineers.
[438F G] (3) Rule 6(iv) of the Non Gazetted Service Rules, read with Schedule I, clearly empowered the Government, in the exigencies of the situation, to continue the cadre for limited purposes and augment the same by the number of Senior Technical Assistants absorbed from the Corporation.
[439H; 440A] (4) On the terms of the relevant rules as on the lan guage of the order of 8.10.1982, the appellants, viz. Senior Technical Assistants absorbed from the Corporation were constituted as a part of the cadre of Junior Engineers, placed on complete par with the Junior Engineers of the department already in service and given the same promotional eligibility and opportunities as the latter.
[440A B] (5) It was open to the State, in view of rule 7(4) of the Gazetted Service Rules of 1968, to promote members of the non gazetted services also to the Gazetted Service to the extent of a prescribed quota.
The restricted language of rule 7, cannot therefore, be construed in such a way as to render redundant the specific provision in the Schedule entitling several persons from the Non Gazetted services to promotion.
[440G H] (6) In interpreting these rules and Government orders one should bear in mind that the promotional stipulations in Schedule II should be read in the light of rule 7(4) which permits a wide latitude to the Government in making recruit ments, by way of promotion, even otherwise than in the manner outlined in rule 7(1).
Reading the rules and the Government orders issued from time to time harmoniously, the effect of the cabinet order of July 1979 was that all J.Es., in position as such, should continue to be promoted until all of them became Assistant Engineers.
[442F G] (7) It is seen from the records that such of the Junior Engineers, belonging to the cadre as had been in service with the State Department have continued to get their promo tions even after the 1981 amendment.
If that be so, then, clearly the Department cannot discriminate as between offi cers belonging to the same cadre by promoting some of them and denying promotion to others.
A discrimination between them would be totally arbitrary and contrary to the scheme of absorption envisaged in 1982.
[441F G; 442B] 427 (8) The truth of the matter is that, when abolition of the cadre of Junior Engineers was thought of, the State decided that this should not affect the existing Junior Engineers and their promotional chances.
Again, when the merger of the Corporation and State services was thought of, the decision was that the Senior Technical Assistants should be placed on par with the Junior Engineers of the State Service.
This was a conscious and equitable decision and to go back upon it has resulted in arbitrary discrimination against the appellants.
By the decision of 1986, they lose their status as Junior Engineers (and are equated to Sub Engineers, which is the status also accorded to the Junior Technical Assistants, their subordinates in the erstwhile Corporation), they lose their right to promotion, they lose seniority by being placed at the bottom of the Sub Engineers of the State services, and the promotional quota now allot ted to them is illusory.
[443B D] (9) Gross injustice has been done to the appellants by the decision of 1.3.1986.
This decision is therefore quashed.
Accordingly, the appellants will be entitled to be considered for promotion as Assistant Engineers in the same manner and to the same extent as the Junior Engineers of the State service have been considered and not on the basis of the percentages prescribed for Sub Engineers under the amended rules.
[443F G]
