The appellant, a diploma holder, was, in 1964, appointed as Transport Officer (Class I Technical Grade, Group A), which post was later redesignated and merged with the post of Mechanical Engineer (Junior) in 1968.
The Geological Survey of India (Group 'A ' and Group 'B ' posts) Recruitment Rules, 1967, framed under Article 309 of the Constitution were brought into force in 1969.
The appellant was promoted as a Mechanical Engineer (Senior) in 1973 and his conditions of service were governed by the said Rules, which had been amended from time to time.
One such amendment made in 1984 prescribed that for promotion to the post of Director (M.E.), a degree in Engineering was a requisite qualifica tion.
The appellant challenged before the Central Adminis trative Tribunal, the validity of the said notification on the ground that it affected his chances of promotion or alternatively his right to be considered for promotion to the post of Director (M.E.).
It was contended that applying the amended Rule, in so far as the appellant was concerned, would amount to giving retrospective effect to the operation of the rule, and no retrospective rule could be framed under Article 309 of the Constitution.
The Tribunal rejected the contention and held that it was for the Government to pre scribe such qualifications as it considered fit, and the Tribunal could not interfere unless it was shown to be perverse.
Aggrieved against the Tribunal 's order, the appellant has preferred this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Mere chance of promotion is not condition of serv ice 445 and the fact that there was reduction in the chances of promotion did not tantamount to a change in the conditions of service.
A right to be considered for promotion is a term of service, but mere chances of promotion are not.
[448D] state of Maharashtra and Anr.
vs Chandrakant Anant Kulkarnt and Others, ; , relied on.
T.R. Kapur and Others vs State of Harvana and Others, [1986] (Suppl.) SCC 584, referred to. 2.
In the instant case, no retrospective effect has been given to the said amended rule.
It is not the case that the appellant has been reverted from the post which he occupies on the ground of lack of any qualification.
The only effect is that his chances of promotion to the higher post is adversely affected.
Alteration of rules of eligibility cannot be invalidated on the ground that an employee 's claim to be eligible for promotion is adversely affected.
This cannot be regarded as retrospective effect being given to the amendment of the rules carried out by the Notification and the challenge to the said notification on that ground must fail.
[448F G] 3.
The fact that for the higher post of Deputy Director General (Engineering Service), it is not necessary to hold a graduate degree is no reason why a degree requirement for the post of Director (Mechanical) should be regarded as unreasonable or bad in law.
It is for the Government to decide what qualification was required for promotion to the post of Director (M.E.) and, unless that requirement was totally irrelevant or unreasonable, it could not be said to be bad in law.
[419B C]
