In the proceedings for eviction under the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for arrears of rent, subletting, conver sion of user from residential to commercial and bona fide need, the appellant tenant committed breach of the Control ler 's directions under section 15(1) of the Act in the matter of payment of monthly rent.
Consequently, his defence was struck off and the suit decreed on the sole ground of de layed payment of future rent.
All the other grounds were rejected.
The tenant assailed the order before the Rent Control Tribunal relying on Hem Chand vs Delhi Cloth Mills, on the rigour of section 15(1) of the Act.
The Tribunal found that there was no infirmity in the order.
The High Court maintained the ejectment.
In the appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellant on the strength of the decision in Ram Murti vs Bhola Nath, that section 15(7) of the Act con fers a discretion on the Rent Controller not to strike off the defence of the tenant and consequently the delay by him in making deposit of future rent should have been excused, and that since no cross appeals were filed by the landlord against the rejection of other grounds in the court of the Rent Control Tribunal or in the High Court nor those grounds were pressed in these two forums by the landlord, those grounds were no more available to him.
The landlord died during the pendency of the appeal and his widow and divorced daughter respondent succeeded to him as landlords.
It was contended for them that the tenant was a rich and well connected industrialist deserving no protection of the rent laws.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
If the appeals were to be allowed by releasing and relaxing the rigour of the order of eviction, the matter then would have to be 507 remitted back at an appropriate stage where the successor landlords could conveniently have the other grounds of eviction adjudicated upon, by overruling the objection that the landlord could have filed an appeal before the Rent Control Tribunal and the High Court seeking eviction of the tenant on grounds other than the ground on which the evic tion was ordered.
[51 lB C] 2.
The successor landlords are two ladies, one a widow and the other a divorcee, brought in the fray by operation of law.
Remitting the case back would not only be unfair and unreasonable but time consuming and inequitous as well to them.
Since almost eighteen years have passed by there should be an end to the dispute.
This course is in the interest of all concerned as well as the State.
Instead of putting the parties to a fresh bout of litigation the order of eviction should, therefore, be sustained. ]51 IC E] 3.
The appellant is granted time ending on March 31, 1991 for vacating the premises subject to his giving an undertaking for vacation on or before the said date and payment of rent to the landlords.
[511E F]
