The appellants, elected Directors of the Sanjay Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd., signed a requisition and sent the same to the Respondent 3, Joint Director of Sugar and Joint Registrar Cooperative Societies, Maharashtra State, request ing him to summon a special meeting of the Committee of the karkhana to consider the proposed motion of no confidence against the Chairman of the Committee, Respondent No. 1.
The requisition was signed by more than 1/3rd of the total members in accordance with the provisions of Clause (2) of Sec.
731D of the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act 1960.
On receipt of the said requisition, Respondent No. 3 issued a notice dated 13.9.1989 convening a special meeting of the Committee of karkhana i.e. Board of Directors on 25.9.1989.
The said notice was issued to the elected members only.
No notice was sent to nominated members of the financial bodies or co opted members.
Respondent No. 1 filed a writ petition before the High Court and challenged the action of the Respondent No. 3 in not issuing the notice to the co opted members and the member nominees of the Financial Institu tions, as according to him, those members are entitled to sit and vote at the special meeting when the committee considers the vote of no confidence under Section 73 ID of the Act.
The High Court on consideration of the provisions of Section 731D read with Rule 57A and bye law No. 29 of the Bye Laws of the Society, allowed the writ petition holding that the three members of the second category who have got a limited right to vote at a meeting except at a meeting to elect Chairman or Vice Chairman are entitled to be served with notices of the special meeting and to participate in the said meeting and as the two nominees of the Financial Institutions and the expert co opted members had not been served with the notice of requisition meeting, the requisi tion meeting could not be held.
The High Court thus directed the Registrar, respondent No. 3, to issue fresh notices to the elected members as well as to the three Directors of the second 492 category before holding the meeting and accordingly disposed of the writ petition.
The appellants thereupon moved the High Court and obtained a certificate of fitness under Article 134(1) of the Constitution and have filed this appeal.
The main contention of the appellants is that the nomi nees of the Financial Institutions and the co opted members are not entitled to notice.
Dismissing the appeal (by majority B.C. Ray and Kuldip Singh, JJ.) this Court, HELD: (Per B.C. Ray, J.) The right to participate in the special meeting as well as to vote for such meeting is a statutory right and it flows from the provision of the Act, Rules and Bye laws of the Society.
It has nothing to do with the democracy.
[501E] The words 'entitled to sit and vote in any meeting of the society ', refer to member to sit and vote not in every meeting but in any meeting of the society.
The only express bar as provided in Section 27 is that the members, that is, the Directors representatives of the Financial Institutions as well as the expert Director (co opted) are 'not competent to participate only in the election of members of the socie ty.
[501E F] The Directors have been conferred the right to partici pate in any meeting including the special meeting of the Board of Directors or of the Managing Committee of the society.
[501G] The requisition meeting that has been convened cannot be held as the representatives of the Financial Institutions in the Board of Directors as well as the Expert Director (co opted) under the relevant provisions of Bye law No. 29 have not been served with the requisition notices of special meeting convened by the respondent No. 3 pursuant to the said requisition notice.
[502B C] (Per R.M. Sahai, J. dissenting) Sub section (i) of Section 73 D provides the manner in which Chairman or Vice Chairman who holds such Office by virtue of his election may cease to hold it.
It also pro vides the method of such removal by two third majority of the total members of the committee 493 who, are, for the time being, entitled to sit and vote in any meeting of the Committee.
It is thus clear that the right to remove and elect Chairman and Vice Chairman has been restricted to only limited class of members.
[504E F] Literal construction of expression 'entitled to sit and vote ' if it results in negation of democratic process or is against logic and is fraught with danger of removal of an elected representative by nominees of financial institutions or government, then it has to be avoided.
[504H; 505A] Voting is sine qua non of election and under clause (i) of sub rule (7) of Rule 57 A, the decision to retain Chair man is arrived at by voting and such right namely, right to vote in election meeting being nonexistent in nominees of 'entitled to sit and vote ' used in section 73 ID has to be read as excluding such members from its ambit.
[505E F] Such reading of the provision is necessary not only because it is more logical but also that is the outcome of combined reading of subsection (9) of Section 27, Section 73 ID and Bye law 29.
[505F] Jamuna Prasad Mukhariya and Ors.
vs Lachhi Ram and Ors., ; at 610 referred to.
