In respect of the assessment of the appellant to income tax the Income tax Officer excluded the amount of interest on arrears of rent received by him, in view of the decision of the Patna High Court in Kamakshya Narain Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1946] 14 , that this amount was not liable to be taxed, though an appeal against the said decision to the Privy Council at the instance of the Income tax Department was then pending.
Subsequently on July 6, 1948, the Privy Council allowed the appeal and held that interest on arrears of rent payable in respect of agricultural land was not agricultural income as it was neither rent nor revenue derived from land.
As a result of this decision the Income tax Officer took proceedings under section 34 Of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, as amended, and revised the assessment order by adding the aforesaid amount, on the footing that the subsequent decision of the Privy Council was information within the meaning of section 34(1)(b) of the Act and that the Income tax Officer had reason to believe that a part Of the assessee 's income, had escaped assessment.
It was contended for the appellant that section 34(1)(b) was not applicable to the case because (1) the information referred to in the section means information as to facts and cannot include the decision of the Privy Council on a point of law, 11 and (2) where income has been duly returned for assessment and an assessment order has been passed by the Income tax Officer, it cannot be said that any income has escaped assessment within section 34(1)(b).
Held, (1) that the word " information " in section 34(1)(b) of the Act includes information as to the true and correct state of the law and so would cover information as to relevant judicial decisions; and, (2) that the expression "has escaped assessment" in to cases where no return has been submitted by the assessee.
The section is applicable not only where income has not been assessed owing to inadvertence or oversight or owing to the fact that no return has been submitted, but also where are turn has been submitted, but the Income tax Officer erroneously fails to tax a part of assessable income.
Rajendra Nath Mukherjee vs Income tax Commissioner, (1933) L.R. 61 I. A. 10 and Messrs. Chatturam Horliram Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, [1955] 2S.C.R. 290, distinguished.
Raja Benoy Kumar Sahas Roy vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, , Madan Lal vs Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab, and The Commissioner of Income tax vs Raja of Parlakimedi, Mad. 22, approved.
, Maharaja Bikram Kishore of Tripura vs Province of Assam, , disapproved.
