A Writ Petition was filed in this Court praying for a direction to.the respondents to hold pre medical and pre dental examination in Hindi and other regional languages.
It was contended that pre medical studies in medical and dental examination should be permitted in Hindi and other regional languages and not in English alone, that admission should not be refused and/or examinations should not be held in English alone if the examinees or the entrants sought to appear in Hindi or other regional languages, and that by not holding the examinations in Hindi or other regional lan guages, there was a breach of Article 29(2).
Dismissing the writ petition as withdrawn, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under Article 32 is an important and integral part of the Indian Constitution but violation of a fundamental right is the sine qua non for seeking enforcement of those rights by the Supreme Court.
[591D E] 1.2 Not holding entrance examination in any particular language, be it Hindi or regional language cannot amount to denial of admission on the ground of language.
Every educa tional institution has right to determine or set out its method of education and conditions of examination and stud ies provided these do not directly or indirectly have any casual connection with violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution.
It may be that Hindi or other regional languages are more appropriate medium of imparting education to very many and 589 it may be appropriate and proper to hold the examinations, entrance or otherwise, in any particular regional or Hindi Language, or it may be that Hindi or other regional language because of development of the language, is not yet appropri ate medium to transmute or test the knowledge or capacity that could be had in medical and dental disciplines.
It is a matter of formulation of policy by the State or educational authorities in charge of any particular situation.
[591 E, G 1.3 Where the existence of a fundamental right has to be established by acceptance of a particular policy or a course of action for which there is no legal compulsion or statuto ry imperative, and on which there are divergent views, the same cannot be sought to be enforced by Article 32 of the Constitution.
Article 32 of the Constitution cannot be a means to indicate policy preference.
[592B C] 1.4 The actions following from non acceptance of any policy perspective cannot amount to direct and casual viola tion of the fundamental right of the citizens guaranteed under the Constitution of India.
Court is not the forum to adjudicate upon the questions of policy unless such a policy is the direct mandate of the COnstitution.
[592D]
