Article 371 D brought into the Constitution by Thirty second Amendment Act, 1973, with effect from July 1, 1974 empowered the President in respect of the State of Andhra Pradesh by an Order (1) to require the State Government to organise any class or classes of posts in a civil service of, or any class or classes of civil posts under, the State into different local cadres for different parts of the State and allot the persons holding such posts to the local cadres, and (2) to specify any part or parts of the State which shall be regarded as the local area for direct re cruitment to posts in any local cadre.
In exercise of the power so conferred the President issued the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Organisation of Local Cadres and Regulation of Direct Recruitment) Order, 1975 on October 18, 1975.
Para 3(1) of the Order empowered the State Government to organise the local cadre within a period of twelve months.
The term 'local cadre ' was defined in para 2(1)(e) to mean any local cadre of posts under the State Government organised in pursuance of para 3, or con stituted otherwise, for any part of the State.
The proviso added to para 3(1) subsequently and published through G.O. Ms. No. 34 dated January 24, 1981, empowered the President, notwithstanding the expiration of the period of twelve months, to require the State Government, whenever he consid ered it expedient so to do, to organise local cadres for different parts of the State.
Para 3(7) permitted the State Government to organise or to continue more than one cadre in respect of any category of posts in any department for any part of the State.
Para 4 provided mode of allotment of employees to local cadres.
Para 562 5(1) declared that each part of the State for which a local cadre has been organised, in respect of any category of posts, shall be a separate unit for purposes of recruitment, appointment, discharge, seniority, promotion and transfer.
In the table in the schedule thereto the State was divided into seven zones and zone V consisted of the revenue dis tricts of Adilabad, Karimnagar, Warangal and Khammam.
In structions were issued for implementation of the Presiden tial Order through G.O.Ms.
No. 728 dated November 1, 1975 in organising the local cadres.
In pursuance of para 3(1) of the Order the State Govern ment in Commercial Taxes Department issued order G.O.Ms.
No. 581 dated May 24, 1976 organising zones and the Warangal Zone consisted of revenue districts of Adilabad, Karimnagar, Warangal and Khammam, which was co terminus with zone V of the Presidential Order.
The Junior Assistant in each revenue district in Warangal zone was a separate district post, but for the purpose of promotion to the post of Senior Assist ants and Assistant Commercial Taxes Officers, which were zonal posts, common seniority of the Junior Assistants and Senior Assistants working in all the four revenue districts was being maintained and promotion made in accordance with the rules.
Subsequently, however, the State Government created separate divisions within the zones in the Commercial Taxes Department through G.O.Ms.
No. 1900 dated December 22, 1981 carving out Adilabad and Karimnagar as Adilabad Division and Warangal and Khammam as Warangal Division.
Options were called for and the employees allotted in G.O.Ms.
No. 1648 dated November 22, 1982 to the respective divisions.
Agrieved by the said order respondent Nos. 4 and 5 filed a petition before the State Administrative Tribunal contend ing that for promotion from Senior Assistant to Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer zonal seniority of Warangal local area comprising of Warangal, Khammam, Karimnagar and Adila bad was the criteria, that the Adilabad division consisting of Adilabad and Karimnagar districts of Commercial Taxes Department could not be treated to be a zone, and that the divisional seniority prepared by the department was bad in law.
The Tribunal held that the zonal seniority was the criteria for purposes of promotion, and allowed the peti tion.
The State Government in exercise of its power under cl.
(5) of article 371 D annulled that order.
Thereupon, respondent Nos. 4 and 5 filed a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution wherein this Court 563 declared cl.
(5) of article 371 D as ultra vires.
Left with no alternative the State filed special leave petition against the original order of the Tribunal, which was dismissed.
Subsequently, the appellants beneficiaries of G.O.Ms. No. 1648 of 1982, filed representative petition before the Tribunal, which was dismissed.
In the appeal by special leave it was contended for them that the State Government continues to have its inherent power to organise local cadres to meet the exigencies of administrative needs, as there was no prohibition in that regard in the Order, and that the phrase 'or constituted otherwise ' engrafted in the definition of 'local cadre ' in para 2(1)(e) read with para 3(7) gave ample power to the State Government to create a zone within the Warangal zone for the purpose of recruitment, seniority and promotion in the Commercial Taxes Department.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The action taken by the State Government in issuing G.O.Ms.
No. 1648 dated November 20, 1982 was illegal and invalid contravening the proviso to para 3(1) and para 4 of the Presidential Order.
[573C] 2.1 Once the State Government had organised the Commer cial Taxes Department by constituting different local cadres and Warangal zone comprising of the four revenue districts, namely, Adilabad, Karimnagar, Khammam and Warangal was declared as local area for local cadres of the Department through G.O.Ms.
No. 581 dated May 24, 1976 in exercise of the powers under para 3(1), it ceased to have any power to bifurcate or reorganise a zone within a zone, cadre or cadres therein.
[572E G] 2.2 In exercise of the power under the proviso to para 3(1), it is for the President and President alone notwith standing the expiry of the period of twelve months pre scribed in para 3(1), by an order require the State Govern ment whenever he considers it expedient so to do to have the power under para 3(1) exercised.
Therefore, the State Gov ernment shall have to place necessary material before the President; the President shall consider that it is expedient to organise any class or classes of posts in the civil services of and class or classes of civil posts under, the State into a further local cadre within the local cadre in the zone already prescribed and to pass an order in that regard requiring the State Government to so organise it.
[572G; 573A] 564 2.3 However, for the purpose of efficient administration or convenience, the State Government may create division/divisions within the local area or local cadre.
But for the purpose of recruitment, seniority, promotion, dis charge, etc.
the local cadre once organised under para 3(1) shall be final and continue to be operative until action is taken under the proviso to para 3(1) of the Order.
In the instant case, no order of the President, as provided under the proviso, was made.
[573A B] 3.
The Presidential Order was made pursuant to the power given under article 371 D, which is a special provision made under the Constitution (Thirtysecond Amendment) Act, 1973 peculiar to the State of Andhra Pradesh.
Therefore, the State Government had no inherent power in creating a zone or organising local cadres within the zones except in accord ance with the provisions of the said Order.
[573D] 4.
The phrase 'or constituted otherwise ' defined in para 2(1)(e) is only related to the power given by the President to the State Government to organise local cadre.
Para 3(1) is the source of that power.
The said phrase is, therefore, to be understood in the context and purpose which article 371 D and the President Order seek to achieve.
The State Govern ment cannot create local cadres at its will.
[573E; 575A] Kochuni vs States of Madras & Kerala, ; and Lilavati Bai vs The State of Bombay, ; at 735, distinguished.
The power given to the State Government in para 3(7) of the Order is only to organise a separate cadre in respect of any category of posts in any department when more than one cadre in respect of such category exists in each depart ment.
So, the State Government may organise one cadre when more than one cadre in respect of different categories of posts exist in a zone under para 3(1) of the Order.
For instance, while creating local cadre co terminus with the administrative control of the Dy.
Commissioner, Commercial Taxes, local cadre for Senior Assistants may be created.
It is also made manifest in Instruction No. 7 and 9(e) of the instructions contained in G.O.Ms.
No. 728 dated November 1, 1975.
But it is only for the purpose of administrative convenience, not for the purpose of recruitment, seniority or promotion etc., as the case may be.
[575C E] Thus, the creation of a division and maintaining sepa rate seniority of Junior Assistants and Senior Assistants in the Commercial Taxes Department for adilabad and Warangal Divisions were illegal, contrary 565 to order issued in G.O.Ms.
No. 581 and the Presidential Order.
[575F]
