In a Writ Petition flied before this Court, the peti tioner assailed the order of his compulsory retirement from service made under rule 56(j)(i) of the Fundamental Rules.
The petitioner contended that he was efficient, had clear and unblemished record of service and his character roll entries were excellent, and since no review has been made six months before he attained the age of 50 or completed thirty years of service nor he had been retired on the basis of review, he was entitled to continue upto the normal retirement age of 58.
On behalf of the respondents, it was contended that the order of retirement was made in public interest after review and that the Committee had concluded after reviewing com plete record of service and considering the quality of work on the whole, that the petitioner was not fit to be retained in public interest.
Dismissing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Compulsory retirement under rule 56(j)(i) is not a punishment as it does not take away any of the past benefits.
Chopping off the dead wood is one of the important considerations for invoking rule 56(j)(i) of the Fundamental Rules.
[786G] 1.2 An aggrieved civil servant can challenge an order of compulsory retirement on the ground (i) that the requisite opinion has not been formed; or (ii) that the decision is based on collateral grounds; or (iii) that it is an arbi trary decision.
If the civil servant is able to establish that the order suffered from any of these infirmities, the Court has jurisdiction to quash the same.
[786F G] Union of India vs Col. J.N. Sinha & Anr., [1971] 1 SCR 791, referred to.
784 In the instant case, on the basis of the service record, the Committee formed the requisite opinion that the peti tioner had ceased to be useful and, therefore, should be retired prematurely.
The petitioner has not placed any satisfactory material to prove that the decision was based on collateral grounds.
Once the opinion is reached on the basis of materials on record, the order cannot be treated to be arbitrary.
The service record of more than five years shows that the higher officers under whom the petitioner had worked were different and different sets of reviewing offi cers had also made the entries.
Therefore, the reports must be taken to have reflected an appropriate and objective assessment of the performance of the petitioner.
[786H; 787A B]
