The lands in question are situate in lot Ahiyapur which is one of the villages forming part of the permanently settled estate of Burdwan and had been set apart as Chaukidari Chakaran lands to be held by the Chaukidars for rendering service in the village as watchmen.
At the time of the permanent settlement the income from these lands was not taken into account in fixing the jama payable on the estate.
Some time before the enactment of the Bengal Patni Taluks Regulation, 1819, the entire village of Ahiyapur was granted by the then 1310 Zamindar of Burdwan, to the predecessors in title of the defendants on Patni settlement.
In 1870 the Village Chaukidari Act came into force and acting under the provisions of that Act the Government put an end to the services of the Chaukidars resumed the lands and imposed an assessment thereon, and, subject to it, transferred the lands to the Zamindar.
On June 3, 899, the Zamindar granted the suit lands on Patni to the predecessors in title of the defendants who were the then holders of the village in Patni.
In proceedings taken by the Zamindar under the provisions of the Bengal Patni Taluks Regulation, 1819, the suit lands were brought to sale for arrears of rent and purchased by him.
On February I3, 1941, the Zamindar sold the lands to the appellant who sued to recover possession thereof from the defendants.
The defendants resisted the suit on the ground, inter alia, that the effect of the grant of the Chaukidari Chakaran lands on June 3, 1899, was to make them part and parcel of the Patni settlement of the village of Ahiyapur and that, in consequence, the sale of those lands, apart from the village of Ahiyapur, was bad as being a sale of a portion of the Patni.
Held, that when the Zamindar made a grant of the Chaukidari Chakaran lands which formed part of a village which had previously been settled in Patni, it was open to the parties to agree that those lands should form a new and distinct Patni and the result of such an agreement would be that while the grantee would hold those lands in Patni right, that is to say, that the tenure would be permanent, heritable and alienable, so far as his liability to pay jama and the corresponding right of the Zamindar to sell it under the Regulation if there was a default in the payment thereof were concerned, the new grant would be a distinct Patni, independent of the original Patni.
Held, further, that construing the grant dated June 3, 899, as a whole, the intention of the parties as expressed therein was that the Chaukidari Chakaran lands were to be treated as a distinct Patni and that, therefore, the sale of the lands for arrears of rent was valid.
