About 250 acres of wooded evergreen land was given to the ancestors of Respondent by grant over a hundred years ago and a patta in respect thereof granting the aforesaid lands was given to them in 1912 and in that patta there was an endorsement reading "redeemed coffee sagawall malai" indicating that the trees on the land had been paid for.
In 1918, it appears that pursuant to an order passed by the Commissioner, the said entry had been altered to "unre deemed" showing that the trees had not been paid for.
The respondent applied for permission of appellant No. 1 to cut and remove some of the trees from the land granted to his ancestors.
The said application was rejected on the ground that the seigniorage payable on the value of the timber standing on the land granted had not been paid and hence, before the trees could be cut and the timber removed, seign iorage in respect of the trees had to be paid.
The respond ent thereupon filed a suit in the Court of Civil Judge, Madakeri for a declaration that the said land granted to him was redeemed in tenure and hence no payment of seigniorage could be demanded from him.
The respondent claimed that the alteration of the relevant entry from 'redeemed ' to 'unre deemed ' in the record of rights pertaining to the lands in question was made under orders of the Commissioner and not of the Chief Commissioner as required under the Regulation and hence the alteration was void having been directed to be made by an unauthorised person.
The trial Court decreed the suit and granted the declaration.
The appellants preferred an appeal against the said decision to the District Court but the appeal failed.
Appellant 's further appeal to the High Court of Karnataka was also dismissed.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The suit in the instant case were not barred as they did not question the right of the Government to levy seigniorage nor the liabi 728 lity of the plaintiffs to pay but the plea was that seign iorage had already been levied and paid.
[731E] Identical orders changing the word 'redeemed ' to the word 'unredeemed ' in the relevant entries have been unifor mally made in a large number of cases which would suggest that these changes were made pursuant to a special revision of the record of rights in respect of a number of properties and was not an individual change in a particular entry in the record of rights of a particular plot of land.
[731G H] Under regulation 29 of the Coorg Regulation, this could have been done only pursuant to a direction or order of the Chief Commissioner.
but no such order or direction of a notification to that effect appears to be on the record.
The result is that the said change must be held to be unautho rised in law, void and of no legal effect.
[732A B] State of Mysore vs Kainthaje Thimmanna Enat and Ors., to.
