Constitution of India, Article 254. ' Repugnancy between the Parliamentary Act and the State Act in respect of mat ters, in the Concurrent List, Seventh Schedule When arises Karnataka Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act, 1976 Whether repugnant to the .
Statutory interpretation Doctrine of pith and substance or dominant purpose Scope of Whether applicable to find repugnancy under Article 254 of the Constitution between Parliamentary and State laws in respect of matters in List 111.
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
The Karnataka Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act, 1976 enacted by the State Legislature by taking aid of Entry 42 List III of the Seventh Schedule and Articles 31 and 39 (b) and (c) of the Constitution was reserved for consideration and received the assent of the President of March 11, 1976.
Section 4 of that Act provided for vesting of contract carriages along with the respective permits and/or certifi cates of registration issued under the in the State absolutely free from encumbrances.
Sub section (1) of section 14 prohibited applications for fresh permits or renewal of existing permits on or from the date of vesting.
Section 14(2) provided for abatement of all applications, appeals or revisions pending before the appro priate authority as on the notified date.
Sub section (1) of section 20 provided for cancellation of, notwithstanding anything in the 1939 Act, all contract carriage permits granted or renewed in respect of any vehicle other than a vehicle acquired under the Act or belonging to the State Road Trans port Corporation.
Sub section (2) entitled the Corporation to the grant or renewal of contract carriage permits to the exclusion of all other persons, while sub section (3) re strained the authority concerned from ?615 entertaining applications from persons other than the Corpo ration.
Section 73 of the (enacted to replace the 1939 Act) lays down the mode of application for a contract carriage permit.
Section 74(1) empowers the Regional Transport Authority to grant such permits.
Sub section (2) enumerates conditions that could be attached to such permit.
Sub section (3) empowers the State Government when directed by the Central Government to limit the number of contract carriages on the city routes.
Under section 80(1) such application could be made at any time.
Sub section (2) posits that a Regional Transport Authority shall not ordi narily refuse to grant such application.
Section 217(1) repealed all the laws which were inconsistent with the provisions of the Act.
The petitioners, a group of contract carriage operators who were denied permits that they had applied for under sections 73, 74 and 80 of the in view of the provisions of sections 14 and 20 of the Karnataka Contract Car riages (Acquisition) Act, 1976, filed writ petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution questioning the action of the R.T.A. It was contended that the provisions of sections 14 and 20 of the Karnataka Act were in direct conflict with the provi sions of sections 74 and 80(2) of the M.V. Act, 1988 in as much as while the Regional Transport Authority was enjoined by the said provisions of the 1988 Act ordinarily not to refuse to grant an application for permit of any kind, the said provisions of the Karnataka Act prohibited any person from applying for, and any officer or authority from entertaining or granting application for running any contract carriage in the State; that since the M.V. Act, 1988 was a later legis lation operating in the same area, it should be deemed to have impliedly repealed the provisions of sections 14 and 20 of the Karnataka Act even if the latter Act had received the assent of the President, in view of the proviso to sub clause (2) of Article 254 of the Constitution; that when there is a repugnancy under Article 254 of the Constitution, the doctrine of pith and substance does not apply, and even if some of the provisions of the State Legislation are in conflict with some of the provisions of the Central legisla tion, the conflicting provisions of the State legislation, will be invalid and that, therefore, their applications under sections 74 and 80 were maintainable without reference to the provisions of the Karnataka Act.
For the respondents it was contended that the Acquisi tion Act was made in exercise of the power under a different entry and was not on the same subject, therefore, the matter did not come within the ambit of article 254 of the Constitu tion, and that the Acquisition Act having been 616 reserved for consideration under article 254(2) and having received the assent of the President, it prevails over the Parliamentary Act in the State of Karnataka.
On the question: Whether there is repugnancy between the provisions of sections 14 and 20 of the Karnataka Contract Car riages (Acquisition) Act, 1976 and sections 74 and 80 of the and whether the doctrine of domi nant purpose and pith and substance is applicable while examining the repugnancy of the two statutes? Per Misra, J. (Concurring with Sawant, J.) 1.
There is no direct inconsistency between the Karnata ka Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act, 1976 and the .
[631G H] 2.1 In cl.
(1) of article 254 of the Constitution it has been clearly indicated that the competing legislations must be in respect of one of the matters enumerated in the Con current List.
In the instant case, the State Act was an Act for acquisition and came within Entry 42 of The Concurrent List.
The Parliamentary Act on the other hand is a legisla tion coming within Entry 35 of the Concurrent List.
There fore, the said two Acts as such do not relate to one common head of legislation enumerated in the Concurrent List.
Clause (2) also refers to the law with respect to the same matter.
[628F; 629A] 2.2 Repugnancy between two statutes would arise if there is direct conflict between the two provisions and if the law made by Parliament and the law made by the State Legislature occupy the same field.
In the instant case, the State Act intended to eliminate private operators from the State in regard to contract carriages acquired under the existing permits, vehicles and ancillary property and with a view to giving effect to a monopoly situation for the State Under taking made provision in section 20.
The Parliamentary Act does not purport to make any provision in regard to acquisition of contract carriage permits which formed the dominant theme or the core of the State Act.
Nor does it in section 73 and section 74 indicate as to who the applicant shall be while laying down how an application for a contract carriage permit shall be made and how such a permit shall be granted.
Section 80 of the Parliamentary Act does contain a liberalised provision in the matter of grant of permits but even then there again the ancillary provision contained in section 20 of the State Act to effectuate acquisition does not directly run counter to the 1988 provision.
[630G; 631C] 617 There does not thus appear to be any repugnancy between the two Acts for invoking article 254 of the Constitution.
[631D E] Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh vs State of U.P. & Anr.
, ; ; Kerala State Electricity Board vs Indian Aluminium Company, [1976] 1 SCR 552; Deep Chand vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., ; ; T. Barai vs Henry Ah Hoe & Anr., ; ; Hoechst Pharmaceuti cals Ltd. & Anr.
vs State of Bihar & Ors.
, ; ; Zaverbhai Amaidas vs State of Bombay, [1955] 1 SCR 799; M. Karunanidhi vs Union of India, ; and State of Karnataka & Anr.
vs Ranganatha Reddy & Anr. ; , referred to.
Per Sawant, J: 1.
There is no repugnancy in the provisions of sections 14 and 20 of the Karnataka Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act, 1976 and sections 74 and 80 of the .
Hence the provisions of Article 254 of the Constitution do not come into play.
[652F; 636C] 2.1 Whenever repugnancy between the State and Central Legislation is alleged, what has to be first examined is whether the two legislations cover or relate to the same subject matter.
The test for determining the same is to find out the dominant intention of the two legislations.
If the dominant intention of the two legislations is different, they cover different subject matters.
If the subject matters covered by '.he legislation are thus different, then merely because the two legislations refer to some allied or cognate subjects they do not cover the same field.
The legislation to be on the same subject matter must further cover the entire field covered by the other.
[652C D] A provision in one legislation to give effect to its dominant purpose may incidentally be on the same subject as covered by the provision of the other legislation.
But such partial coverage of the same area in a different context and to achieve a different purpose does not bring about the repugnancy which is intended to be covered by Article 254(2).
Both the legislations must be substantially on the same subject to attract the Article.
[652E] Municipal Council Palai vs
T.J. Joseph & Ors., ; ; Tika Ramji & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
, ; and State of Karnataka & Anr.
vs Ranga natha Reddy & Anr.
; , , referred to.
618 Ratan Lal Adukia vs Union of India, , distinguished.
2.2 In the instant case, the objects and the subject matters of the two enactments were materially different.
The Karnataka Act was enacted by the State Legislature for acquisition of contract carriages under Entry 42 of the Concurrent List read with Article 31 of the Constitution to give effect to the provisions of Articles 39(b) and (c) thereof.
The MV Act 1988 on the other hand was enacted by the Parliament under Entry 35 of the Concurrent List to regulate the operation of the motor vehicles.
They thus occupy different areas.
[636C, B C] 2.3 Unlike the MV Act 1988 which was enacted to regulate the operation of the motor vehicles, the object of the Karnataka Act was, not only the regulation of the operation of the motor vehicles.
Nor was its object merely to prevent the private owners from operating their vehicles with the exclusive privilege of such operation being reserved in favour of the State or the State Undertaking.
For if that were the only object, the same could have been achieved by the Transport Undertakings of the State following the spe cial provisions relating to State Transport Undertakings in Chapter IV A of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1939 which was in operation when the Karnataka Act was brought into force.
The very fact that instead the State undertook the exercise of enacting the Karnataka Act shows that the object of the State Legislature in enacting it was materially different i.e. to nationalise the contract carriage services in the State with a view to provide better transport facilities to the public and also to prevent concentration of wealth in the hands of the few and to utilise the resources of the country to subserve the interests of all.
[634D F; B C] 3.1 A comparison of the provisions of the MV Act, 1939 and MV Act, 1988 shows that the latter has merely replaced the former.
The special provisions relating to the State Transport Undertakings which are contained in Chapter VI of the MV Act, 1988 are pari materia with those of Chapter IV A of the MV Act, 1939 with only this difference that whereas under the old Act it was the State Transport Undertaking which had to prepare a scheme for running and operating the transport service by it in relation to any area or route or portion thereof exclusively, under the new Act such a scheme has to be prepared by the State Government itself.
There is no difference in the legal consequences of the schemes under the two enactments.
Both envisage the operation of the services by the State Transport Undertaking to the exclusion of the rest, and cancellation of the existing permits and compensation only for the deprivation of the balance of the period of the permit.
No acquisi 619 tion of the vehicles or the paraphernalia connected with such vehicles is envisaged as is the case under the Karnata ka Act.
[634G; 635E G] 3.2 Section 98 of the MV Act 1988 in terms clearly states (as did Section 68B of the MV Act 1939) that Chapter VI relating to the special provisions about the State Trans port Undertaking and the rules ' and orders made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in Chapter V or in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.
Sections 74 and 80 relating to the grant of the contract carriage permit and the procedure in applying for the grant of such permits respectively, are in Chapter V.
This means that when under Chapter VI, a scheme is prepared by the State Govt.
entrusting the contract carriage services in relation to any area or route or por tion thereof, to a State Transport Undertaking to the exclu sion complete or partial of other persons, the provisions of sections 74 and 80 would have no application, and the private transport operators cannot apply for the grant of contract carriage permits under section 80 nor can such permits be granted by the Transport Authority.
The MV Act 1988 thus also makes a provision for nationalisation of routes, and envisages a denial of permits to private operators when routes are so nationalised.
Hence it cannot be said that there was a conflict between the provisions of the Karnataka Act and the M.V. Act, 1988.
[637H; 638D] 4.
When the legislative encroachment is under considera tion the doctrine of pith and substance comes to the aid to validate a legislation which would otherwise be invalid for the very want of legislative competence.
When the repugnancy between the two legislations is under consideration, what is in issue is whether the provision of the State enactment though otherwise constitutionally valid, has lost its valid ity because the Parliament has made a legislation with a conflicting provision on allegedly the same matter.
If it is open to resolve the conflict between two entries in differ ent Lists, viz., the Union and the State List by examining the dominant purpose and therefore the pith and substance of the two legislations, there is no reason why the repugnancy under Article 254 of the Constitution between the provisions of the two legislations under different entries in the same List, viz. the Concurrent List should not be resolved by scrutinizing the same by the same touchstone.
What is to be ascertained in each case is whether the legislations are on the same matter or not.
In both cases the cause of conflict is the apparent identity of the subject matters.
The tests for resolving it therefore cannot be different.
[639E H] 620 Meghraj & Ors.
vs Allahrakhiya & Ors., AIR 1942 FC 27 distinguished.
Per K. Ramaswamy, J. (Dissenting) 1.
Section 14(1) of Karnataka Contract Carriages (Acqui sition) Act, 1976 to the extent of prohibiting to make fresh application for grant of permits to run the contract car riages other than those acquired under that Act and the embargo and prohibition created under section 20(3) thereof on the respective Regional Transport Authority in the State of Karnataka to invite/receive the application to consider the grant of permits to such contract carriages according to law, are void.
[686C D] 2.1 The Parliament and the legislature of a State derive their exclusive power to legislate on a subject/subjects in List I and List II of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution from article 246(1) and (3) respectively.
Both derive their power from article 246(2) to legislate upon a matter in the Concurrent List III subject to article 254 of the Constitution.
The entries in the three lists merely demarcate the legisla tive field or legislative heads.
Their function is not to confer powers on either the Parliament or the State Legisla ture.
[682E D] Subrahmanyam Chettiar vs Muttuswami Goundan., AIR 1941 FC 47; Governor General in Council vs The Reliegh Investment Co. Ltd., ; Harakchand Ratanchand Banthia vs Union of India; , AND Union of India vs
H.S. Dhillon; , , referred to.
2.2 Clause (1) of article 254 posits as a rule that in case of repugnancy or inconsistency between the State Law and the Union Law relating to the same matter in the Concurrent List occupying the same field, the Union law shall prevail and the State law will fail to the extent of the repugnancy or inconsistency whether the Union law is prior or later in point of time to the State law.
To this general rule, an exception has been engrafted in cl.
(2) thereof, viz., provided the State law is reserved for consideration of the President and it has received his assent, and then it will prevail in that State notwithstanding its repugnancy or inconsistency with the Union law.
This exception again is to be read subject to the proviso to cl.
(2) thereof, which empowers the Parliament to make law afresh or repeal or amend, modify or vary the repugnant State law and it became void even though it received President 's assent.
[659D F] 621 2.3 The question of repugnancy under Article 254 of the Constitution arises when the provisions of both laws are fully inconsistent or are absolutely irreconcilable and it is impossible to obey without disobeying the other, or conflicting results are produced when both the statutes covering the same field are applied to a given set of facts.
It matters little whether the provisions fall under one or other entry in the Concurrent List.
The substance of the same matter occupying the same field by both the pieces of the legislation is material and not the form.
The repugnancy to be found is the repugnancy of the provisions of the two laws and not the predominant object of the subject matter of the two laws.
The proper test is whether effect can be given to the provisions of both the laws or whether both the laws can stand together.
If both the pieces of legislation deal with separate and distinct matters though of cognate and allied character repugnancy does not arise.
[660A B; 675B C; 660C; 674H; 675A] Tika Ramji vs State of U.P., ; ; A.S. Krish na vs Madras State; , ; Prem Nath Kaul vs State of J &K, [1952] 2 Supp.
SCR 273; Bar Council of U.P.v.
State of U.P.; , ; Deep Chand vs State ofU. P., [1959] Supp.
2 SCR 8; State of Orissa vs
M.A. Tulloch & Co., ; ; State of Assam vs Horizon Union, ; ; State ofJ & K vs
M.S. Farooqi; , ; Kerala State Electricity Board vs Indian Aluminium Co., [1976] I SCR 552; Basu 's Commentary on the Constitution of India (Silver Jubilee Edition) Volume K 144; Clyde Engineer ing Co. vs Cowburn, ; Hume vs Palmer, ; ; Brisbane Licensing Court; , ; Colvin vs Bradley Bros. Pvt. Ltd., ; ; In Re Ex Parte Maclean, ; ; Wenn vs Attorney General (Victoria), ; ; O ' Sullivan vs Noarlunga Meat Co. Ltd.; , ; O 'Sullivan vs Noarlunga Meat Co. Ltd., and Blackley vs Devon dale Cream (Vic.) Pvt. Ltd.; , , referred to.
2.4 Section 14 read with section 20 of the Acquisition Act freezed the right of a citizen to apply for and to obtain permit or special permit to run a contract carriage in terms of the permit and monopoly to run a contract carriage was conferred on the S.T.U., Karnataka.
But the M.V. Act, 1988 evinces its intention to liberalise the grant of contract carriage permit by saying in section 80(2) that the Regional Transport Authority "shall not ordinarily refuse to grant the permit".
It also confers the right on an applicant to apply for and authorises the Regional Transport Authority to grant liberally contract carriage permit except in the area covered by section 80(3) and refusal appears to be an exception, that too, obviously for reasons to be recorded.
It may be 622 rejected if the permit applied for relate to an approved or notified route.
The M.V. Act accords the right, while the Acquisition Act, negates and freezes the self same right to obtain a permit and to run a contract carriage and prohibits the authorities to invite or entertain an application and to grant a permit to run contract carriage.
The Act and the relevant rules cover the entire field of making an applica tion in the prescribed manner and directs the Regional Transport Authority to grant permit with condition attached thereto to run contract carriages vide sections 66(1), 73, 74 and 80.
Thus the existence of two sets of provisions in the 59 of 1988 and Acquisition Act 21 of 1976 is sufficient to produce conflicting results in their opera tion in the same occupied filed.
The two sets of provisions run on collision course, though an applicant may waive to make an application for a permit.
Thereby there exists the operational incompatibility and irreconcilability of the two sets of provisions.
Sections 14(1) and 20(3) of the Acquisi tion Act are repugnant and inconsistent to sections 73, 74 and 80 of the Act.
By operation of proviso to article 254(2) of the Constitution, the embargo created by sections 14(1) and 20(3) of the Acquisition Act to make or invite an application and injuction issued to Regional Transport Authority prohibiting to grant contract carriage permit to anyone except to S.T.U., Karnataka within the State of Karnataka became void.
[682H; 683E] 3.1 The Parliament with a view to lay down general prin ciples makes law or amends the existing law.
The State Legislature still may feel that its local conditions may demand amendment or modification of the Central Law.
Their reserve power is article 254(2).
After making the Act 59 of 1988 the power of the State Legislature under article 254(2) is not exhausted and is still available to be invoked from time to time.
But unless it again enacts law and reserves it for consideration and obtains the assent of the President afresh, there is no prohibition for the petitioners to make applications for the grant of contract carriage permits under the Act and consideration and grant or refusal thereof according to law by the concerned Regional Transport Author ity.
[685E; 686B] 3.2 The Karnataka State Legislature is, therefore, at liberty to make afresh the law similar to sections 14(1) and 20(3) of the Acquisition Act with appropriate phraseology and to obtain the assent of the President.
[686B] 4.
Parliament may repeal the State law either expressly or by necessary implication but Courts would not always favour repeal by implication.
Repeal by implication may be found when the State law is repugnant or inconsistent with the Union law in its scheme or opera:ion.
The principle would be equally applicable to a question under 623 Article 254(2) of the Constitution.
In the instant case, section 217(1) of the Union law does not expressly repeal sections 14(1) and 20(3) of the State law.
They are repugnant with the Union law.
[676C D; 670E F; 669F] Zaveribhai vs State of Bombay, [1955] 1 SCR 799; M. Karunanidhi vs Union of India, ; ; T. Barai vs Henry Ah Hoe; , and M/s Hoechst Pharmaceuti cals Ltd. vs State of Bihar, ; , referred to.
For the applicability of the principle that special law prevails over the general law, the special law must be valid law in operation.
Voidity of law obliterates it from the statute from its very inception.
In the instant case, since sections 14(1) and 20(3) are void the said principle is not applicable.
[683F] Justiniano Augusto De Peidada Barreto vs Antonia Vicente De Fonseca & Ors., [ ; , distinguished.
6.1 The doctrine of pith and substance or the predomi nant purpose or true nature and character of law is applied to determine whether the impugned legislation is within the legislative competence under articles 246(1) and 246(3) of the Constitution, and to resolve the conflict of jurisdiction.
If the Act in its pith and substance fails in one List it must be deemed not to fail in another List, despite inciden tal encroachment and its validity should be determined accordingly.
The pith and substance rule, thereby, resolves the problem of overlapping of "any two entries of two dif ferent Lists vis a vis the Act" on the basis of an inquiry into the "true nature and character" of the legislation as a whole and tries to find whether the impugned law is substan tially within the competence of the Legislature which enact ed it, even if it incidentally trespasses into the legisla tive field of another Legislature.
[680C; 677F; 678A1 6.2 The doctrine has no application when the matter in question is covered by an entry or entries in the Concurrent List and has occupied the same field both in the Union and the State Law.
It matters little as in which entry or en tries in the Concurrent List the subject matter falls or in exercise whereof the Act/provision or provisions therein was made.
The Parliament and Legislature of the State have exclusive power to legislate upon any subject or subjects in the Concurrent List.
The question of incidental or ancillary encroachment or to trench into forbidden field does not arise.
The determination of its 'true nature and character also is immaterial.
[680C D] 624 Prafulla Kumar vs Bank of Commerce, Khulna, AIR 1947 PC 60; State of Bombay vs
F.N. Balsara; , ; Atiabari Tea Co.Ltd.
vs State of Assam, ; and Meghraj & Ors.
vs Allaharakhiya & Ors., AIR 1942 FC 27, referred to.
