The respondent, a constable, convicted under section 10(n) of the but released on probation under section 4 of the , was dismissed from service.
He chal lenged his dismissal before the High Court which ordered his reinstatement holding that there was no disqualification for him to continue in service, for section 12 of the has the effect of removing the dis qualification attaching to his conviction.
Hence this appeal by the Union of India.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court.
HELD: 1.
Section 12 of the only directs that the offender 'shall not suffer dis qualification, if any, attaching to a conviction of an offence under such law '.
Such law in the context is the other law providing for disqualification on account of conviction e.g. if a law provides for disqualification of a person for being appointed in any office or for seeking election to any authority or body in view of his conviction, that disqualification by virtue of section 12 stands re moved.
But that is not the same thing to state that the person who has been dismissed from service in view of his conviction is entitled to reinstatement upon getting the benefit of probation of good conduct.
Section 12 does not preclude the department from taking action for misconduct leading to the offence or to his conviction theron 761 as per law.
It was not intended to exonerate the person from departmental punishment.
[766B C; 765E] R. Kumaraswami Aiyer vs The Commissioner, Municipal Council Tiruvannarnalai and Anr., ; Embaru (P) vs Chairman Madras Port Trust, Mad; A. Satyanarayana Murthy vs Zonal Manager L.I.C., AIR 1969 A.P. 371; Prern Kumar vs Union of India & Ors., [1971] Lab.
& Ind. Cases 823; Om Prakash vs The Director Postal Services & Ors., and Director of Postal Services & Anr.
vs Daya Nand, , approved.
The Divl.
Personnel Officer Southern Railway & Anr.
T.R. Challappan, , followed.
In criminal trial the conviction is one thing and sentence is another.
The departmental punishment for miscon duct is yet a third one.
The Court while invoking the provi sions of section 3 or 4 of the Act does not deal with the conviction; it only deals with the sentence which the of fender has to undergo.
Instead of sentencing the offender, the Court releases him on probation of good conduct.
The conviction, however, remains untouched and the stigma of conviction is not obliterated.
In the departmental proceed ings the delinquent could be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his con viction on a criminal charge.
Therefore the question of respondent 's restatement into service does not arise.
Howev er, the penalty of dismissal from service is altered into removal from service.
[765C D, F; 766E] Tulsi Ram Patel vs Union of India, [1985] Suppl.
2 SCR 131 and Trikha Ram vs
V.K. Seth & Anr., , followed.
