On an application flied by the respondent landlord in March 1973 for eviction of the appellant tenant on the ground that for a continuous period of more than four months the appellant had ceased to occupy the shop during 1969 71, the Rent Controller passed a decree for eviction under Section 13(2)(v) of the East Punjab Rent Restriction Act, 1949.
The appellate authority affirmed the decree.
The High Court rejected the tenant 's appeal.
In the appeal before this Court, the appellant tenant contended that though the shop had remained closed for a temporary period, it Was in his effective control and that since the non occupation did not continue when the eviction petition was filed, the ground mentioned in Section 13(2)(v) had not been made out.
On behalf of respondent landlord, it was contended that since in a number of Rent Acts, the ground specifically required such nonoccupation for a period immediately preced ing the date on which the ejectment application was filed, the Act which did not use identical language, should be interpreted differently.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 If a tenant stops the business which he is carrying on in a shop and closes the premises continuously for a period of four months without a reasonable cause he will be liable for eviction.
However, the non occupation of the premises by a tenant must continue till the date of.
filing of application for his eviction on the ground covered by section 13(2)(v).
[739D] 737 1.2 The reason of including clause (v) in section 13(2) is to ensure that buildings, which are scarce in number specially in the towns, necessitating rent control legislation, do not remain unused at the instance of tenants who do not actually need them.
A tenant who is in possession of a building in the legal sense only cannot be said to be in occupation thereof for the purpose ors.
13(2)(v); otherwise a question of his eviction as envisaged in that section would not arise.
The section, by making provisions for his ejectment, assumes that he is in possession, but, still includes cessa tion of occupation as one of the grounds.
The clause, there fore, has to be interpreted in this background and it must take colour from the context.
[739B C] However, the use of present perfect tense in the words 'has ceased to occupy ' contemplates a period even connecting in some way with the present time.
[741A] Goppulal vs Thakurji Shriji Shriji Dwarkadheeshji & Anr., ; , relied on.
V. Dhanpal Chettiar vs Yesodai Ammal, ; and Gajanan Dattatraya vs Sheroani Hosang Patel & Ors., [1976] 1 SCR 535, referred to.
1.3 Though a comparison of the language of the Act with that of other Rent Acts specifically indicating that the period of non occupation should be one immediately preceding the suit supports the view that the period of non occupation need not subsist at the date of the suit, that alone does not outweigh the other relevant circumstances.
If, on the other hand, provisions of several other Acts are examined it would be seen that the Section has been framed in such a way which avoids use of present perfect tense.
Besides, compar ing statutes of different States is not to be commended because similarity or variation in the laws of different States is not necessarily indicating.
of a kindered or different intention.
[741 B D] Nathia Agarwalla and Another vs Musst.
Jahanara Begum and Others, ; , followed.
In the circumstances, the decision of the courts below that the tenant is liable to be ejected is set aside.
[741G]
