j was the managing director of a Co operative Bank getting a yearly remuneration of Rs. 1,000.
The Bank went into liquidation and an examination of the affairs having showed that the monies of the Bank were not properly invested and that J was negligent in the discharge of his duties, a payment order for Rs. 15,100 was made by the Deputy Registrar of Co operative Societies against him.
On July 27, 1942, for the realisation of the amount, an item of property belonging to the joint family of J was attached by the Collector and brought to sale under section 155 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, and purchased at auction by the first respondent.
This sale was held on February 2, 1943, and confirmed on June 23, 1943.
In the meantime on January 15, 1943, one of the sons of J instituted a suit for partition and separate possession of his share in the joint family properties, and contended, inter alia, that the sale in favour of the first respondent was not binding on the joint family.
The sale was challenged on the grounds (1) that the liability which J incurred was avyavaharika and therefore the interest of his sons could not be sold for the realisation of the debt, (2) that even if the debt was not avyavaharika, the institution of the suit for partition operated as severance of status between the members of the family and, therefore, the father 's power of disposition over the son 's share had come to an end and, consequently, at the auction sale the share of the ' sons did not pass to the auction purchaser, and (3) that what could legally be sold under section I55 1385 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code was the right, title and interest of the defaulter, i. e., the father alone, which could not include the share of the other members of the joint family.
The evidence consisting of the notice for sale, the proclamation of sale and the sale certificate showed that the whole of the property was sold, and not the share of the father alone.
Held, that the liability which J incurred was not avyava harika and that the sale of the joint family property, including the share of the sons, for the discharge of the debt, was valid.
Held, also, that, Colebrooke 's translation of the term avyavaharika as "any debt for a cause repugnant to good morals,", was the nearest approach to the true concept of the term as used in the Smrithi texts.
Hem Raj alias Babu Lal vs Khem Chand, (1943) L. R. 70 I. A. 171, relied on.
Per Imam and Kapur jj. (1) The liability of the sons to discharge the debts of the father which are not tainted with immorality or illegality is based on the pious obligation of the sons which continues to exist in the lifetime and after the death of the father and which does not come to an end as a result of partition of the joint family property.
All that results from partition is that the right of the father to make an alienation comes to an end.
(2) Where the right, title and interest of a judgment debtor are set up for sale, as to what passes to the auction purchaser is a question of fact in each case dependent upon what was the estate put up for sale, what the Court intended to sell and what the purchaser intended to buy and did buy and what he paid for.
(3) The words "right, title and interest " occurring in section I55 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code have the same connotation as they had in the corresponding words used in the Code of Civil Procedure existing at the time the Bombay Land Revenue Code was enacted.
(4) In execution proceedings it is not necessary to implead the sons or to bring another suit if severance of status takes place pending the execution proceedings because the pious duty of the sons continues and consequently there is merely a difference in the mode of enjoyment of the property.
(5) The liability of a father, who is a managing director and who draws a salary or a remuneration, incurred as a result of negligence in the discharge of his duties is not an avyavaharika debt as it cannot be termed as " repugnant to good morals Case Law discussed.
Panna Lal vs Mst.
Naraini, ; and Sudhashway Mukherjee vs Bhubneshwar Prasad Narain Singh, [1954] S.C.R. 177, followed.
Khiarajmal vs Daim, (1904) L.R. 32 I.A. 23 and Sat Narain vs Das, (1936) L.R. 63 I.A. 384, distinguished.
Mulgund Co operative Credit Society vs Shidlingappa Ishwa rappa, A.I.R. 1941 Bom.
381, approved. 1386
