A case was instituted on a private complaint by the appellant for offences under Sections 323 and 452 IPC before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, who transferred the case to Second Class Magistrate for enquiry.
The Second Class Magistrate issued process to the respondents, which was challenged under Section 482 Cr.
P.C., on the ground that the First Class Magistrate transferred the case without taking cognizance and that the subsequent proceedings were illegal.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Again the respondents approached the High Court under Section 482 Cr.
P.C. alleging that the case had not been taken cognizance of, before it was transferred.
This time the High Court accepted the plea and quashed the proceedings.
This appeal, by special leave, challenges the High Court 's order on the grounds that the second application under Section 482 Cr.
P.C. ought not to have been entertained as it amounted to review of the earlier order and it was contrary to the spirit of section 362 Cr.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The inherent power under Section 482 Cr.
P.C. is intended to prevent the abuse of the process of the Court and to secure ends of justice.
Such power cannot be exer cised to do something which is expressly barred under the Code.
If any consideration of the facts by way of review is not permissible under the Code and is expressly barred, it is not for the Court to exercise its inherent power to reconsider the matter and record a conflicting decision.
If there had been change in the circumstances of the case, it would be in order for the High Court to exercise its inher ent power in the prevailing circumstances and pass appropri ate orders to secure the ends of justice or to 789 prevent the abuse of the process of the Court.
Where there is no such changed circumstance and the decision has to be arrived at on the facts that existed as on the date of earlier order, the exercise of the power to reconsider the same materials to arrive at different conclusion is in effect a review, which is expressly barred under section 362.
[790F H; 791A] 1.2 Ira matter is covered by an express letter of law, the court cannot give a go by to the statutory provisions and instead evolve a new provision in the garb of inherent jurisdiction.
The inherent jurisdiction of the High Court cannot be invoked to override bar of review under Section 362 Cr.
P.C. [791E H] Sooraj Devi vs Pyare Lal, ; , relied on.
Superintendent & Rememberancer of Legal Affairs vs Mohan Singh, , referred to. 2.
In the instant case, there had been a definite find ing that the complaint was taken cognizance of by the Magis trate before he transferred the proceedings under section 192(2) Cr.
P.C. for enquiry under section 202 Cr.
This finding has been arrived at after perusal of the record of the proceedings before the Magistrate and on a consideration of the report of the concerned Magistrate.
A reappraisal of the facts on record to determine whether such cognizance had been taken in a subsequent proceeding is not, therefore, warranted.
It was not open to the parties to reagitate the question by a fresh application nor was the court empowered under section 482 to reconsider the matter.
[791 B C]
