Section 49 of the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 puts a bar on the civil and revenue courts in respect of disputes in regard to which proceedings could or ought to have been taken under the Act.
The plaintiff appellant, an illiterate lady, wanted to make a gift of her properties in favour of her daughter.
Defendant Nos. 3 and 4, who undertook to make arrangements to execute and register the necessary deed, however, prac tised a fraud on her.
They made her put her thumb impression on two documents which she had been told and she honestly believed were the gift deed in favour of her daughter.
She had in fact executed two deeds, one of which was a gift in favour of her daughter and the other a sale deed in favour of the defendants.
Later when she tame to know of the facts, she filed a suit for cancellation of the sale deed.
Consoli dation proceedings were then pending in respect of the property in question.
The suit was decreed by the trim court and that decree was confirmed in appeal by the First Appellate Court.
The High Court, however, found that the plaintiff was totally deceived as to the character of the document which she had executed and the document was, therefore, void and of no effect whatsoever.
Accordingly, it held that the suit was barred by reason of section 49 of the Act.
In the appeal by special leave it was contended for the appellant that since it was a case of the document having been vitiated by fraud, the transaction was voidable but not void and, therefore, the bar of section 49 of the Act was not attracted.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1 A voidable document is one which remains in force 800 until set aside and such a document can be set aside only by a competent civil court.
A suit for that purpose would, therefore, be maintainable.
A claim that a transaction is void is, however, a matter which can be adjudicated upon by the consolidation authorities.
[802E F] Gorakh Nath Dube vs Hari Narain Singh & Ors., ; , referred to. 1.2 In the instant case, the plaintiff appellant was totally ignorant of the mischief played upon her.
She hon estly believed that the instrument which she executed and got registered was a gift deed in favour of her daughter.
She believed that the thumb impressions taken from her were in respect of that single document.
She did not know that she had executed two documents, one of which alone was the gift deed, but the other was a sale of the property in favour of the defendants.
This was, therefore, a case of fraudulent misrepresentation as to the character of the document executed by her and not merely as to its contents or as to its legal effect.
The plaintiff appellant never intended to sign what she did sign.
She never intended to enter into the contract to which she unknowingly became a party.
Her mind did not accompany her thumb impressions.
It was thus a totally void transaction.
[804C E] Ningawwa vs Byrappa & Ors., ; , applied.
No suit was, therefore, maintainable by reason of the bar contained in section 49 of the Act.
[804E] 2.
The remedy of the plaintiff lies in the proceedings pending before the consolidation authorities and it is open to the parties to approach them for appropriate relief.
[804F]
