The appellant, a licensed dealer, was charged under Section 55(3) of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 for failure to maintain the necessary accounts and under section 27(7)(b) for carrying on business in the unlicensed premises on the ground that while the show room of the licensed premises was on the ground floor and appellant had kept the gold orna ments in the third floor of the building.
The Trim Court acquitted the appellant and the Appellate Court confirmed the finding under section 55(3) but convict ed him under section 27(7)(b) holding that the third floor does not form part of the licensed premises.
In this appeal it was contended on behalf of the appel lant that (i) the High Court misocnstrued the provisions of section 27(7)(b); (ii) two views being possible of the evidence on the record the interference with the order of acquittal by the Appellate Court was uncalled for.
Setting aside the conviction and allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In the instant case the entire building hears only one municipal number and the licence was given for conducting the business in that building.
There is no other evidence in support of the prosecution case that the third floor of the building does not form part of the licensed premises.
[796C; 797C] 794 2.
If the finding reached by the trial judge cannot be said to be unreasonable, the Appellate Court should not disturb it even if it were possible to reach a different conclusion on the basis of the material on the record.
The Appellate Court therefore should be slow in disturbing the finding of fact of the Trial Court, and if two views are reasonably possible of the evidence on the record, it is not expected to interfere simply because it feels that it would have taken a different view ff the case had been tried by it.
[797E F] Bhagwati and Ors.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh, , followed.
The view taken by the trial court is quite reasonable and there were no grounds for the High Court to interfere with the findings of the trial court acquitting the accused.
[797G]
