The appellant firm had been carrying on the business of distribution and sale of all kinds of lubricants received from the respondent, a statutory corporation, since 1965.
It is the case of the appellant that it acted as Lube distribu tor of the respondent corporation and that it had been given the Customer No. during the course of business.
The appel lant claimed that from Feb. 1965 to 27th May, 1983, it had received and uplifted the supply of lubricants/goods each year and the total quantity, of lubricants/goods thus lifted had gone upto the extent of 1,11,34854 litres or kgs.
The respondent suddenly stopped the supply of lubricants to the appellant firm on 27.5.1983.
The appellant firm made several representations to the respondent against the aforesaid action of the respondent but to no use.
The appellant there upon filed a writ petition in the High Court praying for a writ of mandamns directing the respondent to desist from denying or discontinuing the supply of lubricants and there by save the appellant from being ousted from the business; claim for damages from the date the supply was discontinued was also made.
Before the High Court, it was inter alia contended by the appellant that the correspondent that passed between the appellant and respondent and the invoices issued during the long years of business would show that the respondent always treated the appellant as its agent and distributor; sudden stoppage of supply violated the principles of natural jus tice.
It therefore sought the specific performance of the alleged contract.
The respondent on the other hand ques tioned the maintainability of the petition as according to it the respondent was not 'State ' within the meaning of article 12 of the Constitution.
It further averred that there was no concluded contract by the respondent with the appel lant and that the work continued under an adhoc arrangement; that the policies of the respondent were governed by the guidelines/directions issued to it from time to time by the Ministry of 819 Petroleum whereunder it was no longer possible to give further supplies to the appellant firm.
After considering the rival contentions advanced by the parties the High Court, dismissed the writ petition.
The appellant has filed this appeal with special leave.
Allowing and disposing of the appeal with directions, this Court, HELD: Every action of the State or of an instrumentality of the State in exercise of its executive power, must be informed by reason.
In appropriate cases, actions uninformed by reason may be questioned as arbitrary in proceedings under Article 226 or Article 32 of the Constitution.
[826D] The respondent company Indian Oil Corporation is an organ of the 'State ' or an 'instrumentality of the State ' as contemplated under Article 12 of the Constitution.
[826F] The State acts in its executive power under Article 298 of the Constitution in entering or not entering in contracts with individual parties.
Article 14 of the Constitution would be applicable to those exercises of power.
Therefore, the action of the State organ under Article 14 can be checked.
[826F] Rule of reason and rule against arbitrariness and dis crimination, rules of fair play and natural justice are part of the rule of law applicable in situation or action by State instrumentality in dealing with citizens in a situa tion like as in the instant case.
Even though the rights of the citizens are in the nature of contractual rights, the manner, the method and motive of a decision of entering or not entering into a contract, are subject to judicial review on the touchstone of relevance, and reasonableness, fair play natural justice, equality and non discrimination in the type of the transactions and nature of the dealing as in the instant case.
[827E F] The dichotomy between rights and remedies cannot be obliterated by any straight jacket formule.
It has to be examined in each particular case.
[829D] Decision of the State/Public authority under Article 298 of the Constitution, is an administrative decision and can be impeached on the ground that the decision is arbitrary or violative of Article 14 of the 820 Constitution or on any of the grounds available in public law field.
It appears to us that in respect of Corporation like Indian Oil Corporation when without informing the parties concerned, as in the case of the appellant firm on alleged change of policy and on that basis action to seek to bring to an end the course of transaction over 18 years involving large amounts of money is not fair action, espe cially in view of the monopolistic nature of the power of the respondent in this field.
[829F G] E.P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu and Anr.
, ; ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India and Anr., [1978] 1 SCC 248; Ajay Nasia and Ors.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and Ors., ; ; A.D. Shetty vs International Airport Authority of India and Ors., ; and Dwarkadas Mariatia and Ors.
vs Board of Trustees of the Port of Bom bay; , , referred to.
