Clause (f) of sub section
(2) of the empowers the Central Government to require any person dealing in any essential commodity to sell the whole or specified part of such commodity to it or the State Government or to a nominee of such Government.
Sub section (3) provides for payment to such a seller (a) the price agreed upon consistently with the controlled price, if any, fixed under the section; (b) the price calculated with reference to the controlled price, if any; and (c) where none of these applies, a price calculated at 910 the market rate prevailing in the locality at the date of the sale.
Subsection (3 A) deals with orders made with a view to controlling the rise in prices or preventing the hoarding of any foodstuff in any locality and determination of price for payment to the seller, notwithstanding anything contained in sub s.(3).
Sub section (3 C) lays down that where any producer is required by an order made with refer ence to cl.
(f) of sub section
(2) to sell any kind of sugar and either no notification in respect of such sugar has been issued under sub section
(3 A) or any such notification having been issued has ceased to remain in force by efflux of time, then notwithstanding anything contained in sub section
(3), there shall be paid to that producer an amount therefore which shall be calculated with reference to such price of sugar as the Central Government may, by order, determine having regard to (a) the minimum price, if any, fixed for sugarcane by Central Government under this section; (b) the manufac turing cost of sugar; (c) the duty or tax, if any, paid or payable thereon; and (d) the securing of a reasonable return on the capital employed in the business of manufacturing sugar, and different prices may be determined from time to time for different areas or for different factories or for different kinds of sugar.
The Central Government by notifications dated 28th November, 1974 and 11th July, 1975 issued in exercise of the power under sub section
(3 C) of section 3 of the Act fixed the prices of levy sugar for 1974 75 production.
The petitioners, owners of sugar mills operating in the State of Uttar Pradesh in areas classified for the purpose of determining the price of levy sugar as West and East zones, challenged the validity of the said orders on the grounds that they were ultra vires the Act and violative of their fundamental rights as the prices of levy sugar had been determined arbitrarily with reference to the average cost profiles of factories grouped together in zones without regard to their individual capacity and cost characteris tics; that although the Government has the discretion to fix different prices for different areas or for different facto ries, or for different kinds of sugar, such wide discretion has to be reasonably exercised, that the words 'having regard to ' occurring in sub section
(3 C) is a mandatory require ment demanding strict compliance with clauses (a) to (d); that the ingredients of the said clauses should, therefore, have been examined with reference to each producer as a condition precedent to the determination of the price of sugar; that the Central Government had not applied its mind to the relevant questions to which they were expected to have regard to in terms of thesub section; and that the expression 'determine ' used in sub section (3 C) indicates 911 that the order to which that expression referred to is quasi judicial amenable to judicial review.
For the inter veners it was contended that the cost incurred by units having lower crushing capacity should be neutralised by giving them an incremental levy price.
For the respondents it was contended that the division of the country into zones and the method adopted by the Government in fixing price of levy sugar was fully supported by the recommendations of various expert bodies and the Tariff Commission and was upheld in Anakapalle Co op.
Agri cultural & Industrial Society Ltd. Etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; and the Panipat Co op.
Sugar Mills".
The Union of India, [1973] 2 SCR 860; that the cost of manufacturing sugar depends not only on recovery from the sugarcane, duration of crushing season, crushing capacity of the plant, the sugarcane price paid and the capital em ployed, but also to a considerable extent on the conditions of the plant and machinery, quality of management, invest ment policy, relations with cane growers and labour, finan cial reputation etc.; that to group together factories having a high cost profile and to determine a price special ly applicable to them is to put a premium on incompetence, if not mismanagement; and that the orders determining the price of sugar in terms of sub section (3 C) were of general application and, therefore, legislative in character and the omission, if any, to consider the peculiar problems of individual producers was not a ground of judicial review.
Dismissing the writ petitions, the Court HELD: 1.
The notifications dated 28th November, 1974 and 11th July, 1975 issued under sub section
(3 C) of section 3 of the are intra rites the Act.
There is no merit in the challenge.
[950F, 918F G] 2.1 Sub section (3 C) is attracted whenever any producer is required to sell sugar by an order made with reference to sub section
(2)(f) and no notification has been issued under sub section
(3 A) or any such notification, having been issued, has ceased to be in force.
It operates notwithstanding anything contained in sub section
This means the compensa tion payable to the seller in the circumstances attracting sub section
(3 C) is not the price postulated in sub section
Nor is it the price mentioned under sub section
(3 A), for that sub section cannot be in operation when sub section
(3 C) is attract ed.
What is payable under sub section
(3 C) is an amount calcu lated with reference to the price of sugar.
[930F H] 912 The Panipat Cooperative Sugar Mills vs The Union of India, [1973] 2 SCR 860, referred to.
2.2 The price of sugar is determined by the Central Government having regard to the factors mentioned in cls.
(a) to (d) of sub section
(3 C).
This is done with reference to the industry as a whole by a process of costing in respect of a representative cross section of manufacturing units and not with reference to any individual seller.
The order notifying the price is required by sub sections
(5) and (6), to be notified in official gazette and laid before both Houses of Parliament.
[931H, 932A, 936G, 931G] 3.
The words 'having regard to ' in sub section
(3 C) are the legislative instruction for the general guidance of the Government in determining the price of sugar.
They are not strictly mandatory, but in essence directory.
They do not mean that the Government cannot, after taking into account the matters mentioned in cls.
(a) to (d), consider any other matter which may be relevant.
The expression is not "having regard only to" but "having regard to".
These words are not a fetter, they are not words of limitation.
[936D, 934E] Union of India vs Kamlabhai Harjiwandas Parekh & Ors., ; ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Williamson Diamonds Ltd., ; Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal, Calcutta vs Gungadhar Banerjee & Co. (P) Ltd., ; ; Saraswati Industrial Syndicate Ltd. etc '.
vs Union of India; , ; State of Karnata ka & Anr. etc.
vs Shri Ranganatha Reddy & Anr.
; , ; State of U. P. & Ors.
vs Renusagar Power Co., ; and O 'May & Ors.
vs City of London Real Property Co. Ltd., , referred to.
4.1 In considering the reasonableness of the order made by the Government ' in exercise of its power under sub section
(3 C) the Court will not strictly scrutinise the extent to which matters mentioned in cls.
(a) to (d), or any other matters have been taken into account by the Government in making its estimate of the price.
There is sufficient com pliance with the sub section if the Government has addressed its mind to the factors which it may reasonably consider to be relevant, and has come to a conclusion, which any reason able person placed in the position of the Government, would have come to.
[936E F] 4.2 In the instant case, the material brought to the notice of the Court does not support the arguments at the bar that the Central Government had not applied its mind to the relevant questions to which 913 they were expected to have regard in terms of the statute.
Nor any data has been furnished to show that the prices determined by the Government would have been different had the ingredients of cls.
(a) to (d) of the sub section been examined with reference to each individual producer instead of a representative cross section of manufacturing units.
[947A, 934D] 5.1 Judicial decisions are made according to law while administrative decisions emanate from administrative policy.
Quasi judicial decisions are also administrative decisions emanating from adjudication but they are subject to some measure of judicial procedure, such as rules of natural justice.
Legislative orders can be distinguished from rest of orders by reference to the principle that the former are of general application.
They are made formally by publica tion and for general guidance with reference to which indi vidual decisions are taken in particular situations, [937C, 939E, 938A B] H.W.R. Wade. ' Administrative Law, 6th ed., 47, referred to.
5.2 An instruction may be treated as legislative even when it is not issued formally but by circular or a letter or the like.
What matters is the substance and not the form, or the name.
Where an authority to whom power is delegated is entitled to sub delegate his power, be it legislative, executive or judicial, then such authority may also give instructions to his delegates and these instructions may be regarded as legislative.
However, a judicial tribunal cannot delegate its functions except when it is authorised to do so expressly or by necessary implication.
[938B C, D E] Griffith and Street. ' Principles of Administrative Law, 5th ed., p. 65 and Bernard & Ors.
vs National Dock Labour Board & Ors., ; at 40, referred to.
5.3 What distinguishes legislation from adjudication is that the former affects the rights of individuals in the abstract and must be applied in a further proceeding before the legal position of any particular individual will be definitely touched by it; while adjudication operates con cretely upon individuals in their individual capacity.
[938F] Davis. ' Administrative Law Text, 3rd ed., p. 123, referred to.
5.4 A statutory instrument such as a rule, order or regulation emanates from the exercise of delegated legisla tive power which is a 914 part of the administrative process resembling enactment of law by the legislature.
It affects the rights of individuals in the abstract.
[939D E, C] Bernard Schwartz. ' Administrative Law [1976] p. 144 and Davis: Administrative Law Text, p. 123, referred to.
5.5 When the function is treated as legislative, a party affected by the order has no right to notice and bearing unless, of course, the statute so requires.
It is neverthe less imperative that the action of the authority should be inspired by reason.
It being of general application engulf ing a wide sweep of powers, applicable to all persons and situations of a broadly identifiable class, the legislative order may not be vulnerable to challenge merely by reasons of its omission to take into account individual peculiari ties and differences amongst those failing within the class.
[939F, 943C, 939F G] Union of India & Anr.
vs Cynamide India Ltd. & Ant., [1987] 2 SCC 720 and Saraswati Industrial Syndicate Ltd., vs Union of India; , , referred to.
5.6 The orders in the instant case, duly published in the official gazettes notifying the prices determined for sugar of various grades and produced in various zones, and applicable without exception to all producers failing within well defined groups can be legitimately characterised as legislative.
No rule of natural justice is applicable to any such order.
[941H, 942A, 943B C] Union of India & Anr.
vs Cynamide India Ltd. & Anr., [1987] 2 SCC 720; State of U.P. & Ors.
vs Renusagar Power Co., ; ; Saraswati Industrial Syndicate Ltd. etc.
vs Union of India; , ; Prag Ice & Oil Mills & Anr. etc.
vs Union of India; , and Bates vs Lord Hailsham of St. Marylebone & Ors., , referred to.
It is with reference to predetermined prices of sugar that subsection (3 C) postulates the calculation of the amount payable to each producer who has sold sugar in compliance with an order made with reference to cl.
(f) of sub section
The calculation of such amount is in contradis tinction to the determination of price of sugar, a non legislative act.
The individual orders to that effect being administrative orders rounded on the mechanics of price fixation, they must be left to the better instructed judg ment of the executive, and in regard to them the principle of audi alteram partem is not applicable All that is 915 required is reasonableness and fair play which are in es sence emanations from the doctrine of natural justice.
[942B, 936F G, 943A B] The Panipat Cooperative Sugar Mills vs The Union of India, [1973] 2 SCR 860; A.K. Kraipak & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors., and State of U.P. & Ors.
vs Renusagar Power Co.; , , referred to.
Union of India & Anr.
vs Cynamide India Ltd. & Anr., [1987] 2 SCC 720, distinguished.
7.1 Any Act of the repository of power, whether legisla tive or administrative or quasi judicial, is open to chal lenge if it is in conflict with the Constitution or the governing Act or the general principles of the law of the land or it is so arbitrary or unreasonable that no fair minded authority could ever have made it.
[946C] E.P. Royappa vs State of TamilNadu & Anr.
, ; ; State of U.P. & Ors.
vs Renusagar Power Co., ; ; Saraswati Industrial Syndicate Ltd. vs Union of India, ; ; Mrs. Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India & Anr., [1978] 1 SCC 248; Ramana Dayaram Shetry vs The International Airport Authority of India & Ors., ; ; Ajay Hasia & Ors.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors., ; ; D.S. Nakara & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; ; The Barium Chemicals Ltd. & Ant.
vs The Company Law Board & Ors., [1966] Supp.
SCR 311; Leila Mourning vs Family Publications Service, ; , 36 L. Ed.
2d 318; Kruse vs Johnson, [1988] 2 Q.B. 91; Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. vs Wednesbury Corporation, ; ; Westminster Corporation vs London and North Western Railway, ; Mixnam Properties Ltd. vs Chertsey U.D.C., ; Commissioners of Customs ney vs Forde, [1971] AC 632 (H.L.); Carltona Ltd. vs Commis sioners of Works, ; Point of Ayr.
Col lieries Ltd. vs Lloyd George, ; Scott vs Glasgow Corporation, ; Robert Baird L.D.v.
City of Glasgow, ; Manhattan General Equipment Co. vs Commissioner, ; ; Yates (Arthur) & Co. Pty Ltd. vs Vegetable Seeds Committee, ; ; Bailey vs Conole, ; ; Boyd Builders Ltd. vs City of Ottawa, ; Re Burns & Township of Haldimand, and Lynch vs Tilden Produce Co., ; , referred to.
916 7.2 Where a question of law is at issue, the Court may determine the rightness of the decision of the authority on its own independent judgment.
If the decision does not agree with that which the Court considers to be the right one, the finding of law by the authority is liable to be upset.
Where it is a finding of fact, the Court examines only the reason ableness of the findings.
When the finding is found to be rational and reasonably based on evidence then judicial review is exhausted even though the finding may not neces sarily be what the Court would have come to as a trier of fact.
[944C E] 7.3 Whether an order is characterised as legislative or administrative or quasi judicial, or, whether it is a deter mination of law or fact, the judgment of the expert body, entrusted with power, is generally treated as final and the judicial function is exhausted when it is found to have warrant in the record and a rational basis in law.
[944E F] Rochester Tel. Corp. vs United States, [1939] 307 U.S. 125, ; Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. vs Wednesbury Corporation, ; and Chief Constable of the North Wales Police vs Evans, ; at 1160, referred to.
7.4 The orders, in the instant case, are undoubtedly based on an exhaustive study by experts.
They are fully supported by the recommendations of the Tariff Commission in 1969 and 1973 and are not shown to be either discriminatory or unreasonable or arbitrary or ultra vires.
[946D E] 8.1 Judicial review is not concerned with matters of economic policy.
Nor is price fixation within the province of the Courts.
The Court does not substitute its judgment for that of the legislature or its agents as to matters within the province of either.
The Court does not supplant the "feel of the experts" by its own views.
When the legis lature acts within the sphere of its authority and delegates power to an agent, it may empower the agent to make findings of fact which are conclusive provided such findings satisfy the test of reasonableness and are consistent with the laws of the land.
[948F, 949B, 948F G] M/s. Gupta Sugar Works vs State of U.P. & Ors., [1987] Supp.
SCC 476; Railroad Commission of Texas vs Rowan & Nichols Oil Company, 311 US 570 577, 85 L. ed.
358 and Mississippi Valley Barge Line Company vs United States of America, 2.92 US 282 290; , , referred to.
917 8.2 In the instant case, sufficient power has been delegated to the Central Government by sub section
(3 C) to formulate and implement its policy decisions by means of statutory instruments and executive orders.
Classification of sugar factories with due regard to geographical cum agro economic considerations for the purpose of determining the price of sugar in terms of the said sub section is a policy decision based on exhaustive expert conclusions.
Such clas sification, cannot, in the absence of evidence to the con trary, be characterised as arbitrary or unreasonable or not rounded on an intelligible differentia having a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved by sub section (3 C).
[949E, 947B D] The Panipat Cooperative Sugar Mills vs The Union of India, [1973] 2 SCR 860 and T. Govindaraja Mudaliar etc.
vs The State of TamilNadu & Ors., ; , applied.
Federal Power Commission vs Hope Gas Co., ; ; Union of India & Anr.
vs Cynamide India Ltd. &Anr., [1987] 2 SCC 720 and M/s. Gupta Sugar Works vs State of U.P. & Ors., [1987] Supp.
SCC 476, referred to.
8.3 If the petitioners nevertheless incur losses, such losses need not necessarily have arisen by reason of geo graphical zoning, but for reasons totally unconnected with it, such as the condition of the plant and machinery, quali ty of management, investment policy, labour relations, etc.
These are matters on which they have not furnished data.
The decisions in Anakapalle; , and Panipat, [1973] 2 SCR 860 do not require reconsideration.
[947D E, 950E F] 8.4 Whether the policy should be altered to divide the sugar industry into groups of units with similar cost char acteristics with particular reference to recovery from sugarcane, duration of the crushing season, size and age of units and capital cost per tonne of output, without regard to their location, is a matter for the Central Government to decide.
What is best for the sugar industry and in what manner the policy should be formulated and implemented, bearing in mind the fundamental object of the statute, is again a matter for decision exclusively within the province of the Central Government.
Such matters do not ordinarily attract the power of judicial review.
[949E G] Secretary of Agriculture, etc.
vs Central Roig Refining Company etc., , 94 L. ed.
391 392, referred to.
