The assessee, who was ordinarily resident in British India, carried on business at Khurja and Aligarh in India and at Chistian in the Indian State of Bahawalpur.
He kept a central set of accounts of the business at Khurja, which were maintained on the mercantile system.
Under the said system credit entries are made in respect of amounts due immediately they become legally due and even before they are actually received.
In his account books the income received by the assessee from all sources was shown, and the interest account showed credit entries of amounts received as interest on capital invested in the shop at Chistian.
The assessee conceded that as creditor he had the right to enforce the payment of, interest in British India and that liability of the Chistian shop had been extinguished to the 46 extent of the interest paid by it to the head office.
The Income Tax Authorities included these amounts in the assessee 's taxable income in India and levied tax on them.
The assessee contended that the entries in respect of the receipt of interest were merely book entries and that the authorities had wrongly treated these amounts as having been actually received.
Held, that the relevant entries in the books of account did justify the inference that the assessee had actually received the amounts by way of interest.
Where an assessee Keeps accounts according to the mercantile method of book keeping the effect of making a credit entry in the interest account would be to treat that amount as income or profits received by the assessee or treated by him as received for the purposes of the tax.
Commissioner of Income tax vs A.T.K.P.L.S.P. Subramaniam Chettiar, Mad. 765, approved.
Gresham Life Assurance Society Ltd. vs Bishop, (1902) A.C. 287; Keshav Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, ; ; Sunder Das vs The Collector of Gujrat, Lah. 349, referred to.
The assessee sought to raise a new point that it was a rule of universal application that no person could trade with himself and that accordingly the interest alleged to have been received from his own shop at Chistian could not amount to receipt of any income by him, and referred to: Dublin Corporation vs M 'Adam, ; Ostime vs Pontypridd and Rhondda joint Water Board, (1944) 28 Tax Cas. 261 ; Caylisle and Silloth Golf Club vs Smith, ; New York Life Insurance Company vs Styles, ; ; Sir Kikabhai Premchand vs Commissioner of Income tax (Central) Bombay, and Ram Lal Bechairam vs Commissioner of Income tax, A.I.R. (1946) All.
The respondent contended that the principle was not inflexible or universal and that the new point having been raised for the first time in appeal ought not to be permitted to be raised.
Sharkey vs Wernher, (1956) A. C. 58, referred to.
Held that, the new point could not be allowed to be raised as that would mean the re opening of the whole enquiry into the question as to the remittances from Chistian to Khurja as well as the rates at which the tax were to be levied on the assessee.
If the assessee wanted to rely upon this principle the point ought to have been urged at the earlier stage of the proceedings.
