The petitioner company had obtained three mining leases from the Government of Assam to extract sillimanite in the Khasi and Jaintia Hills District, for a period of 15 years.
Negotiations between the Union of India and the peti tioner for having the mining leases transferred to the public sector companies, Hindustan Steel Ltd. and Bokaro Steel Ltd., having failed, the Government of Meghalaya, on the request of the Central Government, passed an order dated 7th December, 1972 prematurely terminating the mining leases in terms of section 4 A(1) of the Mines and Minerals (Regu lation & Development) Act, 1957 as amended by the Mines & Minerals (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1972.
Thereupon, the petitioner company filed the present petition under Article 32 of the Constitution.
On behalf of the petitioner it was inter alia contended that since no notice had been issued by the State Government before terminating the leases prematurely, it amounted to denial of natural justice thus vitiating the order of termi nation.
State of Haryana vs Ram Kishan & Ors., [1988] 3 S.C.C. 416, relied upon.
It was further submitted that having regard to the comparatively long periods of leases and the lapse of time, the petitioner would not pray for being put back in posses sion of the leased premises but would be content with an award for compensation for wrongful premature termination, to be determined by any arbitrator appointed by the Court.
On behalf of the respondents it was submitted that the decision of 984 this Court in Ram Kishan 's case was distinguishable; that the rules of natural justice could be statutorily excluded either expressly or by necessary implication; that grant of an opportunity to the lessee would be totally meaningless and futile; that the object and purpose of the statute clearly excluded the provision of an opportunity to the lessee before termination of the leases; that amendment of section 4 A of 1986 specifically providing for an opportuni ty of hearing became necessary because the grounds for premature termination set out in the new subsection (1) of section 4 A were made wider and more comprehensive; that in the writ petition the only prayer made was for quashing the order of premature termination; and that it was open to the petitioner to file a suit or take other appropriate remedies for obtaining compensation in respect of the unlawful termi nation.
The Barium Chemicals Ltd. and Anr.
vs Company Law Board and Others, [1966] Supp.
S.C.R. 311 and R.S. Dass vs Union of India and Others, [1985] Supp.
S.C.C. 617, referred to, Disposing of the writ petition, this Court, HELD: (1) The order dated 7.12.1972 passed under section 4A of the Act whereby the leases were terminated prematurely was null and void as it violated the principles of natural justice and was passed without giving an opportunity to the lessee of being heard.
State of Haryana vs Ram Kishan & Ors., ; , followed.
Dharam Veer vs Union of India, AIR (1989) Delhi 227, re ferred to.
(2) Though it is true that the scope of section 4 A (1) has been widened, the insertion of sub section 4 A(3) clear ly reflects a statutory intention that an opportunity of hearing must be given before the order of termination is passed, presumably as such an order widely effects the rights of the lessees.
[992A] (3) It is difficult to accept the contention that be cause an order under section 4 A is to be passed in order to give effect to a policy of the Government, it is not neces sary or useful to provide the lessees, whose leases are about to be terminated, an opportunity of hearing.
[992D] (4) It is true that the petitioner could have filed a suit or taken 985 other appropriate remedies for obtaining compensation in respect of the unlawful termination.
But, in the facts and circumstances of this case, it is not fair to ask the peti tioner to go hack and file a suit for compensation or dam ages which may be barred by limitation.
The writ petition was filed by the petitioner company in 1973 and has been pending in this Court for about 17 years.
After a lapse of such a long time the proper course is to adopt some method for deciding the quantum of compensation and damages, which can at once be simple and expeditious and which will avoid further unnecessary litigation.
[992G H; 993A] (5) The request made on behalf of the petitioner that the matter may be referred to arbitration is a fair one and indeed this course is also not seriously resisted by the respondents.
The issue of compensation/ damages is accord ingly referred to Arbitration.
[993B] (6) Having regard to the circumstances of the case, the compensation/damages should be restricted to a period of five years from the date of termination of the leases or upto the date of expiry of the original lease deeds whichev er is less and not for the entire unexpired period of all the leases.
[993C]
