The main petition has been filed by the Income tax Officers Group A, challenging the Seniority Rules of 1973, which were framed by the Department pursuant to the direc tions given by this Court in an earlier case B.S. Gupta vs Union of India, [1975] Supp.
SCR 491.
The circumstances that led to the filing of the instant petitions may be stated thus: The Government by virtue of the Rules propounded in its letter dated 29th September 1944, re organised the Income tax services into Class I and Class II.
The said Rules inter alia laid down that recruitment to the cadre of Income tax Officers Group A shall be from two sources i.e. direct recruitment and promotion, the quota for the two being 80% and 20% respectively.
In 1945, the Government framed fresh recruitment rules wherein it was provided that the recruit ment from the said sources will be made as per the direc tions of the Government, in effect, keeping the recruitment quotas in abeyance.
In September, 1949, the Government framed Seniority Rules and it was laid down that the promo tees who had been certified by the Federal Public Commis sion, in any calendar year, shall be senior to all direct recruits who completed their probation during that year or after and are confirmed with effect from the date in that year or after.
In the year 1950, the Seniority Rules were again revised and the concerned Rule 1(f)(iii) was amended.
By its letter dated 18.10.1951, the Government revised the quotas of direct recruits and promotees, in that, in the case of direct recruits the quota was reduced from 80% to 66 2/3% while in the case of promotees, the quota was en hanced from 20% 10 33 1/3% and also amended the Rule 1(f)(iii) of 1950 Rules.
This revision, in effect, gave 3 years ' weightage in seniority to the promotees.
These rules continued to 995 operate till 1959.
Between 1959 and 1960, 114 posts were upgraded to those of Income Tax Officers Group 'A ' and the promotees were appointed to the said posts during that period.
One Jaisinghani, a direct recruit challenged the consti tutional validity of Rule 1(f)(iii) and (iv) of 1952, Sen iority Rules by means of a writ petition in the High Court, which gave 3 years ' weightage to the promotees in the matter of fixation of their seniority and the implementation of quota.
The High Court rejected the writ petition.
In appeal, this Court held that the quota having been fixed by the Government in exercise of the powers conferred on it under Rule 4 of the 1945 Rules, the same was valid.
The Court also upheld the weightage given to the promotees under the 1952 Rules.
The Court further directed that roster system should be adopted by framing an appropriate rule for working out the quota system between the direct recruits and promotees.
It may be mentioned that the court gave this direction because it was of opinion that the promotees were in excess of the prescribed quota for each of the years 1951 to 1956, and that they had been illegally appointed.
It was therefore directed that the seniority of Jaisinghani and others simi larly placed be re adjusted and the Government should pre pare a fresh seniority list in accordance with law.
Pursuant to the direction given by the Court, the gov ernment prepared seniority list which was challenged in the Delhi High Court by two separate writ petitions one by B.S. Gupta, a promotee of 1962 and another by M.C. Joshi, a direct recruit.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition of Gupta but substantially allowed the one filed by Joshi.
In appeal this court by its order dated 16.8.1972 in Gupta 's case AIR 1972 SC 262, held that seniority list was valid with regard to the promotions made upto January 15, 1959 but the same was not valid for the period thereafter.
The court accordingly set aside the list to the extent it concerned the period from 16.1.1959 and directed the Department to prepare a fresh seniority list in accordance with the obser vations and directions of this Court.
The court came to the conclusion that with the upgrading of large number of posts and appointments of the promotees, the quota rule had col lapsed and with that seniority rule giving weightage to the promotees had collapsed.
The court held that quota rule came to an end on 16.1.1959.
In pursuance of the aforesaid direc tion, the government frame the impugned 1973 Rules and prepared a fresh seniority List on February 1973, giving retrospective effect to the Rules from 15.1.1959.
The Gov ernment also challenged the quota of direct recruits and promotees, making it 50% for each of them i.e. 1:1.
Seniori ty of officers upto 15.1.59 was fixed as per old Rules and the 996 seniority from 16.1.1959 was fixed as per new rules; 73 promotees though promoted between 1956 58 could not be accommodated under the old rules, their seniority was fixed under the new rules.
In the present petitions, the petitioners contend that this Court gave its direction in Gupta 's case ; ; because for want of sufficient material the court had come to the conclusion that the quota for recruitment of direct recruits and promotees had broken down as the promo tees were appointed in excess of their entitlement though the requisite material showing the contrary was in posses sion of the government, which was suppressed.
It is asserted by them that the material shows that in fact the appointment of the promotees was short of their quota.
Hence they claim that not only the 1973 Rules be set aside but the appoint ments of the promotees be made and their seniority be fixe daccording to the rules prevailing prior of the said Rules.
In the connected writ petitions, besides these contentions, validity of amendment of Sec. 117 of the Income Tax Act; and classification of Income Tax Officers in Group A and Group B officers have also been questioned.
Dismissing the writ petitions this Court held: HELD: It is clear from the table that the petitioners promotees have calculated the posts in the sanctioned strength not only in Grade II but also in Grade I Posts when the posts available to them for promotion were only in grade I1.
Hence, their further calculations of the working strength, the vacancies and the quota available to them in the vacancies and of the dificiencies or the excess in the quota are erroneous.
[1009F] Even the Government had independently come to the con clusion as early as in 1986 that neither the Rules of sen iority nor the Seniority List of 1973 had done injustice to the promotees.
In fact, the Rules of 1973 had rised the quota of the promotees from 33 1/3% to 50%.
The seniority of the promotees was adjusted upto 15th January, 1959 on the basis of the earlier quota Rule and the Seniority of those who were appointed later and of those who were found in excess of their quota upto that date, were adjusted accord ing to the new Rule.
[1016F G] What this Court wanted to convey in the earlier part of its judgment was that when the Government decides to fill in the vacancies, it is not necessary to defer the appointments from one source pending the appointments from the other source.
But that is when the Government 997 decides to fill in the vacancies and not before it.
[1017F] Power is vested in the legislature to appoint different classes of officers and this carries with it also the power to demarcate their duties, functions and responsibilities.
Whether in fact there is such a division of powers, func tions and responsibilities or not, has nothing to do with the validity of the power to make the classification.
[1019H; 1020 A] The distinction between Group A and Group B Officers has been in existence from the very beginning.
The distinction has been maintained statutorily with distinct powers and jurisdiction, hierarchical position and eligibility qualifi cations.
The sources of their appointment and the authori ties vested with the power to appoint them have also been different.
The distinction between the two further has been made on the basis of the class of work and the responsibili ty entrusted to each.
The work which is of more than a routine nature and which involves a detailed investigation either on account of the class of assessees or of the com plexities of the returns filed, is entrusted to the officers belonging to Groups Group A (now Assistant Commissioners) while the assessment work of a summary nature or of returns involving simple transactions is entrusted to Officers belonging to Group B (now ITOs).
[1023C E] By the very nature of the operation involved, the admin istration has to have the power to classify the work and to appoint personnel with different skill and talent to execute the different types of work.
The legislature being mindful of this need has deliberately created the two classes of officers as is evident from the provisions of Section 117 even prior to its present amendment.
Even after the amend ment the said distinction has been maintained.
After 1987 amendment the situation has further changed and the duties, functions, jurisdiction and powers of the officers have been rationalised clearly demarcating the spheres of work.
In an organisation of this kind, with country wide offices dealing with various categories of assessees and incomes, some dislocation functional overlapping and want of uniformity in the assignment of work during some period is not unexpected; and it does appear that during some period, the situation in the Department was out of joint.
That is why steps were taken to straighten it out by amending the Income Tax Act and making the rules and issuing the relevant notifications, circulars and orders.
[1024B; 1026B C] If during this period on account of the exigencies of service, some ad hoc appointments of Group B officers were made to Group A posts, 998 and Grade 1I or Group B officers were required to perform the same functions and discharge the same duties as Group A officers, they can at best claim the emoluments of Group A officers, but certainly not the equalisation of the two posts of that account.
[1026D E] S.G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India and Ors., ; ; B.S Gupta etc.
vs Union of India and Ors/ etc.
; , ; Kamal Kanti Dutta and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, [1980] 3 SCR III; K.M. Bakshi vs Union Of India, AIR 1962 SC 1139; Federation of A11 India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognised) and )rs.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; ; V. Markandeya and Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
, ; , referred to.
