On November 11, 1968 the Petitioner was apprehended carrying contraband gold in a Maruti Car driven by him.
He was taken into custody and the seized gold was confiscated.
For the assessment year 1960 70 the Petitioner had filed a return declaring total income of Rs.9,571.
In finalising the assessment the Income Tax Officer added Rs.20 Lakhs being the price of the confiscated gold as income from undisclosed source.
The Petitioner went in appeal before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner who reduced the income by that amount holding that the assessee was not the owner of the confis cated gold.
On second appeal by the revenue the Tribunal restored the order of the I.T.O.
The Petitioner then moved a Misc.
Application under section 254(1) for amendment for treating Rs.20 Lakhs as business loss which was rejected by the Tribunal.
The Petitioner then moved a Petition u/s 256(1) of the Income Tax Act seeking reference to the High Court raising certain questions, which was turned down by the Tribunal holding that none of the questions sought to be raised was decided by the Tribunal and ' as such did not arise from its order.
The High Court also declined the application to direct the Tribunal to refer the questions and to state the case to it.
Hence this special leave petition directed against both the order of the Tribunal as well as the High Court.
Dis missing the Special Leave Petition, the Court, HELD: The real and substantial question posed and can vassed before the Tribunal in its appellate order and in the appeal was whether the sum of Rs.20 Lakhs be considered as part of the income of the 6 assessee and as such suffer taxation.
The question sought to be raised is whether in view of the decision of the Court in Piara Singh 's case this amount could be treated as legiti mate business loss of the assessee.
It is possible to take the view that this is substantially a different question, family whether an amount is a business loss even assuming that it was he income.
It is possible and conceivable to consider two different questions, namely whether a certain sum of money is the income of the assessee and secondly, whether even assuming that such was the income, was that income liable to be deducted in view of the provisions of the Act.
Considerations which go into determination whether an amount should be treated as income and considerations which are relevant to determine whether even assuming that, that was the income the amount was deductible, are differ ent.
The question in this form was not canvassed before the Tribunal.
The view taken by the Tribunal and the High Court is a possible view and they have borne in mind the princi ples of law laid down by the Court in Scindia Steam Naviga tion 's case.
[1 lB E; 12E] C.I.T., Patiala vs Piara Singh, 2 and C.I.T., Bombay Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd., , referred to.
