The petitioner tenant was let out the demised premises by the landlord for a period of three years, with permission of Controller under section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, the landlord died before the expiry of period of tenan cy.
After the expiry of the period, his legal representa tives made an application for recovery of possession.
This application was resisted by the tenant on the ground that proceedings for recovery of possession under section 21 could not be initiated and continued by legal representa tives of the landlord who had obtained permission.
Having failed before the High Court, the petitioner has filed petition for special leave.
It was contended on his behalf that 'landlord ' in second part of section 21, enti tling him to claim vacant possession, should be confined to the person who had obtained permission on the premise that he "does not require the whole or any part of the premises for a particular period.
" Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court, HELD: (1) Section 21 is a self contained code.
The purpose and objective of its enactment as provision of short duration tenancy or periodical tenancy in Rent Control Act of Delhi is unique amongst such legislations.
What was unique of it was not short duration tenancy but a fresh look on eviction.
[27G; 28G] Shiv Chand Kapoor vs Amar Bose, ; , referred to.
(2) Since section 21 is an exception to section 14 and it mandates restoration of possession, "notwithstanding any other law" it has to be construed strictly and against any attempt to frustrate it.
[28G] 26 (3) Recovery of possession under section 21 is not hedged, by any inquiry or opportunity, if permission is not challenged on any of the exceptions which have been carved out by courts, obviously to uphold fairness and honesty the core of our jurisprudence.
Right to get vacant possession is thus absolute.
[29D] S.B. Noronah vs Prem Kumari Khanna, ; ; V.S. Rahe vs Smt.
Rem Chamben, ; Shiv Chand Kapoor vs Amar Bose, ; , referred to.
(4) The expression "for the time being" in section 2(e) makes it clear that landlord has to be understood in presen ti.
That is anyone entitled to receive rent is the landlord.
It does not visualise, past or future landlord.
Therefore, the word "landlord" on plain reading of Section 21 does not warrant construction of the word in any other manner.
[29G] (5) Constructionally, Section 21 is in two parts: one creation of short term tenancy and other its execution after expiry of time.
Both stand on their own and operate inde pendently.
Non requirement of premises for time being fur nishes basis for entering into agreement for periodical tenancy.
Truth of it or its genuineness are relevant consid erations for granting permission.
And the permission granted continues unabated, unaffected irrespective of variation in requirement.
[30D E] (6) Vacation is not linked with landlord but with time.
Expiry of it obliges tenant to vacate.
If he does not then whosoever is the landlord at the time of afflux of tenancy may approach Controller for putting him in vacant posses sion.
Death of landlord does not either shorten or enlarge period nor the consequences envisaged are altered or affect ed.
[30F] (7) The doctrine of actio personalies moritur cum per sonna does not apply to Rent Control Acts.
Its applicability was generally confined to actions for damages for defama tion, seduction, inducing a spouse to remain apart from the other and adultery.
[31D C] Supreme Bank vs
P.A. Tindulcar; , ; Shanti Lal Thakur Das & Ors.
vs Chaman Lal Magan Lal Lala, Phool Rani vs Naubat Rai, , referred to.
(8) An action for eviction abates only if the cause of action does 27 not survive.
The cause of action for granting permission was the nonrequirement by the landlord of the premises for the time mentioned in the agreement whereas cause of action for eviction is non vacation by the tenant after the expiry of period.
Therefore, it is immaterial who is the landlord at the time when the action for vacation arose.
[31F G] (9) Permission in the instant case was granted on state ment of parties in regard to their necessity or non require ment of the premises.
Such necessity to let out or non requirement by the landlord could not be brought into those exceptions which invalidated permission.
Therefore, death of the landlord was immaterial as even the reason for letting out did not die with death of landlord.
[32A B]
