The appellant is a commission agent, engaged in the business of sale and purchase of grains, rice, oil seeds etc.
in Chirgaon, District Jhansi.
By a notification issued under section 38(1) of the United Provinces Town Areas Act, 1914, the provisions of Section 298(2)(F)(d) of the U.P. Munici palities Act, 1916 were extended to the Town Area of Chirg aon, as a result of which, the Panchayat of Chirgaon was empowered to make bye laws for the establishment, regulation 'and inspection of market and 1or the proper and cleanly conduct of business therein.
Later by Section 4 of the U.P. Provinces Town Area (Amendment) Act, the word "Panchayat" wherever it occurred in the Principal ' Act was substituted by the word 'Committee '.
In pursuance of the powers con ferred on him the District Magistrate, Jhansi framed bye laws dated 18.11.1934 for the regulation of the market.in Chirgaon which inter alia provided that weighing dues shall be charged at different rates on various articles that came to the Town Area for sale at rates specified therein.
Since the appellant was a dealer in some of these commodities, he was served with a notice calling upon him to pay Rs.1892/26 as weighing dues for the period from 1.5.1962 to 30.6.1962.
The appellant challenged the notice by means of a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court.
A learned single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition taking the view that the demand made by the respondent was purely a measure of taxation.
Special Appeal against the said order was also dismissed by the High Court.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
The main contentions of the appellant, as urged before the High Court, as have been repeated before this Court are; (i) that the bye laws were invalid; (ii) that the Town Area Committee had no power to impose such tax; as the Act did not empower the TAC to levy and collect weighing dues; (iii) that the weighing dues were discriminatory because of the exemptions; (iv) that the weighing dues were not a tax but a fee which could not be charged without quid pro quo and (v) that there was 14 double taxation.
It was also urged that the imposition of weighing dues is tantamount to illegal extraction without the authority of law.
The respondent, on the other hand, supported the judgment of the High Court; Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Under the Indian Constitution the State Govern ment 's power to levy a tax is not identical with that of its power to levy a fee.
While the powers to levy taxes is conferred on the State Legislatures by the various entries in List 11, in it there is Entry 66 relating to fees, empow ring the State Government to levy fees 'in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any Court '.
The result is that each State Legislature has the power, to levy fees, which is co extensive with its powers to legislate with respect to substantive matters and it may levy a fee with reference to the services that would be rendered by the State under such law.
The State may also delegate such a power to local authority.
[21C D] A fee is a payment levied by an authority in respect of services performed by it for the benefit of the payer, while a tax is payable for the common benefits conferred by the authority on all tax payers.
[21F] 'While there is no quid pro quo between a tax payer and the authority in case of a tax, there is a necessary co relation between fee collected and the service intended to be rendered.
Of course the quid pro quo need not be under stood in mathematical equivalence but only in a fair corre spondence between the two, a broad co relationship is all that is necessary.
[21G] Courts cannot review the wisdom or advisability or expediency of a tax as the court has no concern with the policy of legislation, so long they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution.
It is only where there is abuse of its powers and transgression of the legis lative function in leving a tax, it may be corrected by the judiciary and not otherwise.
[24B] Taxes may be and often are oppressive, unjust and even unnecessary but this can constitute no reason for judicial interference.
When taxes are levied on certain articles or services and not on others it cannot be said to be discrimi natory.
[24C] Avinder Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to.
