Some of the erstwhile employees of Burmah Shell, in an earlier writ petition, claimed restoration of the commuted portion of pension and enhancement of pension on par with the pensioners of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, (HPCL).
At the time of hearing, the claim for restoration of the commuted portion of pension was given up.
This Court accepted the claim of the petitioners as regards enhancement of pension and ordered a sizeable hike in the pension.
The present writ petition claims the same relief which was given up at the time of hearing of the earlier writ petition, viz., restoration of commuted portion of pension.
Admitted ly, HPCL had deferred its decision till 1992 in this regard.
On behalf of the petitioners it was contended that though, HPCL has deferred its decision till 1992, the peti tioners were not precluded from approaching this Court and that the earlier decision did not operate as res judicata.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that as soon as HPCL revises its scheme the petitioners would also be entitled to the benefit thereof and that grant of the relief earlier would create disparity between the persons who receive pension from HPCL and those from the Respondent.
Dismissing the writ petition, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
It would be inappropriate to interfere and grant the relief as prayed for at this stage since that would create disparity between the personnel who receive pension from Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. and the respondent Corporation.
[965B] 963 1.2.
This Court has already held that the retired per sonnel of Burmah Shell would be entitled to a hike in pen sion at par with pensioners of HPCL.
(W.P. No. 590/87 decid ed on 11.5.
1988).
HPCL has not accorded to its pensioners the relief of restoration of the commuted portion of pension after the expiry of 15 years.
The order passed by this Court is as recent as May 11, 1988.
After such a short time lag and in the absence of any substantial change in the posi tion, it is not desirable to entertain the claim for resto ration of commuted pension.
The petitioners are governed by a special scheme, which is not at par with Government em ployees or the other Public Sector Undertakings.
[964G H; 965A] Common Cause & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
