Jamunadas C. Tuliani is the owner and the landlord of the suit premises.
He instituted a suit for ejectment against five defendants on the ground that they were tenants of the said premises and were in arrears of rent for a period of more than six months which had not been paid inspite of notice having been served on them as required by Section 12(2) of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates, Control Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) and were consequently liable for eviction under sub section 3(a) of the Act as it then stood.
Two other grounds were that the tenants had changed the user of the suit premises and they had committed breach of the terms and conditions of the tenancy.
Subsequently Arjun Khiamal Mak hijani was impleaded as defendant No. 6 in the suit on the assertion that the tenants had illegally sub let a portion of the premises namely garage to him and were thus liable to be evicted on that ground also.
The Trial Court decreed the suit in favour of the land lord on the plea of default in payment of rent and illegal sub letting.
The other two pleas that the tenants had changed the user of the suit premises and had committed breach of terms and conditions of tenancy were decided against the landlord.
Two appeals were preferred against the judgment of the Trial Court, one by the tenants and the other by the defend ant No. 6 and both these appeals were dismissed.
Aggrieved by the said decree the tenants and defendant No. 6 filed two writ petitions in the High Court.
Against the common judg ment of the High Court dismissing these writ petitions, the present civil appeals have been preferred.
381 Dismissing both the appeals, the Court, HELD: (i) On a plain reading of clause (a) of sub sec tion (3) of section 12 of the Act as it stood at the rele vant time, the said clause was clearly attracted and the consequence provided therein had to follow namely a decree for eviction against the tenants had to be passed.
Clause (b) of sub section (3) of the face of it was not attracted inasmuch as the said clause applied only to a case not covered by clause (a).
This is amply borne out by the use of the opening words "In any other case" of clause (b).
[387A B] (ii) Article 142 of the Constitution does not contem plate doing justice to one party by ignoring mandatory statutory provisions and thereby doing complete injustice to the other party by depriving such party of the benefit of the mandatory statutory provisions.
[390B] (iii) In a case where a tenant renders himself liable to be evicted on the ground of being defaulter in the payment of rent as contemplated by sub sections (2) and 3(a) of Section 12 of the Act, bar from the way of the landlord in instituting a suit for ejectment of a tenant is removed and he gets a right to have a decree for eviction.
Such removal of bar is not in any sense forfeiture of any rights under the lease which the tenant held.
In the instant case, the suit was not based on such forfeiture of lease under the Transfer of Property Act but was filed for the enforcement of the statutory right conferred on the landlord by sub sections (2) and 3(a) of Section 12 of the Act.
[391D; 391H;392A] (iv) The tenants are not entitled even to the benefit of the amended sub section (3) of Section 12 of the Act inas much as on a plain reading of the sub section it is not possible to give it a retrospective operation.
[392C ] The date fixed for settlement of issues in a suit cannot be equated with any other date or dates which may be fixed in the suit or the appeal.
[393C] The words "on or before such other date as the Court may fix" occurring after the words "on the first day of the hearing of the suit" in sub section (3) of Section 12 of the Act were obviously meant to meet a situation where for some inevitable reason the necessary deposit could not be made on the day of the hearing of the suit and the Court extended the time to make such deposit.
[393D] 382 By taking recourse to the process of reopening of pro ceedings one cannot put the hands of the clock back and create an artificial date as the "first day of the hearing of the suit." [393H; 394A] (v) Interpretation of statutes: "When the Act contains provisions, some of which fall under the category of beneficial legislation with regard to the tenant and the others with regard to the landlord, the assertion that even with regard to such provisions of the Act which fail under the purview of beneficial legislation for the landlord an effort should be made to interpret them also in favour of the tenant is a negation of the very principle of interpretation of a beneficial legislation on which reliance is placed on behalf of the tenants.
The argument indeed is self defeating and only justifies the cynical proverb Head I win tail you lose.
It is difficult to countenance the sentimental approach made by learned counsel for the tenants, for the simple reason that as pointed out in Latham vs R. Johnson and Nephew Ltd., (408) sentiment is a dangerous will of the wisp to take as a guide in the search for legal principles." [389B D] Harbanslal Jagmohandas and Anr.
vs Prabhudas Sivlal, [1977] 1 SCC page 576; Jaywant section Kulkarni & Ors.
vs Mino char Dosabhai Shroff & Ors., [1988] 4 SCC P. 108; Ganpat Ram Sharma & Ors.
vs Gayatri Devi, [1987] 3 SCC P. 576; Ganpat Ladha vs Sashikant Vishnu Shinde, [1978] 2 S.C.C.P. 573; Latham vs R. Johnson & Newhew Ltd., (408); Vatan Mal vs Kailash Nath, [1989] 3 S.C.C.P. 79; B.P. Khemda Pvt. Ltd. vs Birendra Kumar Bhowmick & Anr., [1987] 2 S.C.R.P. 559; Smt.
Kamala Devi Budhia & Ors.
vs Hem Prabha Ganguli & Ors., [1989] 3 S.C.C.P. 145; Praduman Kumar vs Virendra Goyal (Dead) by L.Rs., [1969] 3 S.C.R.P. 950; S.D. Chagan Lal vs Dalichand Virchand Shroff & Ors., [1968] 3 S.C.R.P. 346 and Nagindas Ramdas vs Dalpatram Ichharam, [1974] 1 S.C.C.P. 242, referred to.
