The question for determination is, can a licensee occu pying a flat in a tenant co partnership society be evicted therefrom under subsection (1) of section 91 of the Maha rashtra Cooperative Societies Act, 1960 notwithstanding the protection extended by Section 15A of the Bombay Rents, Hotels & Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 as amended by Act XVII of 1973 or whether such proceedings would be gov erned by Section 28 of the Rent Act? The appellant licensee was in actual possession of the fiat on 1st February 1973 under a license without the ex press permission of the Society.
He was let in, in 1957 by one D.P. Kejriwal who was looking after the flat originally allotted to one Laxmi Devi Kejriwal in 1949.
She gifted her interest as allottee member to her brother who in turn transferred his interest therein to his brother Hari Kumar Sharma, respondent No. 2, in July 1967.
Even after this transfer D.P. Kejriwal continued in management of the flat till 1979 when he received a letter from Respondent No. 2 claiming ownership of the flat.
The appellant thereafter filed an interpleader suit.
On disposal of the said suit Respondent No. 2 deposited a sum of Rs.5,500 with Respondent No. 1, the Society, towards the cost of the Society to initiate proceedings for eviction of the appellant from the flat in question under Section 91(1) of the Societies Act.
The appellant contended that the proceeding under section 91(1) was not competent as the document of leave and licence in fact created a lease.
Alternatively, as he was in actual possession under a subsisting license right from 1957 to 1st February 1973, he was a statutory tenant under section 15A of Bombay Rent Act and the Cooperative Court had no juris diction under section 91(1) of the Societies Act and the proper court was one under section 28 of the Rent Act which the Respondent No. 2 had in fact approached.
863 The Co operative Court passed an ejectment order against the appellant.
The appellant filed an appeal under section 97 of the Societies Act to the State Co operative Appellate Court, Bombay.
The appellate court dismissed the appeal and confirmed the order of the Co operative Court.
Feeling aggrieved by the concurrent findings of the two courts the appellant preferred a Writ Petition in the High Court of Bombay.
The Writ Petition was also dismissed.
While allowing the appeal and setting aside the judg ments of all the Courts below and directing that the claim application filed under section 91(1) of the Societies Act shall stand dismissed, this Court, HELD: The appellant was and is a protected tenant under section 15A of the Rent Act.
The proceedings initiated under section 91(1) of the Societies Act cannot in the circum stances succeed as the Society has failed to prove the fact of trespass which constituted the foundation for jurisdic tion.
if the society fails to prove that the appellant has no right to the occupation of the flat since he is a mere trespasser, the suit must obviously fall.
[883B C] The Societies Act, section 91(1), confers jurisdiction on the Cooperative Court while section 28 of the Rent Act confers jurisdiction on the Court of Small Causes, Bombay.
[881B] The Status of a tenant is conferred on him by law as the legislature desired to extend the protection of the Rent Act to such licensees.
Rights which do not flow from contracts but are conferred by law such as the Rent Act must be deter mined by the machinery, if any, provided by the law confer ring the right.
[881G H] Notwithstanding the absence of privity of contract between the owner landlord and the licensee protected tenant the latter cannot be evicted except in accordance with the provisions of the Rent Act.
[882B] Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao vs Ashalata section Gum am; , at 478; Ramesh Himmatlal Shah vs Harsukh Jadhavji Joshi, ; ; Hindustan Petroleum Corpo ration Ltd. vs Shyam Cooperative Housing Society, ; 1989 SC 295; O.N. Bhatnagar vs Rukibai Narsim das; , ; M/s. AVR & Co. & Ors.
vs Fairfield Cooperative Housing Society & Ors., ; ; Sardar Mohan Singh Ahluwalia vs Maitrai Park Cooperative Housing Society & Anr., ; ; Hindustan Thompson Associ ates Ltd. vs Mrs. Maya Inderson Israni & Ors. 864 ; ; Smt.
Krishna Rajpal Bhatia vs Miss Leela H. Advani & Ors., ; ; Deccan Merchant Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs Pali Chand Jugraj Jain, [1969] 1 SCR 887 and Co operative Central Bank Ltd. vs Additional Industrial Tribunal, Andhra Pradesh, , referred to.
