Section 16 of the authorises the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction established under the Act to make enquiry for determining whether any industrial company has become a sick industrial company.
Section 17(2) empowers the Board to grant a reasonable time to such a company to make its net worth positive.
Where such a course is not practicable section 17(3) empowers the Board to appoint an oper ating agency to prepare a scheme for rehabilitation/revival of the company.
Section 22(1) provides that in case the enquiry under section 16 is pending or any scheme referred to under section 17 is under preparation or consideration by the Board or any appeal under section 25 is pending, then proceedings for winding up, execution, distress or the like are to be suspended or presumed to be suspended.
The proceedings in respect of these matters could, however, be continued with the consent of the Board or of the appellate authority as the case may be.
Section 22(5) provides for exclusion of the period during which the remedy remains suspended, in comput ing the period of limitation for enforcement of the right.
The respondent company had been declared by the Board to be a sick industrial company under section 16 of the Act and an operating agency had been appointed under section 17(3) to pre pare a scheme for rehabilitation/revival of the company.
The respondent company owed a large sum to the petition er Panchayat on account of property tax and other dues.
When the petitioners initiated coercive proceedings to recover that amount the company moved the High Court by way of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Act.
The High Court restrained the petitioners from recovering the said amount without the consent of the Board.
Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court, 967 HELD: The High Court was justified in quashing the recovery proceedings taken against the properties of the company.
[970G H] The Board by order dated 27 August, 1987 had stated that it was satisfied that the company had become a sick indus trial company and directed that further proceedings under .the
Act shall be taken.
By another order made on the same day under section 17(2) the Board had found that it was not practicable for the company to make its net worth positive within a reasonable time and had proceeded to take action under section 17(3) and appointed the ICICI as the operating agency to prepare a scheme for rehabilitation/revival of the company.
In view of these steps taken by the Board under sections 16 and 17 of the Act, no proceedings for execution, distress or the like against any of the properties of the industrial company shall lie or be proceeded with further by virtue of section 22(1) except with the consent of the Board.
[970A D] The Board at its discretion may accord approval.
If the approval is not granted the remedy is not extinguished.
It is only postponed.
Sub section (5) of section 22 provides for exclusion of the period during which the remedy is suspended while computing the period of limitation for recovering the dues.
[970F G]
