In order to confer permanent status to workmen in var ious industrial establishments, who have put in a continuous service for a period of 480 days in a period of 24 calendar months, the Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (Conferment of Permanent Status to Workmen) Act, 1981 was passed by the State Government.
The constitutional validity of the Act was challenged before the High Court by various industrial establishments by way of writ petitions.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions in part, striking down some portions of section 3 of the Act.
The State Government preferred appeals against the judgment of the High Court.
Meanwhile, the Appellant State amended the Act in the light of the High Court 's judgment.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that the view taken by the High Court as to the scope of section 3(2) has to be determined notwithstanding the,amendments made.
The contention of the respondents was that the legisla ture while amending the Act with retrospective effect has accepted the judgment of the High Court, since the amendment has not given a different meaning to section 3(2) from the one asserted by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
When an Act has been judicially interpreted, Courts 34 may study the subsequent action or inaction of the legisla ture for clues as to legislative approval or disapproval of the judicial interpretation.
After the statute has been judicially interpreted in a certain way and if the legisla ture by taking note of the judgment amended the statute appropriately so as to give it a different meaning from the one asserted by the Courts, or not giving any different meaning from the view taken by the Court, it may be argued with some justification that the legislature has expressly or by implication ratified the judicial interpretation.
[38G H; 39A] 2.
In the instant case, the legislature has expressly taken note of the High Court verdict and removed the practi cal difficulties caused thereby in implementing the provi sions of the Act, by appropriate amendments.
No provision, however, was inserted to re write and validate the portion which was struck down by the High Court.
It could, there fore, be reasonably held that the legislature has accepted the judgment of the High Court to the extent indicated.
[39A B] 3.
The view taken by the High Court in striking down a portion of sub section 2 of section 3 of the Act cannot be found fault with.
The word 'non employment ' would include retrenchment as well and a person whose services have been terminated or discharged albeit illegal cannot at all be said to be a person in service, much less in continuous service.
Therefore, the period of non employment or the period after discharge cannot be accounted for the purpose of giving continuity of service.
If the discharge is set aside and workmen is reinstated by process known to law the workman automatically gets continuity of service.
No special provision is necessary for such purposes.
[39C; E F]
