While allowing a writ petition, one of the Judges deliv ered the main Judgment invalidating the decision of the Government on the ground that it violated Article 14 of the Constitution.
The other Judge delivered a separate, but concurring opinion which contained highly disparaging re marks attributing mala fides and underhand dealing on the part of the State Government.
Several appeals were filed against the said decision before this Court.
This Court allowed the appeals and observed that the strictures passed in the concurring Judgment were totally unjustified and unwarranted.
State of M.P. vs Nandial Jaiswal & Ors., ; Thereafter an Advocate who had no connection whatsoever with the litigation filed a review petition before the High Court.
It was alleged that the State Government committed fraud and procured the judgment from this Court.
The matter was listed before a Division Bench on 29th October 1988, and one of the Judges dismissed the review petition as not maintainable.
Meanwhile, another application for review was filed stating that the Vidhan Sabha proceedings would lend credence to the claim that the State Government had prac tised fraud on the Court.
On 6th February, 1989 the other Judge,(who had passed strictures against the Government in the Writ Petition) dismissed the review position, for want of jurisdiction, with an observation that had the appellant acted bona fide in briefing the then Chief Minister, the fraud on the Court, as also the misleading press statement by the then Chief Minister, would have been avoided.
It was further observed that the appellant did not act befitting the status of the high office of the Advocate General and that he did not have the courage to face the situation in the Court later.
Before this Court.
the appellant contended that he had no 111 opportunity to meet the allegations in the review petitions.
He had also contended that earlier he entered appearance as Advocate General on behalf of the State, and that when the review petitions were heard neither he was the Advocate General nor did he wish to enter appearance since he thought that the review petitions deserved to be dismissed as there were no valid grounds.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Judicial restraint and discipline are as neces sary to the orderly administration of justice as they are to the effectiveness of the army.
The duty of restraint, this humility of function should be a constant theme of our judges.
This quality in decision making is as much necessary for judges to command respect as to protect the independence of the judiciary.
Judicial restraint in this regard might better be called judicial respect; that is, respect by the judiciary.
Respect to those who come before the Court as well to other co ordinate branches of the State, the Execu tive and the Legislature.
There must be mutual respect.
When these qualities fail or when litigants and public believe that the judge has failed in these qualities, it will be neither good for the judge nor for the judicial process.
[117C E] 2.
The Judges Bench is a seat of power.
Not only do judges have power to make binding decisions, their decisions legitimate the use of power by other officials.
The Judges have the absolute and unchallengeable control of the Court domain.
But they cannot misuse their authority by intemper ate comments, undignified banter or scathing criticism of counsel, parties or witnesses.
The Court has the inherent power to act freely upon its own conviction on any matter coming before it for adjudication but it is a general prin ciple of the highest importance to the proper administration of justice that derogatory remarks ought not to be made against persons or authorities whose conduct comes into consideration unless it is absolutely necessary for the decision of the case to animadvert on their conduct.
[117F G] R.K. Lakshmanan vs
A.K. Srinivasan; , and Niranjan Patnaik vs Sashibhushan Kar, , relied on.
No doubt each Judge is independent to form an opinion of his own in deciding cases or in any phase of the deci sional function.
But the facts of the present case against the background of the views expressed by this Court apropos to the earlier strictures against the Government, should have warned the Judge no matter how clear he was in his mind, 112 not to criticise the appellant.
The avoidance of even the appearance of bitterness, so important in a Judge, required him not to cast aspersions on the professional conduct of the appellant, especially when he held that the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the review petition.
The observations made are not only without jurisdiction, but are also wholly and utterly unjustified and unwarranted, and hence expunged.
[116C 1); 118B] The Nature of the Judicial Process by Benjamin N. Cardo zo, p. 168 169; Some Observations of Felix Frankfurter, J., on the Nature of Judicial Process of Supreme Court Litiga tion, 98 Proceedings AM Phil Society 233 (1954) and The Judiciary and Constitutional Politics Views from the Bench by Mark W. Cannon and David M.O. 's Brien, p. 27, referred to.
