A device parcel containing camouflaged live hand grenade exploded in the hands of the addressee resulting in his instantaneous death.
The police collected from the scene of incident the typewritten pieces of the paper in which the grenade had been wrapped and sent them to the Central Foren sic Science Laboratory where they succeeded in partially reconstructing the name and address of the deceased.
These were then examined by the Head of the Document Division in the said Laboratory with reference to the specimen of typing prints taken from the commercial college where they were alleged to have been got typed.
He opined that on balance of similarities and dissimilarities it was reasonable to con clude that the type scripts found on the slip pasted on the wrapper of the parcel had been typed from one, of the ma chines of the college as both the impressions were identi cal.
At the trial the prosecution wanted to examine the said expert to prove the fact.
This was resisted by the defence on the ground that the evidence of such typewriting expert was inadmissible under section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act as it did not fall within its ambit.
The trial court relying on the observations to that effect in Hanumant & Anr.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh, [1952] SCR 1091, dismissed the prayer.
The High Court dismissed the State 's revision petition in limine.
In the appeal by the State it was submitted that the word 'science ' occurring in section 45 of the Evidence Act should be held comprehensive enough to include the opinion of an expert in regard to transcript as well in view of the march of science.
Referring the matter to the larger Bench, the Court, HELD: By the march of time, there is rapid development in the 125 field of forensic science and it has become imperative to match the said march of modern vistas of scientific knowl edge.
The question in the instant case whether the opinion of an expert in regard to type script would fall within the ambit of section 45 of the Evidence Act should, therefore, be examined in detail and decided by a Large Bench as the judgment in Hanumant 's case was rendered by a Bench of three Judges.
[130D, G]
