The appellants/petitioners filed Writ Petitions before the High Court against the termination of their services as Lekhpals in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The High Court did not entertain the petitions on the ground that alternate relief was available before the U.P. Public Services Tribu nals set up under U.P. Act 17 of 1976.
Hence, the appeals, by special leave/Writ Petitions.
Disposing of the appeals/petitions, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The Services Tribunal set up under the U.P. Act No. 17/76 should be withdrawn and an appropriate tribu nal under the Central should be set up.
Such a Tribunal is deemed to be one in terms of Article 323A of the Constitution.
When set up, it would take away High Court 's jurisdiction in regard to service disputes, and function as its substitute.
It would have plenary powers to deal with every aspect of the dis pute.
This would be in accord with the current thinking on this subject matter at different levels.
[173E; F G] 1.2 A cursory analysis of year wise institution, penden cy and disposal of cases between 1977 and 1984 before the Public Services Tribunal shows that while institutions have sizeably fallen or remained more or less constant, there has been rapid fall in the disposal of cases, even though there has been increase in strength of Tribunals, and only 50 to 60% of the institutions are being attended to, which cer tainly would lead accumulation to mount up.
These aspects require to be noticed seriously.
[174F H] 172 1.3 Since the disputes require judicial handling, and the adjudication being essentially judicial in character, an adequate number of judges of the appropriate level should man the Services Tribunals.
This would create appropriate temper and generate atmosphere suitable in n adjudicatory Tribunal and the institution as well would command he requi site confidence of the disputants.
[175B C] S.P. Sampath Kumar vs Union of India & Ors., , referred to.
1.4 State of Uttar Pradesh territorially is the second largest State India, but populationwise comes first.
Almost every part of the State well advanced and service litigation in such setting is likely to arise everywhere.
Therefore to locate the seat of the Tribunals at the State capital is not appropriate.
Keeping in view the accepted philosophy that justice should be taken to everyone 's doors, State Govern ment would consider increasing the number of Benches and locating them at various sectors or depending upon the number of institution of disputes and pendency at the level of independent Commissionerate or by clubing two or three of them together.
The location of Benches would inquire further examination at administrative level.
but definitely, the tribunals should be available in different parts of the State and all the benches of the Tribunal should not be located at one place.
[175E H; 176A] The decision of the High Court in each of the cases is set aside and e dispute transferred to the Services Tribunal for disposal within six months.
[173C D]
