The two appellants had joined as overseers in the P.W.D. of the respondent Madhya Pradesh State.
Thereafter they were appointed as Junior Engineers.
The grievance of the appel lants is with regard to their seniority in the next promo tional post viz, that of Assistant Engineer.
Recruitment Rules which govern the promotional post lay down that the Departmental promotion Committee is required to consider the names of all eligible candidates on merits and judge their suitability in all respects on merit cum seniority basis.
The D.P.C. is also required to arrange the names of all the selected candidates in the order of their merit.
In the case of exceptionally meritorious junior he is given a higher number in the selection list.
This list is sent to Public Service Commission for its approval.
After approval the list becomes the select list and the promotions are made from this list serial wise.
Under the Rules to be eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer a Junior Engineer has to have an experi ence of two years as Junior Engineer.
As the State Govt.
wanted a certain number of Assistant Engineers but enough number with requisite qualifying serv ice were not available so taking resort to the Rule of Administrative Exigency contained in the proviso to Rule 19(1) of the Rules the Govt.
promoted some Junior Engineers including both the appellants is Assistant Engineers on July 22, 1971 on purely ad hoc basis.
On August 7, 1972 respond ents 40 to 63 were appointed as Assistant Engineers by direct recruitment and on November 22, 1972 respondents 2 to 39 and the appellants were selected as Assistant Engineers by the D.P.C.
On the same date the State Govt.
issued an order of appointment of the appellants and respondents 2 to 39 in which appellant No. 1 was shown at 132 serial No. 14 and appellant No. 2 at serial No. 28.
The State Govt.
thereafter prepared a seniority list of Assist ant Engineers as per the order of November 22, 1972.
The appellants challenged the seniority list before the High Court by a Writ Petition.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition.
Hence the present appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Under the Rules to be eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer, a Junior Engineer has to have an experience of two years as Junior Engineer.
[133G] In the instant case, unless the D.P.C. makes the selec tion, none can be appointed as Assistant Engineer regularly.
The appellants were ineligible to be appointed as Assistant Engineers initially.
Their appointments were made specifi cally under the power given to the Government to make ad hoc appointments for administrative exigency.
The appointment orders made it clear that the appointments were in the said Special Circumstances and that they will not be deemed to determine seniority for any purpose whatsoever.
[138C D] Once it is held that the appellants were appointed on ad hoc basis, what comes into play is the proviso to Rule 19(1) which permitted the Government to make such ad hoc appoint ments for purely administrative exigencies.
[139D] Baleshwar Dass & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors etc.
, [1981] 1 S.C.R. 449 and G.P. Doval & Ors.
vs Chief Secre tary, Government of U.P. & Ors., ; , re ferred to.
