The fourth respondent, a company had two factories in the State of Bombay.
The first respondent Union obtained a certificate of recognition from the Industrial Court under section 12 of the Maharashtra Recognition of Trade Unions & Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, 1971 for one of the company 's undertakings.
While it was acting as such recognised union, many of the workers claimed that they had resigned from the said union and formed a new union, the appellant Union had it registered on January 7, 1981.
The Appellant Union made an application to the Industri al Court under Section 13(1)(ii) on October 9, 1981 for cancellation of the recognition of the first respondent Union on the ground that the latter 's membership in the undertaking had fallen below 30 per cent of the total strength of workmen in the undertaking for the preceeding six months.
The allegations were refuted by the first re spondent Union and it was further contended that its member ship was more than 30 per cent for the relevant period.
Another application was submitted by the appellant Union on March 1, 1982 for cancellation of the recognition of the first respondent Union under Section13(1)(ii) alleging that the recognition was 178 obtained by misrepresentation and/or fraud, and that it was also granted recognition by mistake.
The Industrial Court rendered the relief in favour of the appellant Union, but the said decision was set aside by the High Court, and confirmed by this Court.
After sometime the appellant Union moved an application under section 14 for being registered itself as a recognised union in place of the first respondent Union on the ground that it had the largest membership of the workers in the undertaking, i.e. about 69% of the total strength.
This claim was contested by the first respondent Union, in its reply, and it was pleaded that it had a membership of 1400 workers.
Details of membership were furnished by the parties with their pleadings and an application was made by the appellant Union to the Industrial Court to hold an enquiry under section 12(2) by directing the Investigating Officer to verify the membership of both the Unions.
The Industrial Court thereupon gave directions to the Investigating Officer appointed under the Act to investigate the membership of both the Union.
While the investigation was in progress, both the Unions submitted draft proposals to the following effect: (1) The issue pertaining to recognition of any of the Unions be decided by secret ballot and the Investigating Officer be directed to conduct the same ballot; (2.) The union which would have the majority of the votes would be treated as recognised trade union and the one which fails to get the majority would not raise any technicality or objec tion and (3) The union which fails to secure majority in the ballot would raise no objection for the period of three years to the union thus declared as the recognised union.
The Industrial Court directed the Investigating Officer to hold a secret ballot in the premises of the Company and the employees who were entitled to vote in the ballot were those who were on the rolls of the Company on July 1, 1985.
A secret ballot was held and the appellant Union secured 798 votes whereas the first respondent Union secured 780 votes.
The first respondent Union submitted objections contend ing that he cut off date of July 1, 1985 was not correct as the employees who were in employment of the Company and whose services were intermitently interrupted were not given an opportunity to exercise their votes.
179 The Industrial Court disposing of the aforesaid objection, held that since there was an agreement between the two unions, the procedure adopted to grant recognition to the union under the Act was a valid one, and granted the request of the appellant Union for cancellation of the recognition of the respondent Union under section 13(1)(VII) of the Act, and as a consequence of the recognition, granted recognition to the appellant Union in place of the first respondent Union under section 14 of the Act, and granted the necessary certificate of recognition.
Writ petitions were filed in the High Court under Arti cle 227 of the Constitution by two workers of the first respondent Union, contesting the aforesaid order of the Industrial Court, and they were allowed.
The High Court relying on its earlier decision in Maharashtra General Kamgar Union, Bombay vs Mazdoor Congress, Bombay & Ors., , set aside the order of the Industrial Court.
In the appeals to this Court on the question: whether the procedure adopted by the Industrial Court for granting recognition to the appellant Union was illegal.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The order of the Industrial Court granting recognition under the Act to the appellant Union by follow ing the method of ballot is prima facie, illegal being in breach of the provisions of the Act.
The High Court had, therefore rightly interfered with the said order.
[192B] Maharashtra General Kamgar Union, Bombay vs Mazdoor Congress, Bombay & Ors., , approved.
Section 14 lays down the procedure for recognition of the other union when there is already a recognised union in the field.
The conditions precedent to making such applica tion are; (i) a period of at least two years must have elapsed since the day of the registration of the recognised union; (ii) a period of one year should have elapsed since the date of disposal of the previous application for recog nition of such union; (iii) the union must have satisfied the conditions necessary for recognition specified under section 11; and in addition; (iv) its membership during the whole of the period of six calendar months immediately preceding the calendar month in which such application is made must have been larger than the membership of the recog nised union; (v) the provisions of Section 12 (which also include the conditions specified in Section 19), are satis fied.
If, however, the Court comes to the conclu 180 sion that any of the other unions has the largest membership of employees and such other union has also notified to the Court its claim to be registered as a recognised union and that such other union also satisfies the necessary condi tions, the Court will grant recognition to the other union.
[188B, C G] 3.
The recognition or derecognition of a union under the Act is not a matter which concerns only the contesting unions or its members.
It is a matter of utmost importance to the interests of all the workmen in the undertaking concerned and to the industry and society in general.
No union is entitled to be registered as a 'recognised union under the Act merely because it satisfies the membership qualification.
[1901D E] 4.
The Industrial Court is forbidden from granting recognition to a union whatever its membership, if the Court is satisfied that it is disqualified for reasons mentioned under section 12(5) and 12(6) or does not satisfy the condi tions mentioned in section 19.
[190E] In the instant case what was done by the Industrial Court, was to permit the registration of the union as a recognised one by a method which was clearly alien to the Act.
The Court in effect allowed the parties to circumvent the provisions of the Act and by adopting a simplistic method directed that whoever command a majority of votes of the employees voting on a particular day, would be entitled to the status of the recognised union.
The Court thus ignored in particular the mandatory provisions of Sections 10, 11, 12, 14 and 19 of the Act.
Not only that, the Court also failed to find out whether any of those workers who voted were members of any of the two unions at any time including on the day of the ballot.
What had to be found out was the exclusive membership of the contesting unions con tinuously over the specified period the overlapping member ship being ignored, [191D G] 5.
The consent of the parties to follow a procedure which is against the mandatory provisions of the Act, cannot cure the illegality.
To permit the parties by consent to substitute a procedure of their own is in effect to permit them to substitute the provisions of the Act.
[191G, H; 192A] [Matter remanded to Industrial Court for disposal ac cording to law.] [192B] 181
