The main point for decision in this appeal by the Municipal Committee of Dhamtari and its President was, whether in appointing an Executive Officer in exercise of its powers under section 53A of the C. P. and Berar Municipalities Act, 1922, the State Government acted in a judicial capacity or in an administrative one Complaints having been made against the appellants, the additional Deputy Collector was directed to hold an enquiry and on his report the State Government, by a notification under that section, appointed an Executive Officer of the Municipal Committee for 18 months with specified powers and duties.
The appellants were given notice of the said enquiry, filed objections 1441 and the President was personally present on some occasions during the enquiry.
The notification charged the appellants with incompetency as well as abuse of power.
Against that notification the appellants moved the High Court under article 226, of the Constitution for a writ of certiorari quashing the same, but their application was rejected by the judge sitting singly.
An appeal under the Letters Patent against his decision was summarily dismissed.
It was contended before this Court on behalf of the appellants that, (1) although the notification purported to be one under section 53A of the Act, it was in effect and reality one under section 57 Of the Act, that (2) it was, therefore, incumbent on the Government under section 57(5) of the Act to afford the appellants an opportunity to furnish explanation and that (3) even if the notification was one under section 53A of the Act, the Government was bound by the rules of natural justice to give the appellants an opportunity to defend themselves.
Held (per curiam), that sections 53A and 57 of the C. P. and Berar Municipalities Act, 1922, differed materially in their scope and effect, but it was not obligatory under either of them for the Government to take any action at all.
Although a finding of incompetency of the Municipal Committee was a condition precedent to action under both the sections, the Government was free to choose its remedy as the occasion demanded and it could not be contended that because a notification made under section 53A of the Act, along with a finding of incompetency, contained some instances of abuse of power as well, it must be held to have been made under section 57 of the Act.
Nor could the vesting of power in the Executive Officer by the notification, however substantial in character, be said, in effect and reality, to amount to a dissolution of the Municipal Committee under section 57 Of the Act.
Per Das C. T. and Kapur J.
The real test whether the State Government functioned in a quasi judicial capacity or in an administrative capacity in exercising its powers under section 53A of the Act was whether the statute required it to act judicially either expressly or by implication.
The Act contained no express provision to that effect, nor could the determination of the fact of incompetency as a condition precedent to any action under that section, by itself, carry such an implication.
In making the notification under section 53A of the Act, therefore, the Government functioned in an administrative capacity and not in a quasi judicial one.
Even so, by the enquiry held, the State Government afforded the appellants ample opportunity to defend themselves and there could hardly be any ground for complaint.
Province Of Bombay vs Kusaldas section Advani, [1950] S.C.R. 621, Rex vs Electricity Commissioners, , Rex vs London County Council, , R. vs Legislative Committee Of the Church Assembly, (1928) 1 K.B. 411 and Nakkuda Ali 's Case, , referred to.
1442 Per Bhagwati J.
Since the enquiry held in this case fully satisfied the requirements of natural justice, it was unnecessary to determine for the purpose of this case whether the State r Government in acting under section 53A of the Act did so in a quasi judicial capacity or in an administrative one.
Per section K. Das J.
If the question was one of compliance with the rules of natural justice, the enquiry held in the present case could hardly be said to have complied with such rules; but since the State Government in acting under section 53A of the Act had only to consider policy and expediency and did at no stage have any form of lis before it, its action thereunder was purley of an administrative character not amenable to a writ of certiorari.
Manchester Legal Aid Committee, , applied.
Per Subba Rao J. On a proper appreciation of the criteria laid down by section 53A of the Act itself, there could be no doubt that it imposed a duty on the State Government to act judicially in ascertaining the fact of the incompetency of the Municipal Committee to perform its duties.
It is clear that the determination of such a jurisdictional fact could not have been left to the subjective satisfaction of the Government but was intended to be arrived at objectively and, therefore, it was incumbent upon the Government to give a reasonable opportunity to the appellants to explain the charge levelled against them.
Such enquiry as was held in the instant case could hardly take the place of reasonable opportunity to be given by the Government for the proposed action under section 53A of the Act.
Rex vs The Electricity Commissioners, (1924) i K. B. 171, Province of Bombay vs Kusaldas section Advani, ; and R. vs Manchester Legal Aid Committee, , referred to.
