Writ Petitions/Civil appeals challenging the notifica tion dated 31st May, 1979 which substituted a new rule 17(2) of U.P. Excise Rules and provided for a vend fee, the amend ment to section 49 of the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949 treating exclusive privilege for State in liquor trade and imposing a transport fee, the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949 as amended from time to time along with ordinance No. 15 of 1981 amending the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949 and Section 49 added by reason of which the State was granted exclusive privilege of importing, exporting, transporting, manufactur ing, bottling, selling, buying, processing or using any intoxicant; and seeking a declaration that alcohol plant of the petitioner company was not covered by the A.P. Excise Act, 1968. 'A.P. Distillery Rules, 1970, and A.P. Rectified Spirit Rules.
1971 and that alcohol plant of the company was not a 'distillery ' within the meaning of the said expression under the A.P. Distillery Rules and, therefore, the Distill ery Rules had no application thereto and seeking an order to restrain from interfering with and/or regulating and con trolling production, distribution, movement and supply of alcohol from the plant of the company and the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act, were filed in this Court.
Review Petitions against the judgment and order of this Court dated 19th December, 1979 in State of U.P. etc.
vs Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. and Ors.
; , re agitating challenge 625 to sections 24A and 24B of the U.P. Excise Act, 1910 as amended in 1972 and 1976, declaring exclusive privilege of the Government for manufacture and sale of foreign liquor as defined, which included denatured spirit and industrial alcohol, were also filed.
The petitioners/appellants contended that the levies made by the respondent States on alcohol, which was utilised as raw material by the industries for manufacturing the products were invalid.
Some of three industries 'themselves manufactured alcohol as they had their own distillaries ' and from where it passed through pipelines to their industrial units, where this was used as a raw material, whereas some purchased alcohol or denatured spirit on being allotted by the Government.
It was alleged that, in addition to excise duty levied by the Central Government, excise duty and various levies in various names like vend lee, transport fee and others numbering about eight levies were imposed by the State Government.
It was also contended that the State Legislature had no authority, in view of Entry 84 of List I read with Entry 51 of List I1 to impose such levies; this being alcohol which did not within the ambit of alcoholic liquors for human consumption.
It is only the centre which had the authority to tax under Entry 84, and that Entry 8 In List II only authorised the State Legislature to enact laws to regulate but did not empower it to impose any levy and the various levies which hod been imposed by the State Legislature on industrial alcohol and even methylated spirit could not be brought within the ambit of regulatory duties for purposes of regulation only, and, therefore, could not be justified under Entry 8 of List H, that doctrine of privilege and consideration for sale of privilege could be available to the State only in respect of alcohol or alco holic liquors which were for human consumption.
that by merely widening the definition of intoxicating liquors in respective excise laws enacted by the States, the ambit of authority of taxation could not be enlarged by the State Legislature when in List II Entry 51 the words used were alcoholic liquors for human consumption.
It was further contended that though the direction and commitment to im provement of the standards of living contained in Article 47 of the Constitution must be kept in view, this improvement could be achieved primarily by industrialisation involving increased production and employment and giving priority to the core sectors, that the Industries (Development & Regula tion) Act, 1951 was enacted with a view to developing and controlling various important industries and that the peti tioners/appellants were predominantly and primarily con cerned with using ethyl alcohol (rectified spirit) as an industrial raw material and this industrial alcohol is required as an input for further manufacture of downstream products.
626 It was submitted on behalf of Union of India that the legislative competence of the State enactments in the var ious States would have to be determined by reference to Entries 7, 52, 59, 84, 96 and 97 of List I and Entries 8, 24, 26, 27, 51, 52, 54, 56, 62 of List II and Entries 19 and 33 of List III, that then was a dichotomy between Entry 84 of List I and Entry 52 of List II, but this would not con trol the interpretation of other entries and that there was no such dichotomy in Entry 8 of List II, that the power to levy taxes had to be read from entry relating to the taxes and not from general entry, that none of the taxing entries in List II was controlled by Entry 52 of List I, that State 's privilege to completely prohibit or farm out liquor containing alcohol for consumption did not comprehend a similar right of the State with regard to other intoxicating liquids containing alcohol and to so prohibit or collect fee for farming out, would be unconstitutional under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, that under Entry 51 of List II, State Legislature had no power to levy excise duty on industrial alcohol, as it was not fit for human consumption, and though the State could collect an amount called vend fee, shop rent, etc.
for conferring on a citizen the right to manufacture and sell alcoholic liquors if it is for human consumption, this power did not extend to industrial alcohol or alcohol contained in the medicinal or toilet prepara tions; On behalf of the respondent States; it was contended that: (a) Entry 52 of List I was an exceptional entry, which not only prescribed the field of legislation but also ena bled and empowered the Parliament to make laws to the exclu sion of the State and that, being exclusionary in nature unlike entries merely delineating fields of legislation, this entry had to be strictly and, therefore, narrowly construed; (b) whenever the Constitution intended the Parliament to assume legislative competence in respect of the entire field, a declaration of an unqualified nature was provided for unlike qualified provi sion like Entry 52 of List 1, (c) the words 'control ' and 'regulation ' were, at times, held to he interchangeable or used synonymously, but their use in the various entries either singly or jointly, indi cated that they were sought to convey a different sense and the word 'control ' had in the context, a narrower meaning, excluding details of regulatory nature by the State; (d) comparing Entries 7, 23, 24, 27, 62, 64 and 67 of List I with Entry 52, would demonstrate that under entry 52, it was not the entire 627 field which was sought to be covered but only the control of industries; and that the absence of inclusion of qualifying words like 'the control of which ' could not be brushed aside; (e) in view of the declaration made in Section 2 of the I.D.R. Act, 1951 and the provisions made therein, the entire field was not occupied and the vend fee or other impost by the State legislatures were not infringing in the field treaded by the Central Legislature; the Act did not preclude or eclipse the legislative powers of the State; the Act also did not apply on its own terms to the levy; these operated on different tracks; (f) the Parliament had no power to legislate on indus trial alcohol, since industrial alcohol was also alcoholic liquor for human consumption and Entry 84 in List I express ly excluded this category and, therefore, the residuary Entry 97 of List I would not operate as against its own legislative intent; (g) the State had legislative competence to impose the levy since it was, both on its language and in pith and substance, legislation failing under Entry 8 List II, intox icating liquor, and Entry 51 List II, alcoholic liquor for human consumption, and what was required was intoxicating liquor and/or alcoholic liquor for human consumption; (h) that the State had exclusive right to deal in liq uor, and this power was reserved by and/or derived under, Article 19(6) and 19(6)(ii) of the Constitution, for parting which a charge was levied, and in a series of decisions it had been ruled that the charge was neither a fee nor a tax and was termed as privilege; (i) there was no dichotomy between Ethyl Alcohol, to be used for beverages and for industrial purposes, and in any case the levy was on manufacture of the Ethyl Alcohol, and the dichotomy attempted to be drawn in Entry 84 of List I on the basis of the development of the concept of industrial alcohol and the inapplicability of the concept of potable liquor to the industry of alcohol was not valid.
(j) the levy was consistent with wider interpretation of alcoholic liquor based on pre existing legislative history; (k) when two interpretations were possible, the choice must fall on that interpretation which validated existing State legislations designed to raise revenues and rejection of the other interpretation 628 which was destructive of the scheme of distribution of powers; (1) the words 'alcoholic liquor ' in Lists I & II of the 7th Schedule to the Constitution must be interpretated so as to mean and take within its sweep alcohol as first obtained in the process of or as a product of fermentation industry at which stage, it was capable of being rendered potable, and the fact that it may be rendered unfit for human con sumption, did not render the substance any less liable for taxation; (m) imposition of a fee would be the most effective method of regulating intoxicating liquor other than alcohol and could be justified as the reasonable measure in regard to intoxicating liquor as it is the duty of the State, being a welfare State, to denature by incurring extra cost and effort; quid pro quo was not necessary and, even if it was necessary, the requirements were met; and the price fixation was 'a valid method in regulation of consumption; (n) under its police powers, the State had to regulate health, morality, welfare of society and incidental pauper ism and crime; (o) in enacting a law with respect to intoxication liquor as part of the legislative power, measures of social control and regulation of private rights were permissible and as such may even amount to prohibition; (p) it has been accepted by Courts all along that the 'police power ' of the State enabled regulations to be made regarding manufacture, transport, possession and sale of intoxicating liquor; and such police power could be exer cised as to impose reasonable restrictions as to effectuate the power; (q) trade in alcoholic drinks or intoxicating drinks, being obnoxious and injurious to health, a citizen had no fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution and it Is the privilege of the State alone and it can part with this privilege on receipt of a consideration; (r) the levy was stipulated jointly or severally, both under ' Entries 8 of List II, Entry 51 of List II, Entry 33 of List III and what was described as police powers regula tory and other incidental charges, and the levy was justi fied, being a regulatory power under Article 19(6), and 19(6)(ii); the State had.
a monopoly in alcohol trade and Article 31C 629 granted immunity to the challenge under Articles 13, 14 and 19 of the Constitution, and under Article 298, trading power of the State must be recognised, coupled with century old monopoly of the State in alcohol; and (t) the vend fee was a pre constitutional levy, and so saved under Article 277 of the Constitution: it was not a law either under Article 246 or Article 254 and was, there fore, outside the purview of the Central Act.
On the questions: (i) whether the vend fee in respect of the industrial alcohol under different legislations and rules in different States was valid; (ii) whether the power to levy excise duty m case of industrial alcohol was with the State legislature or the Central legislature; (iii) what was the scope and ambit of Entry 8 List Ii of the Seventh schedule of the Constitution; and (iv) whether, the State Government had exclusive right or privilege of manufactur ing, selling, distributing, etc.
of alcohols including industrial alcohol, and what was the extent, scope and ambit of such right of privilege, Allowing the Writ Petitions, Civil Appeals and Review Petitions, this Court, HELD: Majority: (E.S. Venkataramiah, C.J.I, Sabyasachi Mukharji, Ranganath Misra, B.C. Ray, K.N. Singh and section Natarajan, JJ.) Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. 1.1 The relevant provisions of the U.P Excise Act, 1910, A.P. Excise Act, 1968, Tamil Nadu Act, and Bombay Prohibi tion Act, 1949 are unconstitutional insofar as these purport to levy a tax or charge imposts upon industrial alcohol, namely, alcohol used and usable for industrial purposes.
[680G H] 1.2 Having regard to the principles of interpretation and the Constitutional provisions, in the light of the language used and, having considered the impost and the composition of industrial alcohol, and the legislative practice of this country.
the imposts in question cannot be justified as State imposts.
[680G H] 1.3 The different provisions, in question are not merely regulatory, but are much more than that.
These seek to levy imposition in their pith and substance, not as incidental or as merely disincentives, 630 but as attempts to raise revenue for States ' purposes.
There is no taxing provision permitting these in the lists in the field of industrial alcohol for the State to legislate.
Furthermore, in view of the occupation of the field by the Industrial Development and Regulation Act, it was not possi ble to levy this impost.
Besides, in view of the language used in the specific provision the levy is not on the manu facture of alcohol as such.
Therefore, these levies cannot in essence be sustained as duty of excise, [681A B] 2.1 The meaning of the expressions used in the Constitu tion must be found from the language used.
The words of the Constitution should be interpreted on the same principle of interpretation as one applies to an ordinary law but these very principles of interpretation compel one to take into account the nature and scope of the Act which requires interpretation.
[672H, 673A] 2.2 A Constitution is the mechanism under which laws are to be made and not merely an Act which declares what the law is to be.
[673B] 2.3 It is also well settled that a Constitution must not be construed in any narrow or pedantic sense and that con struction which is most beneficial to the widest possible amplitude of its power, must be adopted.
An exclusionary clause in any of the entries should be strictly and, there fore, narrowly construed.
No entry should, however, be so read as not to rob it of entire content.
A broad and liberal spirit should, therefore, inspire those whose duty it is to interpret the Constitution, and the Courts are not free to stretch or to pervert the language of an enactment in the interest of any legal or constitutional theory.
Constitu tional adjudication is not strengthened by such an attempt but it must seek to declare the law.
It must not try to give meaning on the theory of what the law should be, but must so look upon a Constitution that it is a living and organic thing and must adapt itself to the changing situations and pattern in which it has to be interpreted.
Where division of powers and jurisdiction in a federal Constitution is the scheme, it is desirable to read the Constitution in harmoni ous way.
Further, in deciding whether any particular enact ment is within the purview of one Legislature or the other, it is the pith and substance of the legislation in question that has to be looked into.
[673B E] 3.1 It is well settled that the various entries in the three lists of the Indian Constitution are not powers but fields of legislation.
The power to legislate is given by Article 246 and other Articles of the Constitution.
The three lists of the 7th Schedule to the Constitution are legislative heads or fields of legislation.
These demarcate the area over 631 which the appropriate legislatures can operate.
[673F] 3.2 It is also well settled that widest amplitude should be given to the language of the three entries but some of these entries in different lists or in the same list may over ride and sometimes may appear to be in direct conflict, with each other, then and then comes the duty of the Court to find the true intent and purpose and to examine the particular legislature in question.
Each general word should be held to extend to all anciliary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be comprehended in it.
[673F G] 3.3 In interpreting an entry it would not be reasonable to import any limitation by comparing or contrasting that entry with any other in the same list.
It has to be inter preted that the Constitution must be interpreted as the organic document in the light of the experience gathered.
[673H] 3.4 In the Constitutional scheme of division of power under the legislative lists, there are separate entries pertaining to taxation and other laws.
[674A] The relevant entries in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution demarcate legislative fields and are closely linked and supplement one another.
[674E] The Constitution of India like most other Constitutions is an organic document.
It should be interpreted in the light of the experience.
It has to be flexible and dynamic so that it adapts itself to the changing conditions and accommodates itself in a pragmatic way to the goals of national development and the industrialisation of the coun try.
This Court should, therefore, endeavour to interpret the entries and the powers in the Constitution in such a way that it helps to the attainment of undisputed national goals, as permitted by the Constitution.
[674C D] M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. vs State of A.P., ; at pages 1480 82, relied on.
The India Cement Ltd. etc.
vs The State of Tamil Nadu etc., and Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938 at 37 38, referred to.
4.1 The expression of a Constitution must be understood in its common and normal sense.
Industrial alcohol as it ISI, is incapable of 632 being consumed by a normal human being.
The expression 'consumption ' must also be understood in the sense of direct physical intake by human beings in this context.
No doubt, utilisation in some form or the other is consumption for the benefit of the human beings, if industrial alcohol is uti lised for production of rubber, tyres used.
But the utilisa tion of those tyres in the vehicle of man cannot in the context in which the expression has been used in the Consti tution, be understood to mean that the alcohol has been used for human consumption.
[665C D] 4.2 The expression 'alcoholic liquor for human consump tion ' was meant and still means that liquor which, as it is, is consumable in the sense capable of being taken by human beings as such as beverage of drinks.
Hence, the expression under Entry 84 List I must be understood in the light.
[665E] 4.3 Constitutional provisions specially dealing with delimitation of powers in a federal polity must be under stood in a broad commonsense point of view as understood by common people for whom the Constitution is made.
In termi nology, as understood by the framers of the Constitution and as also viewed at the relevant time of its intepretation it is not possible to proceed otherwise.
Alcoholic or intoxi cating liquors must be understood as these are, what these are capable of or able to become.
[665G H] 5.1 By common standards ethyl alcohol (which has 95%) is an industrial alcohol and is not fit for human consumption.
The petitioners and the appellants were manufacturing ethyl alcohol (95%) (also known as rectified spirit) which is an industrial alcohol.
ISI specification has divided ethyl alcohol (as known in the trade) into several kinds of alco hol.
Beverage and industrial alcohols are clearly and dif ferently treated.
Rectified spirit for industrial purposes is defined as "spirit purified by distillation having a strength not less than 95% of volume by ethyl alcohol".
Dictionaries and technical books would show that rectified spirit (95%) is an industrial alcohol and is not potable as such.
Therefore, industrial alcohol which is ethyl alcohol (95%) by itself is not only non potable but is highly toxic.
The range of spirits of potable alcohol is from country spirit to whisky and the Ethyl Alcohol content varies be tween 19 to about 43 per cent.
These standards are according to the ISI specifications.
Therefore, ethyl alcohol (95%) is not alcoholic liquors for human consumption but can be used as raw material input after processing and substantial dilution in the production of whisky, Gin, Country Liquor, etc.
[677D G] 633 Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. vs The Excise Commissioner, U.P. Allahabad and Anr., Special Appeal No. 177 of 1970, decided on 29.3.1973, referred to.
6.1 Entry 8 of List I which contains the words "intoxi cating liquor ' ' cannot support a tax.
The meaning of this expression has been rightly interpreted by the High Court in Balsara ' s case.
Hence, the observations of this Court in Balsara 's case require consideration.
[677H, 675A B] 6.2 In the light of the new experience and development, "intoxicating liquor" must mean liquor which is consumable by human being as it is.
When the word "liquor" was used by this Court, it did not have the awareness of full use of alcohol as industrial alcohol.
It is true that alcohol was used for industrial purposes then also, but the full poten tiality of that user was not then comprehended or under stood.
With the passage of time, meanings do not change but new experience give new colour to the meaning.
[675B C] F.N. Balsara vs State of Bombay, AIR 1951 Born 210 & 214, approved.
State of Bombay & Anr.
vs F.N. Balsara, ; Har Shankar & Ors. etc.
vs The Dy.
Excise & Taxation Commissioner & Ors., ; ; Adhyaksha Mathur Babu 's Sakti Oushadhalaya Dacca (P) Ltd. vs Union of India, ; M/s Guruswamy & Co. etc.
vs State of Mysore & Ors.
, ; State of Mysore vs S.D. Cawasji & Co. & Ors., ; ; R.C. Jallv.
Union of India, [1962] Suppl 3 S.C.R. 436; Om Prakash vs Giriraj 'Kishore; , ; Inspector of Taxes vs Australian Mutual Provident Society, [1959] 3 All England Law Report 245 and Commonwealth of Massachusetts Et AI vs USA, 92 Lawyers, Edition p. 968, referred to.
6.3 Article 47 of the Constitution imposes upon the State the duty to endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purpose of intoxicating drinks and products which are injurious to health.
If the meaning of the expression "intoxicating liquor" is taken in the wide sense adopted in Balsara 's case, it would lead to an anamolous result and would oblige the State to prohibit even such industries as are licensed under the IDR Act but which manufacture industrial alcohol.
This was never intend ed by the Constitution or judgments of this Court.
There fore, the decision in the Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd. 's case was not correct on this aspect.
[679C D] State of U.P., etc.
vs Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd. & Ors.
etc., 634 ; and State of Bombay & Anr.
vs F.N. Balsara, , overruled.
K.K. Narula vs State of J & K, ; , referred to.
The Indian Constitution does not recognise police power as such.
But, the exercise of sovereign power, which gives the State sufficient authority to enact any law, subject to the limitations of the Constitution to discharge its functions must be recognised.
The Indian Constitution as a sovereign State has power to legislate on all branches except to the limitation as to the division of powers be tween the Centre and the States, and also subject to the fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution.
The Indian State, between the Centre and the States, has sover eign power.
The sovereign power is plenary and inherent in every sovereign State to do all things which promote the peace, morals, education and good order of the people.
Sovereignty is difficult to define.
This power of sovereign ty is, however, subject to Constitutional limitations.
[666F H] 8.1 In interpreting the provisions of the Constitution, one should go by the plain words used by the Constitution makers.
Importing of expression like 'police power ', which is a term of variable and indefinite connotation, can only make the task of interpretation more difficult.
[671B] State of West Bengal vs Subodh Gopal & Ors., at 601 604 and Kameshwar Prasad & Ors.
vs The State of Bihar & Anr., ; , referred to.
8.2 The power of the State to regulate, though not as emanation of police power, but as an expression of the sovereign power of the State is recognised, but that power has its limitations.
[671G] 8.3 Whether the States have the police power or not, they have the power to regulate the use of alcohol, and that power must include power to make provisions to prevent and/or check industrial alcohol, being used as intoxicating or drinkable alcohol.
However, the question is whether, in the garb of regulations, a legislation which is in pith and substance, fee or levy which has no connection with the cost or expenses administering the regulation, could be imposed purely as regulatory measure.
[671D E] In the instant case, judged by the pith and substance of the legisla 635 tion in question, these levies cannot be treated as part of regulatory measures.[671E] 9.1 The activity in potable liquor, which was regarded as a safe and exclusive right of the State earlier, cannot be justified under the police power of the State, i.e., the power to preserve public health, morals, etc.
This reasoning can never apply to industrial alcohol manufactured by indus tries which are to be developed in the public interest, and which are being encouraged by the State.
In such a situa tion, it is essential to strike a balance, and while doing so, it is difficult to find any justification for any exclu sive right of a State to deal with industrial alcohol.
Restriction valid under one circumstance may become invalid in changing circumstances.
[680C D] Nashville, Chattangooga & St. Louis Railway vs Herbert section Walters, 79 Lawyers ' Edition 949; Leo Nebbia vs People of the State of New York, 78 Lawyers ' Edn.
940 at p. 941 and Motor General Traders & Anr.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh 9.2 Arbitrary and excessive imposts under the so called privilege of the States are a great disincentive for devel opment of industries in the public interest and for indus trial development in general and can render units unviable and sick.
It is essential that there should be uniformity in the industry so that these are free from the vagaries and arbitrary and differential treatment meted out from State to State and even in the same State from time to time.
[644C D] 9.3 Right to tax or levy must be in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.
It is clear that all duties of excise, save and except the items specifically excepted in entry 84 of List 1, are generally within the taxing power of the Central Legislature.
The State Legislature has power, though limited in imposing duties of excise.
That power is circumscribed under Entry 51 of List II of the 7th Schedule to the Constitution.
[666H, 667A, 674G] 10.
In view of the subsequent amendments and additions to the levies, the levies in question are not pre Constitu tional levies.
[662E] 11.1 After 1956 amendment to the Industries (Develop ment and Regulation) Act, 1951 bringing alcohol industries (under fermentation industries)as item 26 of the First Schedule to the Act, the control of this industry has vested exclusively in the Union.
Thereafter, licences to 636 manufacture both potable and non potable alcohol is vested in the Central Government.
Distilleries are manufacturing alcohol under the Central Licences under IDR Act.
No privi lege for manufacture even if one existed, has :been trans ferred to the distilleries by the State.
The State cannot itself manufacture industrial alcohol without.the permission of the Central Government.
The States cannot claim to pass a right which these do not possess.
Nor can these States claim exclusive right to produce and manufacture industrial alco hol which are manufactured under the grant of licence from the Central Government.
Industrial alcohol cannot upon coming into existence under such grant be amenable to States ' claim of exclusive possession of privilege.
The State can neither rely on Entry 8 of List II nor Entry 33 of list III as a basis for such a claim.
It cannot claim that under Entry 33 of List III, it can regulate industrial alcohol as a product of the scheduled ,industry, because the Union, under section 18 G of the IDR Act, has evinced clear intention to occupy tile whole field.
Even otherwise, sec tions like Section 24A and 24B of the U.P. Act do not con stitute any regulation in respect of the industrial alcohol as product of the scheduled industry.
On the contrary, these purport to deal with the so called transfer of privilege regarding manufacturing and sale.
This power, admittedly, has been exercised by the State purporting to act under Entry 8 of list II and not under Entry 33 of list III.
[681C F] 11.2 The position with regard to control of alcohol industry has, therefore, undergone material and significant change and the State is left with only powers to pass any legislation in the nature of prohibition of potable liquor referable to Entry 6 of list II and regulating powers, lay down regulations to ensure that non potable alcohol is not diverted and misused as a substitute for potable alcohol, and charge excise duty on potable alcohol and sales tax under Entry 52 of list II; however, sales tax cannot be charged on industrial alcohol in the present case, because under the Ethyl Alcohol (Price Control) Orders, sales tax cannot be charged by the State on industrial alcohol; and in case State is rendering any service, as distinct from its claim of so called grant of privilege, it may charge fees based on quidpro quo.
[681G H, 682A C] Indian Mica and Micanite Industries vs State of Bihar, , relied on.
12.1 On an analysis of the various Abkari Acts and Excise Acts, it is clear that various provinces/States reserve to themselves in their respective States the right to transfer exclusive or other privileges only in respect of manufacture and sale of alcohol and not in respect of 637 possession and use.
Not all but some of States have provided such reservation in their favour.
The price charged as a consideration for the grant of exclusive and other privi leges was generally regarded as an excise duty.
In other words, excise duty and price for privileges were regarded as one and the same thing.
So called privilege was reserved by the State mostly in respect of country liquor and not for eign liquor which included denatured spirit.
[682D E] 12.2 On an analysis of various decisions and practice, it is clear that is respect of industrial alcohol the States are not authorised to impose the impost they have purported to do.
Hence, such impositions and impost must go as being invalid.
However, this would not affect any impost so far as potable alcohol as commonly understood is concerned.
It will also not affect any impositions of levy on industrial alco hol fee, where there are circumstances to establish that there was quid pro quo for the fee sought to be imposed.
This will also not affect any regulating measure as such.
[682F G] The provisions are, therefore, declared to be illegal and invalid prospectively.
The Respondent States are re strained from enforcing the said levy any further but they will not be liable for any refund and the tax already col lected and paid will not be refunded.
[683B] In respect of Tamil Nadu, no further realisations will be made in future by the State Government from the petition ers.
Regarding past realisations, the application for that part of the direction should be placed before a Division Bench, for disposal upon notice both to the State and the Central Governments.
[683F] Calcutta Gas Co. (Proprietory) Ltd. vs The State of West Bengal .
and Ors., [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 1; Nashirwar etc.
vs The State of M.P.; , ; SheopatRai & Ors.
vs State of U. P., [1972] All.
L.J. 1000; Indian Mica & Mican ite Industries Ltd. vs State of Bihar & Ors., [1971] Suppl.
SCR 319; Town Municipal Committee, Amraoti vs Ramachandra Vasudeo Chimote & Anr., ; ; P.N. Kaushal etc.
vs Union of India; , ; M/s Guruswamy & Co. etc.
vs State of Mysore & Ors., ; Coo verjee B. Bharucha vs The Excise Commissioner and the Chief Commissioner, Ajmer & Ors., [19541 SCR 873; Crowley vs Christensen, [1890] 34 Lawyers ' Edn. 620 and Southern Phar maceuticals & Chemicals Trichur & Ors.
vs State of Kerala & Ors. etc.
; , at 537, referred to.
638 Per Oza, J. (Concurring) 13.1 The State Legislature had no authority to levy duty or tax on alcohol which is not for human consumption as that could only be levied by the Centre.
[686G] 13.2 A comparison of the language of Entries 84 of List I and 51 of List II clearly demonstrates that the powers of taxation on alcoholic liquors have been based on the way in which they are used.
Admittedly, alcoholic liquor is a very wide term and may include variety of types of alcoholic liquors, but our Constitution makers have distributed them into heads, namely, (a) for human consumption, and (b) other than for human consumption.
Alcoholic liquors which are for human consumption were put in Entry 51 List II authorising the State Legislature to levy tax on them whereas alcoholic liquors other than for human consumption have been left to the Central Legislature under Entry 84 for levy of duty of excise.
This scheme of these two entries in List I and II is clear enough to indicate the line of demarcation for pur poses of taxation of alcoholic liquors.
What has been ex cluded in Entry 84 has specifically been put within the authority of the State for purposes of taxation.
[685E H] 13.3 From the scheme of entries in the three lists, it is clear that taxing entries have been specifically enacted conferring powers of taxation, whereas other entries pertain to the authority of the Legislature to enact laws for pur poses of regulation.
If Entry 8 in List II is compared with Entry 51 it is clear that while Entry 51 authorises the State Legislature to levy tax and duties on alcoholic liq uors failing under this entry, Entry 8 confers authority on the State Legislature to enact laws for regulation.
Similar ly are Entries in List I.
But since a declaration has been made by the Parliament under Entry 52, List I, declaring the industry based on fermentation and alcohol to be an industry under the Industrial (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and placing it directly under the control of the Centre, even in respect of regulation, the authority of the State Legislature in Entry 8, List II could only be subject to the Act or rules made by the Centre.
Therefore, in view of clear demarcation of authority under various items in the three Lists, Entry 8 List II could not be invoked to justify the levies which have been imposed by the State in respect of alcoholic liquors which are not meant for human consumption.
[686C D, F G] The State, in exercise of powers under Entry 8 of List II and by appropriate law may, however, regulate and that regulation could be to 639 prevent the conversion of alcoholic liquors for industrial use to one for human consumption and for the purpose of regulation, the regulatory fees only could be justified.
In fact, the regulation should be the main purpose, the fee or earning out of it has to be incidental.
[690H, 691A] 14.1 There is nothing like privilege vested in any one of the functionaries of the State.
In the background of this basic feature of our Constitution, the doctrine of privilege is difficult to reconcile with when this privilege of trad ing in commodities injurious to health and dangerous to life is examined especially in the context of Article 21 and Article 47 of our Constitution.
[688C D] 14.2 Article 21 castes a duty on the State to protect the life of every citizen except as is provided under the Article.
If this duty of the State is compared with the scheme of privilege, it means that the State has a privilege to endanger human life (the life of a citizen).
Such a privilege runs contrary to Article 21 [688F] 14.3 Article 47 appears in the Chapter of Directive Principles of State Policy.
Inclusion of this Article in this Chapter clearly goes to show that it is the duty of the State to do what has been provided in this Article.
It has provided that it is the duty of the State to improve public health and this duty will be discharged by endeavouring to bring about prohibition.
It, therefore, sounds contradictory for a State, which is duty bound to protect human life, to claim that it has the privilege of manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages which are expected to be dangerous to human life and injurious to human health and transferring this privilege of selling this privilege on consideration to earn huge revenue without thinking that this trade in liquor ultimately results in degradation of human life even endan gering human life and is nothing but moving contrary to the duty cast under Articles 21 and 47 and ideal of prohibition enshrined in Article 47.
[688H, 689A C] Therefore, in view of Articles 21 and 47, the State cannot claim the privilege of having the right to trade in goods obnoxious and injurious to health.
[689D]
