These appeals arose as a sequel to certain directions of this Court in the famous Sanchaita Investment Company case, which by dint of tremendous advertisement campaign collected deposits amounting to several crores of rupees from thou sands of depositors spread all over India.
The firm pros pered and thereafter tied up and siphoned away a sizeable portion of its funds from its coffers for the benefit of the management personnel by acquiring movable and immovable properties in the names of the firm, relatives and benami dars.
Then they started making defaults in its obligations to the depositors.
The depositors approached the High Court and eventually the matter came up to this Court in 1983.
With a view to safeguard the interests of the depositors and ensure that the properties of the firm be duly identified and full and due benefit of the funds be diverted to its coffers, this Court by its order appointed a Commissioner to take charge of all the assets, documents, papers of the firm, agents, sub agents, transferees and benamidars.
Further to enable the Commissioner to gather all the assets of the firm, he was given powers to attach all assets and properties which in his prima facie opinion are of the ownership of the firm or any of its partners.
Such assets were to be put to sale if no objections are received there to within one month from the date of attachment.
All objections thus received in respect of such properties were to be forwarded to the Prothonotary of Calcutta High Court, and a Division Bench of the High Court was to dispose of the objections on merits.
By a further order dated 23rd September, 1985 this Court empowered the Commissioner to remove all unauthorised 283 persons or trespassers from possession of the property proposed to be sold, and the Commissioner to hand over vacant possession to the rightful purchasers.
One of the properties thus attached by the Commissioner by a public notice was house N. 52/1/1B Surendra Nath Baner jee Road, Calcutta.
It was subsequently brought to sale on "as is and where is basis".
Asit Kumar Mandal and two others purchased this property and requested the Commissioner to give them vacant possession.
Since the sale was on "as is and where is basis", the Mandais moved an application before the High Court Division Bench praying for the vacant posses sion of the said property and the same was granted.
Hence the appellants i.e. Paul Bros and Others, moved two Special Leave Petitions in this Court and claimed that they were bona fide tenants in the property even under the predecessors in interest of Mahamaya Devi in whose name the property was purchased by Sanchaita firm and therefore could be evicted only in accordance with due process of law after full contest, and could not be thrown out in summary pro ceedings just as if they were persons in unauthorised pos session of the property, or as if they were mere trespass ers.
On the other hand the Mandais contended that in terms of the orders of this Court, and of the Calcutta Division Bench they purchased the property only on the basis that they would get a perfect title and speedy possession.
Allowing the Special Leave Petitions, this Court, HELl): That the contention of the Mandais is not main tainable either in principle or on the terms of the direc tions of this Court.
The attachment and sale in pursuance of this Court 's order of the present property in question did not have the legal effect of invalidating any interests created or subsisting in the property by sale, transfer encumbrance or alienation prior to the attachment.
Even the sale was on "as is and where is basis".
The Courts order of 27th September, 1983 only empowered the Commissioner to remove all unauthorised persons and trespassers but persons who are in lawful possession of the 284 property could not be evicted forcibly or summarily.
The said order could not be interpreted to mean that the pur chasers would be entitled to vacant possession through the commissioner even by evicting bona fide tenants or other encumbrancer or independent out siders who had acquired interest for consideration in the property.
The object of the directions was to cut short the proliferation of litiga tion and to gather in expeditiously the assets of Sanchaita.
[292D E; 295H; 296B] Having regard to the large scale dealings, the special circumstances and the desperate situation, the Court made an exception and made it possible for the Commissioner to get false and frivolous claimants out of the way by a quick procedure because even normally the trespassers and unautho rised persons cannot be thrown out except by recourse to legal proceedings.
So this order could not be availed of to ride rough shod over the rights and interests of others in the properties which had been created bona fide.
Even third parties who have acquired real interests in the property either independent of, or even through Sanchaita could not be called upon to give up their rights which would mean to do more than merely realise what rightfully belongs to Sanchaita that is by conferring a better title than it had in fact acquired while purchasing those properties, [297B, G] So in the instant case, considering the materials and evidence and the records placed before the Court by the claimants/objectors, to prove that they are not stooges or false claimants but have bona fide right to possession, it was held that the auction purchaser could not evict Paul Brothers and Phani Bhushan Ghose except eviction proceedings in the normal course and in accordance with law as may be available to them against the claimants/objectors.
The claim 's of the other appellant was rejected.
[297C D]
