The petitioner was detained under Section 3(1) of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act by an order dated 13.7.1989.
The facts lead ing to his arrest and detention are: On 7.7.1989 officers of Directorate of Revenue Intelli gence New Delhi intercepted a Maruti Car in which one Mahesh Kumar Chauhan and three others were present.
On search of the car no recovery was made on the spot, but later on when the car was thoroughly rummaged in presence of two independ ent witnesses and the occupants of the car, 206 foreign marked gold biscuits of ten tolas each were recovered from the cavities of the car meant for fitting speakers in the rear portion of the car.
The occupants did not give any explanation for the possession of the.
said gold biscuits.
However on personal search of Mahesh, a slip was recovered which contained a telephone number and Mahesh Kumar in his statement admitted that he was to hand over the smuggled goods to one Vijay Kumar.
Mahesh Kumar admitted that he was visiting Dubai frequently to bring consumer goods and orna ments for being sold in the local market.
According to him one Avtar Singh who was engaged in smuggling of foreign gold biscuits, agreed to sell the gold biscuits to Mahesh Kumar on commission.
He also gave some details about Avtar Singh.
Similarly Vijay Kumar also made a statement.
From these statements it is also revealed that petitioner Sanjeev Kumar Aggarwal had made arrangements for selling the gold bis cuits.
the residential premises of the petitioner was searched and he was taken into custody.
The petitioner made a statement before the officers of the Directorate or Reve nue Intelligence.
On the basis of the material the detaining authority passed an order of detention on 13.7.1989 which was served on the petitioner on 24.7.1989.
The grounds of detention were also served on the petitioner in time.
318 The petitioner challenged his detention by means of a writ petition before the Delhi High Court, and having re mained unsuccessful, he filed this petition for Special Leave to Appeal against the order of the Delhi High Court dismissing his writ petition.
Before this Court two main points have been urged viz., (i) that there is a total non application of mind by the detaining authority inasmuch as he has failed to note that the petitioner was in jail, and that there was no possibili ty of his being released, and the failure to consider this aspect on the part of the detaining authority renders his detention invalid; and (ii) that the detaining authority has not applied his mind properly in .rejecting his representa tion and that there was delay in serving the detention order on him.
Dismissing the petition, this Court, HELD: Whether an order of detention can be passed against a person who is in detention or in jail, will always have to be determined in the circumstances of each case.
No decision of this Court has gone to the extent of holding that no order of detention can validly be passed against a person in custody under any circumstances.
[326B] Section 3(3) of the Act lays down that for the purpose of Article 22(5) of the Constitution the order should be served as soon as possible but ordinarily not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, not later than fifteen days from the date of detention.
[320B] In the instant case from the record it was submitted that it took quite sometime for translating the documents to Hindi and Gurmukhi, and the Court is satisfied that there are valid and sufficient reasons for delay in serving the detention order.
[327C D] Abdul Razak Abdul Wahab Sheikh vs
S.N. Sinha, Commisioner of Police, Ahmedabad & Anr., ; ; Binod Singh vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad, ; ; Vijay Kumar vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, ; ; Ramakrishna Rawat vs District Magistrate, Jabalpur, ; Smt.
Shashi Aggarwal vs State of U.P. & Ors., ; ; Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah & Ors.
, ; Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate Burdwan, ; ; Alijan 319 Mian vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad, [1983] 4 S.C.C. 301; N. Meera Rani vs Government of Tamil Nadu & Anr., ; Shri Dharmendra Suganchand Chelawat etc.
vs Union of India & Ors., J.T. Sat Pal Man chanda vs
M.L. Wadhawan & Ors., Crl.
Writ No. 333 of 1986, decided by Delhi High Court on 30.10.1986.
