Rule 4 of the Bihar Engineering Service Rules, 1939 provided for recruitment to the cadre of Executive Engineers in the Bihar Public Works Department by (i) direct recruit ment, and (ii) promotion from Class II Service.
The State Government by a memorandum dated February 18, 1977 merged with the cadre of Executive Engineers of the Public Works Department, the cadre of District Engineers functioning under the Rural Engineering Organisation.
The latter cadre was constituted by the State in 1965 by integration of the Rural Engineering Ceil of the Public Works Department and the cadre of District Engineers created by the erstwhile District Boards under the Government District Engineers Service Rules, 1957 framed under sections 36(a) to 36(1) of the Bihar and Orissa Local Self Government Act, 1885.
The appellants Assistant Engineers assailed the said merger before the High Court on the ground that it adversely affected their chances of promotion, that the District Engineers ' Service was constituted under the 1957 Rules framed under the 1885 Act whereas the cadre of Executive Engineers in the Public Works Department was created by the 1939 Rules, and, as such the two cadres having been created under their respective statutory rules the same could not be merged by an executive order, and that since under rule 4(i) and 4(ii) of the 1939 Rules recruitment to the cadre of Executive Engineers could only be by direct recruitment and by way of promotion, the merger of District Engineers ' cadre with the Executive Engineers was contrary to the 1939 Rules.
The High Court negatived their contentions.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The appellants, who were Assistant Engineers in the Bihar Engineering Service, Class II were not affected adversely by the merger in any manner.
The District Engi neers were merged in the 374 cadre of the Executive Engineers along with the permanent posts which they were holding on the date of merger.
The cadre of the Executive Engineers was thus enlarged with the result that more vacancies would become available in future to be filled by way of promotion from the cadre of Assistant Engineers.
The merger would thus operate to their advantage rather than disadvantage.
[378E F] 2.
The provincialised cadre of District Engineers under the District Boards was constituted by the 1957 Rules but in the year 1977 when merger took place the District Engineers constituted an entirely different cadre which was created in the year 1965 as a part of Rural Engineering Organisation.
It did not have any statutory frame work.
Since the cadre of District Engineers under the Rural Engineering Organisation was created by the State Government by an executive order the State Government could further merge the same with any other cadre by an executive fiat.
The Executive Engineers were governed by the 1939 Rules which are statutory.
Their statutory character has not been interfered with.
The Dis trict Engineers were being merged with Executive Engineers and not the vice versa.
[378H, 379B,379D] 3.
Rule 4(i) and 4(ii) of the 1939 Rules do not come into picture at all.
It was not a question of appointment of an individual to the Service.
A group of persons similarly situated in respect of rank and pay scale was sought to be brought into the Service along with their posts.
The State Government could always increase the number of posts in the cadre of Executive Engineers.
The conditions of service of the existing members of Service are not being altered or affected to their prejudice in any manner.
[379E F] 4.
The merger order being a policy decision is in a way supplemental to the Rules and does not go contrary to any of the provisions of the Rules.
[379F G]
