The respondents were holding class III civil posts in the Research Laboratories attached to the Ministry of De fence.
Under the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, their 'appointing authori ty ' was the Scientific Adviser.
But the appointing authori ty, the Scientific Adviser, delegated his power of appoint ment to the Director under Proviso to Rule 9(1).
Pursuant to the delegated power.
the Director appointed the respondents.
Subsequently, the Director initiated disciplinary proceed ings against the respondents.
Similarly for the respondents, in the connected appeals, belonging to Group C and D employees of the Railways the competent authority, prescribed under the Railway Establish ment Code.
to make appointments was the General Manager.
But the General Manager delegated his power of appointment to Zonal Officers/Divisional Superintendents.
Pursuant to the delegated power the Divisional Superintendents appointed the respondents.
Subsequently, disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the respondents by the Divisional Superin tendents.
The respondents challenged the disciplinary proceedings before the Central Administrative Tribunal contending that they were without jurisdiction since the Director and the Divisional Superintending were not competent to initiate the disciplinary proceedings.
The Central Administrative Tribu nal accepted the plea and quashed the proceedings.
In appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the respondents (i) that the Director was not competent to initiate disciplinary proceedings against them and only the Scientific Adviser, a higher authority, could do so; the expression "whichever authority is the high 442 est authority" in Rule 2(a) governs only sub clause (iv) of Rule and this expression seeks to ensure that though the power to appoint may have been delegated under the Proviso to Rule 9(1), such delegation does not extend to the exer cise of disciplinary powers; (ii) that appointments made by the Scientific Adviser should be treated as .appointments made by the Scientific Adviser himself with the result that a subordinate authority could not initiate disciplinary action against the respondent.
Also, in the connected railway cases, it was contended on behalf of the respondents that notwithstanding the delegation of powers of appointment by the General Manag er, he, being the highest amongst the various appointing authorities, was alone competent to institute disciplinary proceedings.
On behalf of the appellant, Union of India, it was contended: (i) that on a proper interpretation of the rules, the Director Zonal Officer/Divisional Superintendents were competent to initiate the proceedings and (ii) that, irre spective of the provisions in the rules, a person who makes an appointment has always an implied power of suspending or dismissing the appointee under section 16 of the .
Disposing of the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The delegation of the power of appointment under the Proviso to rule 9(1) does not necessarily deprive the disciplinary authority specified in the main part of the rule from exercising the delegated power of appointment in any case or class of cases.
[459B] Godawari section Parulekar vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; followed.
Ramachandra Rao vs State, ; Hals bury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn., pare 32; Wade on Adminis trative Law, 6th Edn., P. 365, referred to.
King Emperor vs Shibnath Banerjee, 72 I.A. 241; Huth vs Clarke, , cited.
A proper and harmonious reading of rules 2(a) and rule 9 shows that sub rule (a) of rule 2 only envisages the authority to whom the power of appointment has been delegat ed under rule 9 and not both the delegator and the delega tee.
Rule 2(a) directs the ascertainment of the authorities specified, in such of clauses (i) to (iv) of the rule as may be applicable to a particular case and designates the high est of them as the 'appointing authority '.
It envisages only one authority as failing under each of these clauses and not more.
An inter pretation of clause 443 (i) or (ii) as contemplating more than one authority runs counter to the tenor of the rule.
The said rule does not contemplate any authority other than the one empowered to appoint a person belonging to the post or grade which the concerned government employees holds.
In that sense the two parts of clause (i) and clause (ii) are not to be read disjunctively to ascertain the authority empowered to make appointments (a) to the service (b) to the grade and (c) to the post and consider the highest of them.
One has to re strict oneself to the post or grade of the government serv ant concerned and invoke clause (i) or (ii) as the case may be.
[459F H; 460C D] Dharma Dey vs Union of India, ; ; Om Prakash Gupta vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 1265, explained and held inapplicable.
Murishwar vs Union, ; Union vs Choud hary, ; Choudhary vs Union, , cited.
2.1 In Rule 2(a), not only do the words "whichever is the highest authority" occur in the Rules separately from the four sub clauses but the terms thereof also clearly envisage a determination of one who, among several authori ties, is the highest.
It, therefore, clearly means that the 'authorities ' falling under the definition in sub clauses (i) to (iv) have to be ascertained and the highest among them taken as the disciplinary authority for purposes of rule 12(2)(b).
[449B] 3.
The appointing authority under the Schedule is a high ranking authority and, in an organisation like the Railways for instance, it will be virtually impossible for him to consider each and every case of appointment of, or disciplinary action against, all the Class III or Class IV employees in the organisation.
It is indeed this realisation that has rendered necessary a delegation of the power of appointment and cannot be ignored, in the absence of compel ling reasons, in the matter of disciplinary powers.
[461C D] 4.
In the context of rules 2(a) and 12(2) which outline a contrast between the person who is empowered to appoint and the person who actually appoints, it is impossible to treat the Scientific Adviser/General Manager as the person who appointed the respondents.
[456H; 457A] Roop Chand vs State, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 539, held inapplicable.
444 B. Daniel & Ors.
vs Union of India, , referred to.
4.1 A delegation of power does not enhance or improve the hierarchical status of the delegate.
[456G] Krishna Kumar vs Electrical Engineer Central Railway & Ors., , referred to.
It is doubtful how far, in the context of the service rules which make a clear distinction between the power to appoint and the power to take disciplinary proceedings, the latter can be said to be adjunct or ancillary to the former.
[457D E] Daluram Pannalal Modi vs Commissioner, [1964] 2 S.C.R. 286, held inapplicable.
Section 16 of the confers on the factual appointing authority, in terms, only a power to suspend or dismiss and not a power to conduct disciplinary proceedings or impose the various other kinds of penalties envisaged in the rules.
To say that the latter power also comes within section 16, one would need to make a further assump tion that the power to suspend or dismiss is a more compre hensive power which would include the power to impose small er penalties too and this assumption is said to run counter to the rules which deal with the two powers separately.
The said section applies only "unless a different intention appears".
It applies only where a general power of appoint ment is conferred under an Act or Regulation.
Here the Act or Regulation i.e. the Rules envisage the power of appoint ment conferred by them on certain authorities being delegat ed.
The power conferred on the delegatees is circumscribed by the instrument of such delegation and cannot be extended beyond its ambit.
[454B E] Heckett Engineering Co. vs Workmen, ; ; Gafoor Mia and Ors.
vs Director, DMRL, , referred to.
The dismissal in limine of the Special Leave Petition cannot preclude the Tribunal or Court from considering the issue in the appeals on merits.[452H; 453A]
