The respondent, claiming to be the beneficiary to the estate of deceased 'M ' under a will executed by her, filed an application in the Sub Court for Letters of Administra tion.
The petitioner lodged a caveat and opposed the probate of the will on the ground that the will propounded by the respondent was a fictitious one intended to disentitle 'Z ', daughter of 'M ', from claiming interest in the estate of her mother 'M '.
The petitioner based her caveatable interest on the basis of membership of the Trust, a gift deed and a will executed by 'Z ' which was subsequently probated in her favour.
The Subordinate Judge struck off the petitioner 's caveat on the ground that she has no caveatable interest.
The petitioner filed a Civil Revision Petition in the High Court and a Single Judge of the High Court confirmed the order of the Subordinate Judge.
In the special leave to this Court it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that the courts below have erred (i) in holding that she has no caveatable interest and in striking off her caveat; (ii) that Z 's will in her favour which was subsequently probated established her interest in the estate on the date of entering the caveat.
487 Dismissing the petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
By granting a probate the Court does not decide the disputes to the title.
A probate granted can be revoked under Section 263 of the .
[492C] 1.1 In the instant case the findings regarding the caveatable interest of the petitioner have a limited effect and are relevant only to the extent of granting of probate.
But they cannot deprive her right to invoke section 263 of the Act.
[492D] 2.
The order of the Trial Court shows that admittedly neither the original nor a copy of the will said to have been executed by 'Z ' was filed.
Likewise the registered gift deed or a copy thereof was not filed.
It is also evi dent that the Trust has come to an end and the same was not in existence.
The Trial Court has considered both the docu mentary and oral evidence in this regard and has rightly held that the petitioner has no existing benefit from the trust.
Accordingly, it cannot be held that the petitioner has caveatable interest.
[490F G; 491C] 3.
In the instant case it is not known whether the citations were issued to all the persons interested before the grant of the probate.
The probate was also granted when the special leave petition was pending in this Court yet the respondent had no notice about this probate proceedings.
Under these circumstances it is not expedient to acknowledge this probate proceeding and re open the matter.
[491 G H] Nabin Chandra Guha vs Nibaren Chandra Biswas and Ors., AIR 1932 Cal.
734; Gourishankar Chattoraj vs Smt.
Satyabati Debi, AIR 1931 Cal.
470; Shanti Devi Aggarwala vs Kusum Kumari Sarkar & Ors., and Narayan Sah vs Smt.
Devaki, AIR 1978 Patna 220, referred to.
