The respondent was permitted by the Municipal Council to construct a building on the disputed land.
Later, the site was reserved under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act for a town planning scheme.
When the respondent was prevented from proceeding with the construction he filed a suit for dam ages.
The Municipal Council, however, by a resolution passed on February 13, 1967 decided to accord permission.
The suit was thereafter withdrawn.
The State Government appointed a high power committee to examine the entire matter.
The aforesaid resolution was rescinded by the Municipal Council.
The respondent made a fresh application in July, 1968 which was kept in abeyance.
He thereupon filed a writ peti tion before the High Court in 1969.
During the pendency of the case, the Municipal Council passed a resolution on June 29, 1970 deciding to replan the scheme with respect to the area in question in accordance with the recommendations of the high power committee.
The High Court by its judgment dated April 18, 1972 directed the Municipal Council to dispose of the application in accordance with law.
The latter, however, by its order dated November 21, 1972 rejected it on the basis of the 1970 resolution.
In the writ application challenging the said order it was contended for the respondent that the disputed question must be deemed to have been finally settled in his favour in view of the earlier judgment which was binding on the par ties by reason of rule of res judicata.
For the State it was contended that no final decision was arrived at in the earlier case.
The High Court allowed the writ application on the basis of constructive res judicata.
In the appeal by special leave it was contended for the appellants 534 that the previous judgment could not be interpreted as a direction commanding the Municipal Council to allow the proposed construction, and that the plots were urgently needed for providing parking space for vehicles.
For the respondent it was contended that the resolution of February 13, 1967 was passed by way of a compromise between the parties and acting thereupon he withdrew his suit.
it was, therefore, binding on the Municipal Council, that the 1970 resolution should be completely ignored and the Municipal Council should not be allowed to bypass the judgment of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court.
HELD: 1.
The resolution dated February 13, 1967 was not binding on the Municipal Council so as to disable it to take a different decision later.
It was not the result of a compromise between the parties.
[538D; 537E F] 2.1 At the best for the respondent, it could be assumed that when the said resolution in his favour was passed the acquisition of the land was not so urgently essential so as to call for his dispossession.
But for that reason it could not be said that the plots had become immune from being utilised for any other public purpose for ever.
[538B C] 2.2 The question as to whether a particular scheme framed in exercise of statutory provisions is in the public interest or not has to be determined according to the need of the time and a final decision for all times to come cannot be taken.
Such a scheme may serve the public purpose at a given point of time but due to change of circumstances it may become essential to modify or substitute it by anoth er scheme.
The requirements of the community do not remain static, they indeed, go on varying with the evolving process of social life.
Accordingly, the State or a body.like the Municipal Council entrusted with a public duty to look after the requirements of the community has to assess the situa tion from time to time and vary the scheme periodically to meet the changing needs of the public.
In the instant case, the high power committee appointed by the State had given a report stating that the land in question would he needed for the proper circulation of traffic.
[537H; 538; 537F G] 3.
There was no scope for application of the principle of res judicata.
By the judgment dated April 18, 1972, the High Court did not finally decide the controversy and it remained open for the Municipal Council to decide, by recon sidering and disposing of the application of the respondent in accordance with law.
[537G H] 535
