The All India State Bank Officers ' Federation filed a Writ Petition in this Court on the 24th April, 1989 seeking to impugn a new promotion policy initiated by the State Bank of India.
The petition was supported by an affidavit of the President of the Federation affirming the contents of the petition to be true to his personal knowledge, and submit ting in paragraph 9(mm) of the petition that the petitioners were approaching this Court in great haste as the Bank was moving with great speed to implement its new promotion policy and was likely to constitute a Departmental Promotion Committee, and declare the results.
In para 4 it was submit ted that the petitioners had not filed any other similar petition either in this Court or any other High Court.
When the writ petition came up for admission before a Bench of this Court on April 26, 1989, counsel for the State Bank of India was present and accepted notice on behalf of the Bank.
The Writ Petition was contested by the Bank which sub mitted in its counter affidavit that the statement in para 4 of the petition in support of the writ petition was false, and pointed out that the Federation through its Deputy General Secretary had filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh along with an application seeking stay of the promotion policy, and that the High Court admit ted the Writ Petition on April 13, 1989 but rejected the application for interim stay, and further pointed out that another petition had been filed by the State Bank of India Officers ' Association (Karnataka) in the Karnataka High Court.
A second objection as regards the maintainability of the 494 petition was raised in para 3 that since the promotions had already been made they could not be disturbed and that no steps were taken to implead those officers, who would be directly affected as a result of the prayer made in the writ petition.
To the aforesaid objections raised by the Bank the petitioner filed a rejoinder supported by an affidavit of the President of the Federation, submitting that the depo nent did not have any knowledge of the writ petition filed in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, and that as soon as it came to his knowledge it was withdrawn.
and that the peti tioners did not know the names of all the 58 candidates who had been promoted favoured.
When the Writ Petition was taken up for further hearing on April 5, 1990, counsel for the Bank objected to the maintainability of the writ petition on the grounds of suppression of material facts and abuse of the process of court.
The Court directed the petitioner to file a better affidavit, and the petitioner Federation filed a better affidavit explaining the correct position and tendering an unqualified apology for the mis statements in the earlier affidavit, but still reiterated that they came to know of the writ petition in the Andhra Pradesh High Court only on April 23, 1989 and that, at the time of the preliminary hearing, it was brought to the notice of the Court by the Respondent 's counsel.
The respondent pointed out that the statements made in the rejoinder filed by the petitioners that they were not aware of the names of the promoted officers till November, 1989 was a total falsehood because; (i) the writ petition filed in the Karnataka High Court made all of them parties to the writ petition, and (ii) the names of the promoted officers were listed in the fortnightly bulletin of the State Bank Officers ' Association dated 1st May, 1989 carry ing a message of congratulations to all of them.
Disposing of the preliminary objections and adjourning the writ petition for further hearing on merits, the Court, HELD: 1.
Apart from mis statements in the affidavits filed before this Court the petitioner federation has clear ly resorted to tactics which can only be described as abuse of the process of court.
The simultaneous filing of writ petitions in various High Courts on the same issue though purportedly on behalf of different associations of the Officers of the Bank, is a practice which has to be discour aged.
[500H; 501A] 495 2.
An attempt was made to obtain a stay in the Andhra Pradesh High Court and when that attempt failed the writ petition here was filed.
In this the petitioners were able to obtain only an order that any "promotions made during the pendency of the petition would be subject to the decision in the writ petition.
But having obtained this order on April 26, 1989, it is curious and inexplicable that an affiliated association should have made an application on April 27, 1989 in the Karnataka High Court praying for a stay of the promotions.
These are only tactics that will be indulged in by a chronic and compulsive litigant and not by a Federation like the petitioner.
[501C D] 3.
One expects that officers fight their battles fairly and squarely and not stoop low to gain what can only be temporary victories by keeping away material facts from the court.
[501E] 4.
It is common knowledge that, of late, statements are being made in petitions and affidavits recklessly without proper verifications not to speak of dishonest and deliber ate misstatements.
Strong and emphatic disapproval of the conduct of the petitioners in this case is recorded in the hope that this will be a lesson to the present petitioners as well as to other litigants and that atleast in future people will act more truthfully and with a greater sense of responsibility.
[501F G] 5.
The Court does not wish to penalise the various officers who may suffer as a consequences of the new policy, which they wish to challenge, and decline them an opportuni ty to put forward their grievances before the Court, for the mis statements or wrong steps taken by the officers of the Federation in their over anxiety to get quick interim re lief.
[502B C]
