The appellant after his Haj pilgrimage had been to Jeddah and from Jeddah he landed in Bombay on 15.9.1987.
Thereafter he boarded a bus to go to his native place in Kerala.
On 17.9.1987, the Custom authorities intercepted the bus wherein the petitioner was travelling and in the presence of the panch witnesses, searched his person and the chappals worn by him.
On opening the chappals about 13 gold ingots with foreign markings were found and they were duly recovered.
The appellant confessed that he was introduced to a person who promised to give him remuneration for carrying the gold to India and that is how he brought those gold biscuits.
The detaining authority passed the detention order against the appellant on 21.9.1988, and grounds of detention were served on him within time and he was informed that if he so desired he could make a representation to the Advisory Board, and also that he could make a representation to the detaining authority or the Central Government.
The appellant challenged his detention by means of a writ petition in the High Court and the same having been dismissed, he has filed this appeal after obtaining special leave.
The appellant urged: (i) that the delay in making the detention order and the disposal of his representation by the Central Government are fatal and violative of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India; and (ii) that the delay in arresting him pursuant to the detention order casts a doubt on the genuineness of the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Delay ipso facto in passing an order of detention after an 518 incident is not fatal to the detention of a person.
In this case the delay by itself does not invalidate the detention but even otherwise it has been reasonably explained.
[524G] From the explanation it can be seen that the representa tion was considered most expeditiously and there is no "negligence or callous inaction or avoidable red tapism ' '.
[523C] It can therefore be seen that on the mere delay in arresting the detenu pursuant to the order of detention the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority cannot be held to be not genuine.
Each case depends on its own facts and circumstances.
The Court has to see whether the delay is explained reasonably.
In the instant case, this Court is satisfied with the explanation for the delay in arresting the detenu.
[525G H] Khudiram Das vs The State of West Bengal & Ors.
, ; ; Tara Chand vs State of Rajasthan, ; Shyam Ambalal Siroya vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Sabir Ahmed vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Rama Dhondu Borade vs
V.K. Saraf, Commis sioner of Police & Ors., ; T.A. Abdul Rahman vs State of Kerala & Ors.
, ; ; Lakshman Khatik vs The State of West Bengal, [1974] 4 S.C.C. 1; Rajendrakumar Natvarlal Shah vs State of Gujarat & Ors., ; ; Yogendra Murari vs State of UP.
, ; Hemlata Kantilal Shah vs State of Maharashtra, ; and SK.
Serajul vs State of West Bengal, ; , referred to.
