Election to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Madhya Pradesh was held in February, 1985.
For Constituency No. 14 Lahar (Distt.
Bhind) nomination papers were filed before 6th February, 1985 and scrutiny done on February 7, 1985.
During the scrutiny the nomination paper of Ramprakash who was one of the candidates was rejected by the Returning Officer.
The order rejecting the paper reads as under: "Candidate is not identified as per electoral roll.
His rep resentative has accepted this mistake also.
Hence rejected.
Advised for correction but did not correct.
The candidate did not correct after advising to correct mistake.
Even did not appear at the time of Scrutiny to correct mistake.
Hence rejected.
See Section 33(4) R.P.A." Result of the election was declared on ' 5th March, 1985 and the appellant declared elected.
The election of the appellant was challenged by the Respondent who was one of the voters of the constituency through an election petition on several grounds the main ground being the wrongful rejection of the nomination paper of Ramprakash.
On the pleadings of the parties the High Court framed issue No. 1 which reads as under: (i) Whether rejection of the nomination paper of Rampra kash by the Returning Officer was illegal, as alleged? The High Court on an analysis of the evidence came to the conclusion that the entire story advanced by the elec tion petitioner and his witnesses was a fabrication and deserved to be rejected outright.
How 504 ever after recording this finding the learned single judge of the High Court went on to hold that the candidate 's absence was immaterial and the Returning Officer could have himself found out the electoral number of the candidate Ramprakash readily with a little effort without the assist ance of any of the persons mentioned in Section 36(1) of the Act and that the defect in the nomination paper cannot be held to be of a substantial character.
Issue No. 1 was thus decided in favour of the election petitioner as a result of which the election petition was allowed and the election of the appellant declared void.
Hence this appeal by the elect ed candidate.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, this Court, HELD: There is no statutory duty cast on the Returning Officer to himself look through the entire electoral roll of a particular part with a view to finding out the correct identity of a candidate at the time of the scrutiny even though neither the candidate himself nor any other represen tative on his behalf was present to cure the defect.
[516B D] A perusal of the circumstances put forward by the wit nesses at the time of scrutiny and rejection of the nomina tion paper of Ramprakash shows that Ramprakash himself was not present and even his proposer Jaiprakash after having gone to fetch Ramprakash did not return back and ultimately the Returning Officer rejected the nomination paper of Ramprakash.
The order passed by the Returning Officer re jecting the nomination paper of Ramprakash clearly makes a mention that the candidate was not identified as per elec toral roll.
His representative had accepted the mistake also and was advised for correction but did not correct the same.
The candidate did not correct after advising to correct the mistake.
It further makes a mention that the candidate even did not appear at the time of scrutiny to correct the mis take.
In the circumstances mentioned above we have no hesi tation at all in holding that the Returning Officer was perfectly justified in rejecting the nomination paper of Ramprakash.
[509A C] .
It depends on the facts and circumstances of each case to find as to what mistake in a nomination paper can be considered a mistake of substantial nature.
It is correct that the Returning Officer should not reject a nomination paper merely on a mistake of technical or formal nature, where the identity of the candidate can be ascertained by him on the material made available to him.
He should also give an opportunity to the candidate or his representative present at the time of scrutiny to remove the defect.
Howev er, in case neither the candidate nor his representative be present and without removing such defect in the 505 nomination paper the identity of the candidate cannot be ascertained, then there is no statutory duty cast on the Returning Officer to make a roving enquiry by going through the material placed before him and to remove such defect himself.
[509D F] Lila Krishan vs Mani Ram Godara & Ors., [1985] Suppl.
S.C.RI 592; Dalip Kumar Gon.
vs Durga Prasad Singh, AIR 1974 SC 2343; Amolak Chand vs Raghuveer Singh, ; and Brij Mohan vs Sat Pal, ; , referred to.
