14 accused were tried for offences under section 148 and 302 read with Section 149 of I.P.C. for the murder of two persons named Mahendra Singh and Virendra Singh and injuries to 3 others named Vijay Narain Singh, P.W. 1, Uma Shankar Singh, P.W. 2 and Kailash Singh.
Accused No. 6 Chirkut Singh was further tried under Section 307 I.P.C. for attempting to murder P.W. 1 and all the remaining accused under section 307 read with Section 149 I.P.C. for causing injuries to Uma Shankar and Kailash Singh.
The trial court relying on the evidence of P.Ws 1 and 2 who were the main eye witnesses convicted all the 14 accused under section 302 I.P.C. read with Section 149 I.P.C. and awarded them life imprisonment.
The convicted accused preferred appeals to the High Court and the State filed appeals for enhancement of their sen tence.
A Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court consist ing of Justice Katju and Aggarwal heard the appeals.
While Justice Katju allowed the appeals by the accused and dis missed the State appeals, Justice Aggarwal disagreeing with him, dismissed all the appeals, both by the accused and by the State.
Consequently the matter was referred to a third judge.
Justice Seth who confirmed the conviction and sen tence awarded to accused Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 6 only and acquit ted all the rest of the accused on the view taken by him that the specific overt acts were attributable to only these four accused and the rest should be given the benefit,of doubt.
Criminal Appeals Nos.
375 377 of 1987 by special leave were preferred by the convicted accused Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 6 and Criminal Appeals Nos.
372 374 of 1987 preferred by the State against the acquittal of other accused.
Accepting the plea of the accused to the right of selfdefence but holding that they had definitely exceeded this right when they went to the extent of intentionally shooting the deceased to death and therefore the offence committed was one punishable under section 574 304 Part I I.P.C. and not under Section 302 read with Sec tion 149 I.P.C. Accordingly in partly allowing the Appeals filed by the convicted accused and dismissing the State appeals, this Court, HELD: A fact is said to be "proved" when, after consid ering the matters before R, the Court either believes it to exist or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.
[596G H] A fact is said to be 'disproved ' when, after considering the matters before it, the Court either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it does not exist.
A fact is said to be "not proved" when it is neither "proved" nor "disproved".
[596H; 597A] The maxim that the prosecution must prove its case beyond reasonable doubt is a rule of caution laid down by the Courts of Law in respect of assessing the evidence in criminal cases.
[601E] Section 105 places "burden of proof ' on the accused in the first part and in the second part there is a presumption which the Court can draw regarding the absence of the cir cumstances, which presumption is always rebuttable.
Taking the section as a whole the "burden of proof" and the pre sumption have to be considered together.
It is exiomatic when the evidence is sufficient as to prove the existence of a fact conclusively then no difficulty arises.
But where the accused introduces material to displace the presumption which may affect the prosecution,case or create a reasonable doubt about the existence of one or other ingredients of the offence and then it would amount to a case where prosecution failed to prove its own case beyond reasonable doubt.
[601F G] The initial obligatory presumption regarding circum stances gets lifted when a plea of exception is raised.
More so when there are circumstances on the record, gathered from the prosecution evidence, chief and cross examinations, probabilities and circumstances, if any, introduced by the accused, either by adducing evidence or otherwise creating a reasonable doubt about the existence of the ingredients of the offence.
In case of such a reasonable doubt, the Court has to give the benefit of the same to the accused.
[601H; 602A] The presumption regarding the absence of existence of circumstances regarding the exception can be rebutted by the accused by intro 575 ducing evidence.
If from such a rebuttal, a reasonable doubt arises regarding his guilt, the accused should get the benefit of the same.
Such a reasonable doubt consequently negatives one or more of the ingredients of the offence charged, for instance, from such a rebuttal evidence, a reasonable doubt arises about the right of private defence then it follows that the prosecution has not established the necessary ingredients of intention to commit the offence.
In that way the benefit of a reasonable doubt which arises from the legal and factual considerations even under Section 105 of the Evidence Act should necessarily go to the accused.
[602C E] Section 3 is so worded as to provide for two conditions of mind, first, that in which a man feels absolutely certain of fact, in other words, "believes it to exist" and secondly in which though he may not feel absolutely certain of a fact, he thinks it so extremely probable that a prudent man would under the circumstances act on the assumption of its existence.
[602G H; 603A] The Evidence Act while adopting the requirement of the prudent man as an appropriate concrete standard by which to measure proof at the same time contemplates of giving full effect to be given to circumstances or condition of proba bility or improbability.
It is this degree of certainty to be arrived where the circumstances before a fact can be said to be proved.
[603D] The general burden of establishing the guilt of accused is always on the prosecution and it never shifts.
Even in respect of the cases covered by Section 105 the prosecution is not absolved of its duty of discharging the burden.
The accused may raise a plea of exception either by pleading the same specifically or by relying on the probabilities and circumstances obtaining in the case.
[606F G] In the instant case, as per the evidence of the material witnesses, the two deceased were only proceeding alongwith the rasta towards the pump set for taking bath.
Even in the plea set up by accused No. 6 it is not stated specifically that deceased Nos. 1 and 2 were armed with any deadly weap ons.
Therefore, the assailants had definitely exceeded the right of private defence when they went to the extent of intentionally shooting them to death by inflicting bullet injuries.
Therefore, the offence committed by them would be one punishable under Section 304 Part I I.P.C.
The convic tion of accused No. 1, 3, 4 and 6 under Section 302 read with Section 149 I.P.C. and the sentence of rigorous impris onment for life awarded thereunder is set aside and instead they are 576 convicted under Section 304 Part I read with Section 34 I.P.C. and each of them sentenced to undergo rigorous im prisonment for 10 years.
Their other convictions/sentences are confirmed the sentences to run concurrently.
[608C E] Mohar Rai & Bharath Rai vs The State of Bihar, ; ; Lakshmi Singh & Ors.
vs State of Bihar, ; Pratap vs State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1976 S.C. 966; Woolmington vs The Director of Public Prosecutions, [1935] Appeal Cases 462; Emperor vs U. Damapala, AIR 1937 Rangcon 83; Parbhoo & Ors.
vs Emperor, AIR 1941 Allahabad 402; K.M. Nanavati vs State of Maharashtra, [1962] Suppl.
1 SCR 567; Dahyabhai Chhaganbhai Thakkar vs State of Gujarat, ; ; Rishi Kesh Singh & Ors.
vs The State, AIR 1970 Allahabad 51; Bhikari vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Behram Khurshed Pesikaka vs The State of Bombay, ; Government of Bombay vs Sakur, AIR 1947 Bombay 38; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Ram Swarup, ; ; Mohd. Ramzani vs State of Delhi, AIR 1980 S.C. 1341; State vs Bhima Devraj, AIR 1956 Sau. 77; Miller vs Minister of Pensions, ; C.S.D. Swami vs The State, ; ; V.D. Jhingan vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Harbhaian Singh vs State of Punjab, ; ; Amjad Khan vs The State, ; and Puran Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to
