A civil suit was flied by the appellant herein against the respondent herein in the year 1973 praying for a decree for specific performance of the contract, in the alternative for a decree for a total sum of Rs. 16,000 including the earnest money of Rs.5,000 on averments inter alia that she had entered into an agreement dated 16.9.71 with the Re spondent for the purchase of a property with 2 Kohlus of 20 H.P. electric Motor etc., installed therein and jointly owned by the Respondent with her step mother in law Smt.
Lajwanti, for a consideration of Rs.50,000; that in case Smt.
Lajwanti did not join in the execution of the sale deed, the Respondent would sell her half share of the property for half the sale price; that pursuant to this agreement the Respondent handed over to the Plaintiff appel lant possession of her share of the property but later as arbitration proceedings were going on between the Respondent and her co sharer Smt.
Lajwanti, the Respondent took back the said agreement (styled as receipt) and thereafter ille gally took possession of the property from the appellant and declined to execute the sale deed in terms of the agreement.
The Respondent contested the suit on the pleas that she never intended to sell the suit property to the Plaintiff; that the agreement was a mere paper transaction brought into being for putting pressure on her co sharer; that the agree ment being not scribed on a proper stamped paper was inad missible in evidence; that the agreement related only to the moveable property; that no advance money was paid as alleged and lastly that pursuant to the compromise between the parties dated 9.1.72 350 the agreement dated 16.9.71 stood destroyed.
The trial Court disallowed the agreement Exhibit PW I I/A which constituted the foundation of the claim as inad missible in evidence and dismissed the suit.
The High Court on revision, allowed the revision peti tion of the appellant with the direction to the trial court to impound the document in accordance with law and then proceed with the case.
Respondent 's Petition for special leave against that order was dismissed by this Court.
Consequent to these orders of the Supreme Court and the High Court the Trial Court tried the suit afresh and passed a decree for specific performance which was affirmed by the Additional District Judge on appeal.
However on second appeal the High Court held that there was no valid and enforceable contract as evidenced by Exhibit PW.
II/A and thus instead of the decree for specific performance granted a decree for Rs.5,000 only by way of refund of the earnest money.
Hence this appeal by special leave by the Plaintiff.
Dismissing the appeal and upholding the finding of the High Court, this Court, HELD: The specific performance of a contract is the actual execution of the contract according to its stipula tions and terms, and the courts direct the party in default to do the very thing which he contracted to do.
The stipula tions and terms of the contract have, therefore, to be certain and the parties must have been consensus ad idem.
The burden of showing the stipulations and terms of the contract and that the minds were ad idem is, of Course, on the plaintiff.
If the stipulations and terms are uncertain and the parties are not ad idem there can be no specific performance, for there was no contract at all.
[362D E] Where there are negotiations, the Court has to determine at what point, if at all, the parties have reached agree ment.
Negotiations thereafter would also be material if the agreement is rescinded.
In the instant case the defence of there having not been a contract for lack of consensus ad idem was available to the defendant.
[363F; 364B] The jurisdiction of the Court in specific performance is discretionary.
When a promise is made in an alternative form and one 351 alternative is impossible to perform, the question whether the promiser ' is bound to perform the other or is altogether excused depends on the intention of the parties to he ascer tained from the nature and terms of the contract and the circumstances of the particular case.
[362F] The expression 'otherwise pay back the advance and compensation in the same amount ' is capable of being inter preted as payment of the amount as alternative to perform ance.
Of course the amount advanced and the compensation was stipulated to he the same amount.
That, however, would not effect the real character of the promise.
[361G]
