The Respondent Company which was established in 1942 went into production in 1944 manufacturing Straw Boards and Mill boards only uptil the year 1964.
In 1965 it expanded its activities by manufacturing duplex board.
In the follow ing year it started manufacturing packing and wrapping paper on experimental basis and on commercial basis after 1967.
Sometime in 1971 the Company wrote to the Assistant Collec tor of Central Excise enquiring as to whether it would be entitled to exemption from duty under Notification No. 163/1965 both in respect of production attributable to its installed capacity as in 1967 as well as in respect of production attributable to its expanded capacity.
The As sistant Collector passed an Order holding the company was entitled to concession under column 5 of the Table of the Notification No. 163 of 1965 in respect of production at tributable to its enlarged capacity namely, the third ma chine and rejected its claim for exemption on production attributable to its capacity as it existed in 1967.
Dissat isfied the company preferred appeal to the Appellate Collec tor who maintained the order of the Assistant Collector.
The Respondent Company thereupon moved the High Court by a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In allowing the writ Petition the High Court held that on a plain literal construction it is obvious that the commencement of production must refer not to the production of excisable goods paper in general failing under item 17.
but to production of those specified exempted categories of paper in column 2 of the aforesaid notification.
Hence this appeal by the Union of India.
Allowing the appeal and dismissing the Writ Petition of the Company.
this Court.
HELD: When the question is whether a subject falls in the Notification or in the exemption clause then it being in nature of exception is to be construed strictly and against the subject but once ambiguity or doubt about applicability is removed and the subject falls in the notification then full play should be given to it and it calls for a wider and liberal construction.
[663D E] A close reading of both parts of the Notification together leaves no 660 room for doubt that it was intended to be exhaustive grant ing exemption to all factories producing packing and wrap ping paper whether existing or commencing production from 1st March.
1964 to the former to the extent of enlarged capacity and to latter to the full extent.
[663G H] As the Respondent Company did not fall in the first clause of the notification there was no question of giving the clause a liberal construction and hold that production of goods by the Respondent mentioned in the Notification were entitled to the benefit.
Production of packing and wrapping paper by Respondent was entitled to exemption only to the extent it was at tributable to enlarged capacity and not to the existing capacity.
[665F; 664F] Hansraj Goverdhan vs H.H. Dave, Asstt.
Collector, Cen tral Excise & Customs, Surat and Others, [1969] 2 S.C.R. 2.52; Commissioner of Inome tax vs Madho Prasad, ; ; Tara Oil Mills Co. Ltd. vs Collector of Central Excise, ; referred to.
