The appellants purchased properties in auction sales conducted by the Tax Recovery Officer for recovery of income tax and were issued sale certificates.
Copies of certifi cates were also sent to the SubRegistrar, as required under Rule 21 of the Income Tax (Certificate) Proceedings Rules ITCP Rules.
The appellants approached the SubRegis trar for getting the properties registered in their names but the Sub Registrar and the Collector of Stamps refused to do so unless stamp duty was paid on the certificate of sale.
At the appellants ' request, the Tax Recovery Officer also addressed the two officers for getting the entries made in the Register on the basis of the copy of sale certificate.
He also informed the Collector of Stamps that according to the legal advice given to him no stamp duty was payable on the certificate of sale.
However, no action was taken by either of the officers.
The appellants ' request to Delhi Administration and Municipal Corporation to effect mutation entries in the Corporation Register, was also not acceded to on account of the appellants ' failure to pay the transfer fees, leviable as additional stamp duty under the Delhi Municipal Act.
Therefore, the appellants filed writ peti tions before the High Court praying for directions to the respondents to register the certificate of sale and mutate the property in the name of the appellants.
The High Court dismissed the petitions holding that, in the absence of specific contract to the contrary, the liability to pay the stamp duty was that of the purchaser.
628 Allowing the appeals by the purchasers, partly, this Court, HELD: 1.
Under section 89(4), every Revenue Officer, granting a certificate of sale of immovable property or public auction should send a copy of such certificate to the registering officer within the local limits of whose juris diction the whole or any part of the immovable property comprised in such certificate is situate, and such register ing officer shall file the copy or copies, as the case may be, in his Book No. 1.
So far as sales for recovery of income tax are concerned rule 21 of the ITCP Rules, makes a like provision requiring the concerned T.R.O. to send a copy of the certificate of sale to the registering officer con cerned.
[632E G] There is no need to read the term 'revenue officer ' in any restricted sense.
It is wide and comprehensive enough to include the T.R.O. who effects a compulsory sale for the recovery of an income tax demand.
The registration officer has to act in terms of section 89(4) of the Indian Registra tion Act read with Rule 21 of the ITCP Rules and file the copy of the certificate of sale received by him from the T.R.O. in his Book No. 1.
[633A B] 2.
Section 17(2)(xii) of the makes it clear that the certificate of sale issued in a court sale or by a revenue officer does not need registra tion.
Though this provision, like section 89, relates only to a certificate of sale granted to the purchaser of any property sold by public auction by a civil court or revenue officer, the certificate issued by the T.R.O. is also cov ered by this provision.
It is, therefore, not obligatory on the purchaser of property in a tax recovery sale to get the certificate of sale registered in order to perfect his title.
However, if he presents the original certificate of sale to the Registration Officer for registration, the Registration Officer will have to comply with the relevant statutory provision in this regard.
[636F H] 3.1 The Certificate of sale itself not being a compulso rily registerable document: vide section 17(2)(xii), the transfer of title in favour of the purchaser is not vitiated by the non registration of the certificate.
The copy of the certificate filed in Book No. 1 contains all the relevant details.
These details are reflected in the indices main tained under section 55 which are open to inspection to all persons.
These requirements are sufficient to ensure that any person intending to purchase or deal with the property is put on notice about the principal contents of the certif icate of sale provided he inspects the relevant book and/or index.
[635A C] 629 3.2 Therefore, in the instant case, all that the Sub Registrar is required to do is to file the copy of the certificate in Book No. 1 and no more.
He does not have to copy out the certificate or make any other entries in Book No. 1.
[635C] 4.1 Under Sections 3, 29(f) and Article 18 of Schedule I of the Stamp Act, 1899 the liability to pay stamp duty is of the purchaser to the contrary can be spelt out.
[635D] In the instant case, the auction notice did not promise any exemption from stamp duty.
The Tax Recovery Inspectors ' Manual which states that both the certificate and copies are liable to stamp duty, also renders it unlikely that any promise was given by T.R.O. at the time of sale that no stamp duty will be payable.
However, the T.R.O. 's letter to the Collector of stamps referring to the legal advice given to him strikes a some what inconsistent note.
However, the issue of stamp duty is felt to be adjudicated upon in the normal course, as and when found necessary.
[635E G] 4.2 The payability of municipal transfer fee depends upon the payability of stamp duty.
It will be open to the appellants to contest this levy in other appropriate pro ceedings.
[637B] 5.
The Sub Registrar is directed to file the copy of the certificate of sale received by him from the T.R.O. in his Book No. 1 as required by section 89(4) of the read with Rule 21 of the IncomeTax (Certificate Proceed ings) Rules, 1962.
[637D] Fatteh Singh vs
Daropadi, [1908] Punj.
Case No. 142; Sirajun nissa vs Jan Muhammad, ; Masarat un nissa vs Adit Ram, All. 568 (F.B.) and Premier Vegetable P. Ltd. vs State, AIR 1986 M.P. 258.
referred to.
