The appellant who was nominated by the State of Himachal Pradesh to undergo the B.D.S. course in the State of Uttar Pradesh, successfully completed his course and secured the B.D.S. degree.
For this purpose he had stayed in that State for over a period of five years.
Later, he applied for admission to the M.D.S. course at King George Medical Col lege, Lucknow and the subject of his choice was Oral Sur gery.
He secured admission but the subject 'that was offered to him was Periodontics.
The reason for denying the appellant the subject of his choice, viz. Oral Surgery; was that he had to step down in favour of others who had come within the rule of preference provided for in the Notification dated August 19, 1983.
issued under Section 28(5) of the U.P. State Universities Act, 1974, providing for reservation of seats, and prescrib ing a residence qualification for selection to the M.D.S. course.
The High Court in its judgment in Writ Petition No. 5400 of 1989 following an earlier decision of the Court held that those candidates who joined B.D.S. course on the basis of nominations made by the 667 Central Government or their own State will not be treated to be bona fide residents of Uttar Pradesh merely because they have stayed in the State for five years for completion of the course.
The appellant who was not a party to the proceedings in the writ petition applied for clarification and modification on the said judgment as it had adversely affected him.
The High Court rejected the application, holding that clause 2 of Notification stipulates two conditions viz: (i) institu tional and (ii) residential: and that the appellant satis fies the first requirement, namely, institutional but does not fulfill the second requirement, viz 'bona fide resident '; that a 'bona fide resident ' is one who comes within the meaning of that expression in clause 4 of this Notification, and that residence merely for the purpose of studies would not satisfy the requirement of clause 4.
In the appeal to this Court on the question: Whether the appellant was a 'bona fide resident of Uttar Pradesh ' within the meaning of clause (b) of the Notification dated August 19, 1983.
Allowing the appeal, and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
A person is treated as a 'bona fide resident of Uttar Pradesh ' in terms of sub clauses (a) and (b) of Clause 4 by reason of either his 'domicile ' or 'residence ' in that State.
While sub clause (a) speaks of the domicile of the candidate and his father, sub clause (b) speaks of a person, whose father was not domiciled in the State and who himself has resided for not less than five years in the State.
The concept of domicile is irrelevant to the construction of sub clause (b) in respect of the residence qualification of the candidate.
All that it requires is his requisite resi dence.
[673A B] 2.
Clauses 2 and 4 indicate that a person should have resided in Uttar Pradesh for the requisite period lawfully and bona fide.
The convers of bona fide being mala fide, meaning lack of good faith, in the absence of any allegation that the appellant 's residence in that State was in any manner opposed to the law of the land, or tainted by lack of good faith, and in the light of the undisputed fact that his residence was neither casual nor fleeting, but in excess of the minimum period of five years, and for the definite purpose of education, he satisfies the definition of a ' bona fide resident. ' [678B C] 3.
The construction placed by the High Court upon sub clause (b) 668 of clause 4 of the Notification is unsustainable.
A person such as the appellant who resided in the State of Uttar Pradesh specifically for the purpose of undergoing a course of studies for not less than five years albeit with the intention of finally returning to his home State, also comes within the meaning of the expression 'bona fide resident ' as defined in the said clause.
[678D E] 4.
Domicile which is a private international law or conflict of laws concept identifies a person, in cases having a foreign element, with a territory subject to a single system of law, which is regarded as his personal law.
[673B C] 5.
A person is domiciled in the country in which he is considered to have his permanent home.
His domicile is of the whole country, being governed by common rules of law, and not confined to a part of it.
No one can be without a domicile and no one can have two domiciles.
[673C D] Re Fuld 's Estate (No. 3) 1968 (P) 675; Casdagli vs Casdagli. , 178 and Dicey & Morris, The Con flict of Laws, Vol.
I page 24, referred to.
Domicile being a private international law concept, is inapposite to the relevant provisions, having no foreign element i.e. having no contact with any system of law other than Indian.
unless that expression is understood in a less technical sense.
[674D E] Dr. Pradeep Jain and Others etc.
vs Union of India & Others etc.
, [1984] 3 SCC 654, 666 669, referred to.
An expression which has acquired a special and tech nical connotation and developed as a rule of choice or connecting factor amongst the competing diverse legal system as to the choice of law of forum is, when employed out of context, in situations having no contact with any foreign system of law.
apt to cloud the intended import of the statutory instrument.
[674E F] 8.
India though a Union of States, and a federation in that sense, the whole country is governed by a single uni fied system of law, with a unified system of judicial admin istration, notwithstanding the constitutional distribution of legislative powers between the Centre and the States.
1675B C] 9.
There is no State wise domicile within the territory of India.
A 669 man who is domiciled in India is domiciled in every State in India and is identified with a territorial system of legal rules pervading throughout the country.
He is domiciled in the whole of this country even though his permanent home may be located in a particular spot within it.
[675C D] Halsbury 's Laws of England, vol.
8 para 422; D.P. Joshi vs The State of Madhya Bharat and Another, ; ; Udny vs Udny, [1869] LR 1 Sc & Div 441, H.L.; Bell vs Kennedy, [1868] LR 1 Sc & Div 307, H.L. and D.P. Joshi vs The State of Madhya Bharat and Another, ; , referred to.
Education, business, profession, employment, health, family or merely love of the place are some of the reasons commonly regarded as sufficient for a choice of regular abode.
It is only lawful residence that can be taken into account.
If a man stays in a country in breach of immigra tion laws.
his presence there does not constitute ordinary residence.
[677E F] 11.
Residence is a physical fact.
No volition is needed to establish it.
Unlike in the case of a domicile of choice, animus manendi is not an essential requirement of residence.
Any period of physical presence, however short, may consti tute residence provided it is not transitory, fleeting or casual.
Intention is not relevant to prove the physical fact of residence except to the extent of showing that it is not a mere fleeting or transitory existence.
To insist on an element of volition is to confuse the feature of 'residence ' with those of 'domicile '.
[676E F] 12.
A person is ordinarily resident in a country if his residence there is not casual or uncertain, but is in the ordinary course of his life.
A man may be ordinarily resi dent or habitually resident in more than one place.
While 'ordinary residence ' is the physical residence in regard to which intention is irrelevant, except to show that the residence is not merely fleeting, 'habitual residence ' may denote a quality of endurance longer than ordinary resi dence, although duration, past or prospective, is only one of the many relevant factors, and there is no requirement of any particular minimum period.
[676H; 677A B] 13.
While residence and intention are the two essential elements constituting the 'domicile of choice ', residence in its own right is a connecting factor in a national legal system for purposes of taxation, jurisdiction, service of summons, voting etc.
To read into residence volition as a necessary element is to mistake residence for domicile of choice.
[677F] 670 14.
Where residence is prescribed within a unified legal system as a qualifying condition, it is essential that the expression is so understood as to have the widest room for the full enjoyment of the right of equality before the law.
Any construction which works to the disadvantage of the citizen lawfully seeking legitimate avenues of progress within the country will be out of harmony within the guaran teed rights under the Constitution, and such a construction must necessarily he avoided.
[677G H; 678A] J.D. McClean, International & Comparative Law Quarterly, [1962] Vol.
II pp.
1153 et seq; Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs Lysaght, ; Levene vs Commissioner of Inland Revenu, ; at p. 222 and Dicey & Morris; The Conflict of Laws, 10th ed., pp.
143 145 & 200 202.
Cheshire & North; Private International Law, 11th ed., pp. 171 173 and Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th ed., vol.
318 330, referred to.
