Certain disputes having arisen between the Union of India and the Contractors in respect of the Contract awarded to the letter for the execution of certain civil works pertaining to the Metro Railway Project in Calcutta, the same were referred for decision to two Arbitrators appointed by the High Court of Calcutta.
The Contractors filed their itemised claim before the Arbitrators for a total sum of Rs.2,05,67,554.
The Arbitrators awarded a sum of Rs.57.47,198 to the contractors in full and final settlement of all their claims which included a sum of Rs.6.76,540 as interest vide item (1).
They directed that the award shall be complied with within sixty days of its publication fail ing which simple interest @ 11 percent per annum shall accrue thereon (excluding interest amount of Rs.6.76,540) till the date of payment or decree upon award which ever is earlier.
On an application being made to the High Court for making the Award a rule of the Court.
the learned single judge confirmed the award except that the principal sum awarded was reduced by Rs.5,20,000 with the direction that the amount so awarded will carry interest @ 11% per annum from the date of reference till the date of the award.
639 The Union of India preferred an appeal to the Division Bench, which reduced the amount awarded under item (c)(xii) from Rs.23.96.000 to Rs.2.39,000.
Thus the principal amount to be awarded to the contractors was finally put at Rs.30.70,798 and this amount was directed to carry interest @ 11% per annum from the date of the reference till the date of the award.
Aggrieved by the order of the Division Bench reducing the amount awarded under item (c)(xii) from Rs.23,96,000 to 239,600 the contractors preferred an appeal to this Court.
The Union of Indian on the other hand preferred a cross appeal praying (i) that interest should not be payable on the amount of Rs.30,70,798 fixed by the High Court but only on Rs.23,94,258 left after deducting therefrom the amount of Rs.6,76,540 awarded by the Arbitrators in respect of item No. (L) and (ii) that.
though the arbitrators had also awarded interest on the principal sum till the date of payment or decree on award in case payment was not done within sixty days of the publication of the award.
the contractors should be held entitled to interest upto the date of the award only and not beyond it because both the learned single judge and the Division Bench have held so and the contractors have preferred no appeal therefrom.
Taking up the contractor 's appeal first, this Court came to the conclusion that the Division Bench had exceeded its jurisdiction in interfering with this part of the award and restored the amount awarded by the arbitrators under item (c)(xii).
Dealing with the appeal of the Union of India this Court ruled that there was really no dispute left about Union of India 's first contention as to what was the correct amount on which interest was payable to the contractors after its findings in the contractor 's appeal and placed the figure at Rs.45,50,658.
Dealing with the second contention as to what was the period with reference to which interest would be payable to the contractors on the above amount it was noticed that the arbitrators had allowed interest from 5.10.82 (date of termination of contract) to 26.3.84 (date of award) under item (L) and had also allowed interest from the date of the award till the date of payment or decree whichever is earli er.
The learned single judge had deleted the interest for the period 5.10.82 to 6.5.83 (date of reference) but held that the arbitrators had jurisdiction to award interest from the date of the reference till the date of award and also post award interest.
As the objection of the Union of India 640 before the Division Bench in the LPA on the question of interest was only that the arbitrators had erred in awarding interest from 6.5.1983 to 26.3.1984 the High Court had not decided that the contractors were not entitled to interest beyond the date of award and therefore this contention of the Union of India failed and was rejected.
The Court.
HELD: The grant of pendente lite interest would be justified only when reference to arbitration is made in the course of a suit.
The principle indicated is that since a court has.
under section 34 of power to grant pendente lite interest in a suit.
an arbitra tor to Whom a reference to arbitration is made in the course of the suit would be clothed with all the powers of the court including one to grant such interest.
Generally speak ing.
it would only seem reasonable that the power to grant interest pendente lite should be treated as ancillary to the award of damages or compensation which.
but for the delay in the litigation (Whether in court or by way of arbitration).
the claimant should have received much earlier.
However.
though pendente interest has been made available in court proceedings.
its extension to arbitration law appears to have acquired some technical limitations resulting in denial of pendente lite interest in most arbitration cases.
Pendent lite interest cannot still be awarded by an Arbitrator appointed by the parties under a private agreement for which there may be no justification in equity.
Anomalies have arisen because formerly an Arbitrator could not be treated as a court to which the code of civil procedure applied and because now the Interest act, 1978, while including arbitration proceed ings within its ambit, has, apart from a reference to section 34 omitted to provide specifically for pendente lite interest.
This has been clearly brought out by Chinnappa Reddy, J., in Abhaduta Jena which outline the principle the learned judge had in mind for permitting pendente lite interest by arbi trator.
Abhaduta Jena has been followed in later cases also and its scope has been recently explained in Sharma 's Case , and the Gujarat Water Supply case where pendente lite interest was denied.
[655H; 656A F] Gujarat Water Supply & Sewage Board vs Unique Erectors, ; ; Firm Madan Lal Roshan Lal Mahajan vs Hukumchand Mills Ltd., lndore; , ; Allen Berry & Co. Pvt. Ltd vs Union of India, ; N. Chellappan vs Secretary, Kerala State Electricity Board & Anr., ; ; Hindustan Tea Co. vs
K. Shashi Kant Co. & Anr., ; Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd. vs C. Rajasekhar Rao, [1987] 4 S.C.C. 93; Sudarsan Trading Co. vs Government off Kerala & Anr. ; M/s. Alppi Prashad & Sons, Ltd. vs 641 Union of India; , ; Bhagat Trading Co. vs Union of India, AIR 1984 Delhi 358; Union of India vs Bakshi Ram, [1957] LIX P.L.R. 572; Executive Engineer vs Abhaduta Jena, [1988] 1 S.C.C. 418; Nachiappa vs Subramaniam, ; Satinder vs Amrao, ; ; Union vs Bungo Steel Furniture P. Ltd., ; ; Ashok Construction Co. Ltd. vs Union, ; State vs Saith & Skelton P. Ltd., ; ; Food Corpora tion of India vs Surendra, Devendra & Mohendra Tansport Co., and State of Rajasthan vs Sharma & Co., ; , referred to.
