The respondent, who was indenting and lifting goods from textile mills situated in different places, and was main taining a current account with the appellant Bank for this purpose, filed a suit against the Bank for accounts, dam ages, compensation and delivery of goods or their equivalent in money, for non delivery of goods despite receiving pay ment thereof, contending that there was an oral agreement with the appellant Bank, regarding receipt and payment of bills, etc.
and receipt and storage of goods on his behalf, and delivery of goods to him as and when required.
and that under the said terms and conditions.
the Banker constituted himself and acted as an express trustee and/or agent of the respondent in relation to the said goods and documents and thus stood in fiduciary relationship with the respondent.
The appellant.
denying the allegations, contended that it had never acted as an agent, trustee or depositee of the respondent in respect of the goods and documents and that no fiduciary relationship existed between the parties.
The trial court decreed the suit holding that from the evidence and entries in the current account, it could be inferred that there was agreement or arrangement between the parties, and the appellant acted as agent/trustee of the respondent.
and that there was fiduciary relationship be tween the parties.
The High Court, affirming the decree of the trial court.
held that 710 if the respondent had paid the value of the goods and the appellant Bank neither delivered the goods nor rendered accounts.
a fiduciary relationship could exist between the respondent and the Bank in respect of the goods for which value was paid by the respondent.
In the appeal, by special leave, on behalf of the appel lant Bank it was contended that the Bank was only a collect ing agent for the supply of goods, and not an agent or trustee for the respondent; adjustment of bills by debiting to the current account without cheques from the respondent would not change the ordinary relationship of bank and customer; no special relationship was created either by opening the current account or storing the goods meant for delivery to the respondent and there was nothing to take the parties outside the usual course of banking business; and the bank received and took charge of the goods only as bailee and any inference of fiduciary relationship between.
parties was unwarranted and unjustified.
Dismissing the appeal.
this Court.
HELD: 1.
The courts below were not justified in holding that a fiduciary relationship could exist between the par ties in respect of goods for which the suit claim was based.
This inference was drawn primarily from the debit entries in the respondent 's current account.
Collection of bills.
remittances to mills.
meeting expenses of storing the goods and debiting the same to the current account even without cheques from the respondent could not lead to an inference that the Bank acted as agent of the respondent and that there was fiduciary relationship between parties.
There is nothing in this method of operation to take the parties outside the ordinary relationship of banker and customer.
This is the normal method of banking operation and the maintenance of the current account in the instant case is not outside this principle.
[716D G] Law of Banking by Lord Chorley 10th ed.
at 167 168 and Paget 's Law of Banking, 9th ed.
at8.2 83.
referred to.
2.1 Banks take charge of goods, articles, securities as bailee and not as trustee or agent.
Bailment is the delivery or transfer of possession of a chattel or other item of personal property with a specific mandate which required the identical res either to be returned to the bailor or to be dealt with in a particular way by the bailee as per direc tions of the bailor.
One important ' distinguishing feature between agency and bailment is that the bailee does not represent the bailor.
He merely exercises.
with the leave of the bailor under contract or otherwise, certain 711 powers of the bailor in respect of his property and the bailee has no power to make contracts on the bailor 's be half: nor can he made the bailor simply as bailor liable for any acts he does.
[717D F] Fridman 's Law of Agency 5th ed.
p. 23, referred to.
In the instant case, there is nothing to indicate that the Bank represented some of the parties or the respondent with authority to change the contractual or legal relation ship of parties.
It cannot, therefore.
be held that the Bank acted as agent of the respondent.
[717G] 2.2 The banker bailee, gratuitous or for reward.
is bound to take the same care of the property entrusted to him as a reasonable, prudent and careful man may fairly be expected to take of his own property of the like descrip tion.
A paid bailee must use the greatest possible care and is expected to employ all precautions in respect of the goods deposited with him.
If the property is not delivered to the true owner the banker cannot avoid his liability in conversion.
[718C D] Having regard to the finding of fact recorded by the courts below, it is immaterial whether the Bank acted as bailee or in any other capacity.
On the evidence adduced by the parties it has been established that the respondent did pay the price of the goods in respect of which he based his claim in the suit.
The Bank having received the price of the goods from the respondent has failed to deliver the same.
This finding has not been seriously disputed and the evi dence adduced by the Bank was insufficient to establish the factum of delivery of goods to the respondent.
Therefore the bank could not avoid the liability to return the goods as agreed upon or to pay an equivalent amount to the respond ent.
Even if it is assumed that the goods were delivered to a wrong person, the Bank has to own the responsibility to pay the respondent.
The liability of the banker to customer in such a case is absolute even if no negligence is proved.
[717H; 718A; B, E] Halsbury 's Laws of England 4th ed.
3 paras 93 and 94.
The Law Relating to Banking by T.G. Reeday 4th ed.
p. 81 and Law and Practice relating to Banking by F.E. Ferry 5th ed.
p. 21, referred to.
In practice, the bankers do not set up the statute of limitations against their customers or their legal represen tatives.
There is no reason for making an exception to this practice in the instant case.
