Notifications No. 24 and 25 of 1984 under rule (1) of the Central Excise Rules, were issued on 1.3.1984 in respect of paper and paper board falling under item 17(1) of the first schedule to the .
While notification No. 24 of 1984 restricted the excise duty on certain items, notification No. 25 of 1984 provided for a concession in respect of paper and paper boards manufactured out of pulp containing not less than 50 per cent by weight of pulp made from materials (other than bamboo, hardwoods, softwoods, reeds or rags) and cleared on or after the 1st day of April in any financial year, subject to certain important conditions set out in the provisoes to the notifi cation.
Under the provisoes, the concessional rates were applicable only if the factory did not have plant attached to it for making bamboo, wood pulp and the exemption would not apply to cigarette tissue, glassing paper, grease proof paper, coated paper (including waxed paper) and paper of a substance not exceeding 25 grammes per square metre.
Another notification No. 45 of 1985 dated 17.3.1985 was also issued prescribing rates on paper and paper board failing under the aforesaid item including coated paper.
The appellant assessee had a factory in which different varieties of paper and paper board were being manufactured, using waste paper and cereal straw containing more than 50 per cent by weight of pulp made from the unconventional raw materials.
The factory did not have a bamboo pulp plant.
The assessee was manufacturing art paper and chromo paper.
These two types of paper generally fell under catego ry of printing and writing paper.
These two articles also fell under the description coated 798 paper used in the second proviso to the notification No. 25 of 1984.
The appellant initially paid excise duty on the goods manufactured by it in terms of notification No. 24 of 1984, but later claimed concessional rates prescribed by notification No. 25 of 1984.
Since coated paper was taken out of the purview of notification No. 25 of 1984, by the proviso, the Excise Department refused to permit the asses see to avail of this concession in respect of its manufac tured goods.
This was confirmed by the Central Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appel lantassessee it was contended that though the expression 'coated paper ' had generally a wide connotation and included coated papers of all varieties, it should be given a re stricted meaning in the context in which it appeared in the proviso, that in the paper business, paper was broadly two varieties, "industrial paper" and "cultural paper", that while paper used for printing or writing was treated as cultural paper that used for various purposes, broadly described as industrial purposes, such as wrapping, packing, sanitary use and the like, was industrial paper, that since a common strain ran through all the five categories men tioned in the proviso, inasmuch the first three varieties, admittedly fell under the category of industrial paper and the last one was invariably used for industrial purposes, and so found by the Tribunal, the word 'coated paper ', must be read in that context, and should be interpreted by apply ing the principle of "Noscitur A Sociis" or on the analogy of the "Ejusdem generis" principle and that even if the words of the proviso were capable of being construed in a wider manner so as to deny exemption to all kinds of coated paper, the Court should apply the well established principle of construction of taxing statutes that an ambiguous provi sion should be interpreted in favour of the subject.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that there was no principle of interpretation by which the plain and natural meaning of the word 'coated paper ' could be abridged nor was there anything in the context to warrant such a limitation, that there was no 'clear cut distinction between industrial and cultural paper, and that it could not be said that light paper could only be industrial paper.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1. 'Coated paper ' in the second proviso to notifi cation No. 25 of 1984 refers only to coated paper used for industrial purposes and not to coated varieties of printing and writing paper.
The 799 appellant is, therefore, entitled to concessional rates specified in the notification.
[812F G] 2.1 The expression 'coated paper ' in the proviso should draw colour from the context in which it is employed and receive an interpretation consistent therewith than its literal one, which in its widest sense, may be comprehensive enough to include all coated paper, industrial or otherwise, [809G H] 2.2 The concession of the notification is denied to five kinds of paper.
Three of them are varieties of industrial paper.
The fourth is light paper, not exceeding a particular weight.
Light paper is by and large industrial paper and is also used occasionally for cultural purposes also.
The five varieties of paper are found in serial Nos. 3 and 4 of the 1985 notification and serial Nos. 1 and 3, reflect a con trast between coated paper and light paper used for cultural purposes (item No. 1) and that used for other (industrial) purposes (item No. 3).
On this basis, it is clear that four out of the five varieties of paper which are denied the benefit of the concession constitute industrial paper.
In fact, even if, only three of these items are of the indus trial variety, while the other two could be either, it will not still be unreasonably (though may be, a little less plausible) to draw an inference that only industrial paper falling in those two categories are intended to be compre hended in the classification rather than assume, for no detectable reason, that all paper of these two varieties alone are excluded from the concession, [809E G] 2.3 Though no meticulous reasons can always be made available or discovered for variations in rates of duty as between various types of goods and the absence of some common thread ' in relation to a set of goods treated alike may not necessarily render the classification irrational or arbitrary, it can legitimately be postulated that the denial of a concession to a group proceeds on the basis of some aspect or feature common to all items in the group.
If such a principle can be conceived of which would rationalise the inclusion of all the items, it would be quite reasonable and proper to give effect to a construction of the notification as will accord with that principle.
[808F G] 2.4 In interpreting the scope of any notification, the Court has first to keep in mind the object and purpose of the notification.
All parts of it should be read harmonious ly in aid of, and not in derogation, of that purpose.
[811F] 800 Collector of Central Excise vs Parle Exports (P) Ltd., ; and Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. vs
C.C.E.; , , referred to.
In the instant case, the aim and object of the notifica tion is to grant a concession to small scale factories which manufacture paper with unconventional raw materials.
If the proviso had referred only to coated paper no special object or purpose would have been discernible and perhaps there would have been no justification to look beyond it and enter into a speculation as to why the notification should have thought of exempting only coated paper manufactured by these factories from the purview of the exemption.
But the notifi cation excepts not one but a group of items.
If the items mentioned in the group were totally dissimilar and it were impossible to see any common thread running through them, again, it may be permissible to give the exceptions their widest latitude.
But when four of them undoubtedly, at least three of them can be brought under an intelligible classifi cation and it is also conceivable that the Government might well have thought that these small scale factories should not be eligible for the concession contemplated by the notification where they manufacture paper catering to indus trial purposes, there is a purpose in the limitation pre scribed and there is no reason why the rationally logical restriction should not be placed on the proviso based on this classification.
[811H; 812A C] The only reasonable way of interpreting the proviso is by understanding the words 'coated paper ' in a narrower sense consistent with the other expressions used therein.
[812D] 3.
The principle of statutory interpretation by which a generic word receives a limited interpretation by reason of its context is well established.
The expression noscitur a sociis simply means that the meaning of a word is to be judged by the company it keeps [810A B] In the context of the instant case, this principle can be legitimately drawn upon.
However, the latin maxims and precedents are not to be mechanically applied; they are of assistance only in so far as they furnish guidance by com pendiously summing up principles based on rules of common sense and logic.
[811E F] State vs Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, ; ; Rainbow steels Ltd. vs
C.S.T.; , and Lethang vs Coopex, ; , referred to. 801 "The Dictionary of Paper" published by the American Paper and Pulp Association (Second Edition), referred to.
