The appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the detention order passed against him under Section 3(1) of the , alleging that his representation was dealt with in a cavalier manner, resulting in undue delay in its disposal.
Refuting the allegation, it was contended on behalf of the respondents that the representation, received on 23.8.89, was forwarded to the sponsoring authority for comments on 25.8.89 and the comments were received only on 11.9.89, and orders rejecting the representation were issued on 19.9.89, after obtaining the orders of the appropriate authorities.
The High Court rejected the petition as devoid of any merit.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appel lant it was contended that the offices of the detaining authority and the sponsoring authority were within the same city and there was absolutely no explanation for the delay on the part of the sponsoring authority in sending the comments till 11.9.89, though the representation dated 18.8.89 was sent for comments to the said authority even on 25.8.89, thus vitiating the order of detention, and that in view of the inordinate and unexplained delay in considering and disposing of the representation, the continued detention of the appellant was impermissible and unconstitutional, as being violative of the mandatory provisions of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, 980 HELD: 1.1 A representation of a detenu whose liberty is in peril and deprived should be considered and disposed of as expeditiously as possible; otherwise the continued deten tion will render itself impermissible and invalid as being violative of the constitutional obligation enshrined in Article 22(5) of the Constitution and if any delay is occurred in the disposal of a representation, such delay should be explained by the appropriate authority to the satisfaction of the Court.
[985A B] Rama Dhondu Borade vs
V.K. Saraf, Commissioner of Police Bengal, [1969] II Supreme Court Weekly Reports 529; Jayana rayan Sukul vs State of West Bengal, ; Shaik Hanif& Ors.
vs State of W. B., ; ; Raisuddin vs State of U.P., ; and Frances Coralic Muffin vs
W.C. Khambra and Ors.
, ; , relied on.
1.2 Inspite of the weighty pronouncements, of this Court making the legal position clear, it is still disquieting to note that on many occasion the appropriate authorities cause considerable delay in considering and disposing of represen tations and also exhibit culpable indifference in explaining such delay.
In case the appropriate authority is unable to explain personally the delay at various stages, then it will be desirable indeed appropriate for the concerned author ity or authorities at whose hands the delay has occured to individually explain such delay.
[985C D] 1.3 The Court, in the absence of any explanation, cannot wink at or skip over or ignore such an infringement of the constitutional mandate and uphold an order of detention merely on the ground that the enormity of allegations made in the grounds of detention is of very serious nature, as in the present case.
[985D El Prabhu Dayal Deorah vs The District Magistrate, Kamrup & Ors., ; , relied on.
In the instant case, except merely mentioning that the representation was forwarded to the concerned sponsoring authority on 25.8.89 and the comments from the sponsoring authority were received by the Department on 11.9.89, there is absolutely no explanation as to why such a delay had occured.
This undue and unexplained delay is in violation of the constitutional obligation enshrined in Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India rendering the order invalid.
[986B C] 981 Rama Dhondu Borade vs
V.K. Saraf, Commissioner of Police & Ors., , relied on.
