The appellant assessee owned certain properties on lease hold lands.
The leases in respect of these lands expired in 1958 and 1963 and the lessor State Government issued notices to the assessee to hand over vacant posses sion of the leasehold lands.
The properties were let out to the tenants and the assessee was receiving rental income from the same.
In the Wealth Tax Returns for the assessment years 1971 72, 1972 73, 1973 74 and 1974 75, the assessee valued the properties at ten times of the annual rental income.
In the assessment order the Wealth Tax Officer valued the properties at fifteen times of the annual rental income.
On appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Wealth Tax valued the said properties at twelve and a half times of the annual rental income.
On further appeal, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal valued the properties at ten times of the annual rental income, but, at the request of the assessee, referred to the High Court for its opinion certain questions of law, includ ing the questions whether the Tribunal was right in holding that the properties in respect of which the leases had expired in 1958 and 1963 and notices had been issued to hand over the possession were assets within the meaning of Sec tion 2(e)(v) of the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 and its value was liable to be included in the net wealth of the assessee and that, on correct interpretation of Section 2(e)(v) of the Wealth Tax Act, and relevant provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, the interest of the appellant in respect of properties in dispute was for a period of over six years.
887 The High Court held that after the determination of the earlier leases, the assessee was lessee of properties under a new contract of tenancy, and it was a tenancy from month to month under Section 116 read with Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, and for an unstated period, and could not be said to be precarious in nature, that the said tenancy was an asset as defined in Section 2(e) of the Act and was not excluded under sub clause (v) because the said interest had been available to the assessee for a period exceeding six years from the date the new contract of tenan cy came into existence.
It, however granted certificate of fitness to appeal to the Supreme Court.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The properties in respect of which leases had expired in 1958 and 1963 and notices had been received by the assessee to hand over the possession were not assets within the meaning of Section 2(e)(2)(iii) of the Wealth Tax Act 1957 and the valuation of the same was not 'liable to be included in the net wealth of the assessee.
The Tribunal was not right in holding that the interest of the assessee in respect of the properties in dispute was for a period over six years for the purpose of Section 2(e)(2)(iii) of the Act.[898F H] 2.1 The word "available" in Section 2(e)(2)(iii) of the Act is preceded by the word "is" and is followed by the words "for a period not exceeding six years".
The word 'is ', although normally referring to the present, often has a future meaning.
It may also have a past signification as in the sense of 'has been '.
In view of the words "for a period not exceeding six years" which follow the word "available", the word 'is ' must be construed as referring to the present and the future.
In that sense, it would mean that the inter est is presently available and is to be available in future for a period not exceeding six years.
[896C D] The High Court has construed the word 'is ' to mean 'has been '.
As per the construction placed by the High Court in a case where an interest has been created for a period exceed ing six years it would be included in the assets of the assessee under Section 2(e) of the Act only after the expiry of the period of six years even though the interest is available to the assessee for a period exceeding six years from the date the interest vests in the assessee.
The con struction placed by the High Court attaching importance to the enjoyment of the interest, instead of placing emphasis on the nature of the interest is not correct.
[894E G] 2.3 The question as to whether the interest should be in cluded or 888 excluded from the assets of the assessee under Section 2(e)(2)(iii) of the Act has to be considered in the light of the nature of interest on the relevant date.
Under the said provision, the relevant date is the date on which the inter est vests in the assessee.
Therefore, the matter has to be considered by examining the nature of the interest on the date the interests vests in the assessee.
[894G H] Commissioner of Wealth Tax vs Smt.
Muthukrishna Ammal, ; , relied on.
In the instant case, after the expiry of the leases of the assessee in the years 1958 and 1963 the assessee contin ued in possession under a new contract of tenancy and the said tenancy was a tenancy from month to month for an un stated period.
The said tenancy was precarious in nature because it could be terminated by the lessor, at any time by a notice under Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act.
The fact that such a notice was not given cannot mean that the interest created by the said new tenancy was an interest available to the assessee for a period exceeding six years from the date the interest vested in the assessee.
In the circumstances, in view of Section 2(e)(2)(iii) the said interest could not be treated as an asset of the assessee for the purpose of the Act.
[897C D] [Section 2(e)(v), as amended in 1964, was substituted by the Finance Act,1969 and the relevant provision applicable to the instant case was Section 2(e)(2)(iii).
However, in the reference to the High Court, the Tribunal referred to sub clause (v) of clause (e) of Section 2, as it stood prior to the 1969 amendment and the High Court also did not notice it.
This Court observed that since the provisions of Section 2(e)(v) as amended in 1964, were identical with the provi sions of Section 2(e)(2)(iii) as substituted by the 1969 amendment the error was of no consequence and examined the matter in the light of the provisions contained in Section 2(e) as substituted by the 1969 amendment.] [893G H; 894A]
