In the South Eastern Railway the cadre initially com prised of Assistant Station Masters at the bottom and the Station Masters at the top.
Initial appointment of ASM was made in the scale of Rs.360 540.
The promotional ladder bifurcated into: (i) ASM to SM, and (ii) ASM to SM, both in the scale of Rs.425 640 (non selection), and then Rs.455700 (selection); before becoming one common source for promotion to Deputy Station Superintendent/SM Rs.550 750 (non selec tion) Rs.700800 Station Superintendent (selection), and Rs.840 1010 Station Superintendent (non selection).
For moving up the promotional ladder every ASM was required to opt if he would proceed on the channel of ASM to ASM, or ASM to SM.
Later, re structuring was done in 'C ' and 'D ' cadres in the scales, designation and percentage; in selection and non selection posts.
Two alternatives were framed described as alternative 'I ' for the combined cadre, and alternative 'II ' for the separate cadres; which were to be adopted by the respective zones depending on the prevailing cadre pattern.
For ASM/SM two alternatives were provided to be adopted by the respective zones depending on whether the existing cadre was separate or combined.
In alternative 'I ' meant for the combined cadre SMs in the scale of Rs.425 640 and Rs.455 700 were designated as Deputy Station Superin tendents and Station Superintendents in the scale of Rs.540 750 and Rs.700 900 respectively.
Pursuant to the re structuring, the Chief Personal Officer issued a letter to the Divisional Manager, South Eastern Railway that it has been decided that alternative 'I ' enunciated by the Board shall be followed on the said railway, and the existing system of calling for options from ASMs for the post of SMs/ASMs in the higher grade was being dispensed with seniority of staff in each grade shall be determined on 814 the basis of non fortutious service rendered in such grade.
Since the aforesaid direction of the Chief Personnel Officer worked to the prejudice of numerous persons who had exercised their options to the promotional channel of Sta tion Master, they approached the High Court/Tribunal by way of writ petitions/claim petitions but without any success.
Some of these disputes came up in appeal before this Court which were disposed of on July 30, 1987 by directing the Railway Board to consider if the Chief Personnel Officer while implementing its scheme deviated from its terms, and implemented it to the prejudice of those appellants.
The appellants Station Masters of South/Eastern Railway aggrieved by the implementation of the scheme of re struc turing by the Chief Personnel Officer approached the Central Administrative Tribunal, which rejected their claim, as the implementation was beneficial to the majority, and further found that the alternative 'I ' of the scheme meant for the combined cadre was rightly adopted as the cadre of Assistant Station Masters and Station Masters in the South Eastern Zone was combined before 1983.
The appellants in their appeal to this Court challenged the correctness of the aforesaid findings and also claimed that the implementation of the scheme was highly unjust and inequitable.
It was claimed that if alternative 'I ' was adopted then it should have been given full play and the SMs should have been placed en bloc in the re designated posts without any further process of selection.
Disposing of the appeal by directing that the respond ents shall grant promotional benefit to those 204 SMs who have exercised option before 1983, this Court, HELD: 1.
It is not disputed that in the South Eastern Zone the practice of obtaining option by ASM for promotional channel was in vogue before 1983.
The dispute was about the time when it was exercised.
According to the appellant it was at the time of recruitment and appointment even on pain of disciplinary action whereas according to the officials it used to be offered when vacancy arose according to seniori ty.
Unfortunately, it was accepted by the Tribunal as well without any foundation in the record by shutting its eyes to the letters dated 14th May, 1965 and 20th May, 1970, issued by the Divisional 815 Superintendent which shows that options were required to be exercised by ASMs irrespective of availability of vacancy before the target date, and if it was not exercised then they were liable to disciplinary action.
[818F H; 819A] 2.
Even the claim of the Administration that cadre of ASM/SM was combined cadre in South East Railway was not substantiated by any document, letter or order.
On the other hand, the letter dated 10th May, 1984 issued by Additional District Pay Commissioner to the General Manager recognises existence of separate cadre.
[819F] 3.
Existence of separate cadres prior to 1983 and chang ing over to a combined system is not the same thing as claiming that the cadre which existed prior to 1983 was a combined cadre.
[820C] 4.
Since the cadre in South Eastern Railway was a sepa rate one, the Chief Personnel Officer deviated from the scheme by applying alternative 'I ' which was to be adopted by a zone where combined cadre existed and if alternative 'I ' was adopted then the SMs should have been automatically designated as Deputy Station Superintendents and they should not have been subjected to the selection procedure.
In alternative 'I ' SM in scale of Rs.425 640 automatically stood redesignated as Deputy Station Superintendents.
But the scale does not find place in alternative II.
But both the employees unions have accepted the implementation of the letter of the Chief Personnel Officer as h is beneficial to a majority of the employees.
Therefore, it may not be dis turbed.
At the same time all those 204 employees who had opted before 1983 must be entitled to the benefit which would have been available to them on their options.
[820F H]
