The appellant, a registered Housing Co operative Socie ty, acquired about 70 acres of land during the period 1973 to 1975.
After the enactment of U.P. Industrial Area Development Act, 1976, the State Government constituted an Industrial Development Authority called NOIDA.
Soon after the constitu tion of the said authority, notifications were issued under the Land Acquisition Act acquiring certain lands including that of the appellant Society.
The appellant and several other societies demanded land in lieu of the land acquired.
A sub Committee was constitut ed and it was proposed to offer developed plots to the bona fide members of the societies whose lands were acquired.
An approximate rate of Rs. 130 per square metre was fixed.
It was also stipulated that 30% of the price would have to be deposited before a tripartite agreement between NOIDA, Co operative Societies and individual members is made after finalisation of lay out plan.
The appellant society filed a Writ Petition in the High Court alleging that the action taken by NOIDA was arbitrary and challenging the notifications issued under Sections 4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act.
Meanwhile, the authority had intimated the appellant society that it was finally decided to offer lands, and that 20% of the amount had to be deposited within a stipulated time.
The Society requested for extension of time.
Time was not extended and the Society was not allotted the land.
It was contended before the High Court that the authori ty acted mala fide, and its not extending the time was arbitrary and discrimi 65 natory.
The land price fixed by the authority was also challenged.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition, holding that the appellants Society had no legal right to get a particular land and that it did not avail the conces sion granted by the authority.
This appeal by special leave is against the order of the High Court.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court.
HELD: 1.
The interim orders of this court dated 30.5.83, 19.3.84, 30.4.84 and 8.5.85 will merge in this Order.
[70B] 2.
The Judgment of the High Court dated 6.5.83 is set aside.
The total number of persons entitled to allotment will be confined to those persons who were eligible members of the Society on 1st May, 1976 not exceeding 600.
The total area to be allotted to the members of the Society will be 28.8 acres in the form of developed plots.
This amounts to 40% of the total 72 acres of land acquired by the Society in the villages Chhalera Bangar and Suthari between January, 1973 and September, 1975.
The allotment shall be made in Sectors 40, 41 and 42 and if sufficient number of plots are not available in these Sectors, then from the adjacent sectors.
The plots to be allotted are to be developed by NOIDA within a period of nine months beginning from 1st May, 1990 and ending on 31st January, 1991 by which date the plots shall be allotted to the entitled members of the Society.
NOIDA shall be permitted to charge the price of the allotted plots at the rate of Rs. 1.000 per square metre.
Every member who has deposited any sum of money with NOIDA against proposed allotment shall be entitled to 12 per cent interest on such amount from the date of deposit till the actual allotment and such interest accrued in favour of the persons shall be entitled to adjustment of such interest against actual price of the land to be worked out at the rate of Rs.1,O00 per square metre.
Balance amount, if any, shall have to be paid by every eligible member of the Socie ty as on1.5.76 not exceeding 600 in all, within three months from now in three equal monthly instalments.
The 1st instal ment will be paid on or before May 31, 1990.
The second instalment to be paid on or before June 30.
1990 and the third instalment to be paid on or before July 31, 1990.
It shall be obligation of the Society to duly notify every member of these directions and the time factor forthwith as failure to pay any of these instalments within the time limit indicated above shall disqualify such person from allotment and NOIDA will thereafter be only obliged to refund the money lying to the credit of the defaulter with bank rate of interest.
In case the Review Petition in Hira lal Chawla 's case is allowed, the parties herein shall be at liberty to apply for review of this judgment 66 on similar extent.
Each allottee shall furnish an affidavit to the effect that neither he/she or spouse, nor dependent children owns any other plot or house or flat within NOIDA.
All the norms laid down by NOIDA in the matter of develop ment shall be strictly followed.
Supervision of this opera tion of course shall be by NOIDA.
The society would cooper ate with NOIDA in this regard.
[70B H; 71A B] Hiralal Chawla and Anr.
vs State of U. P. & Ors., [1990] 1JTSC 194, applied.
