The appellant challenged before the High Court the order of detention passed against him under Section 3(1) of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psycho tropic Substances Act, 1989, on various grounds including delay in disposal of his representation.
An affidavit was filed by a Deputy Superintendent of Police, on behalf of the respondents stating that the representation was placed before the Assistant Secretary on 19.6.1989, a report was called for from the District Magistrate, the comments, which were received by the State Government on 1.7.1989, were placed before the Assistant Secretary on 3.7.1989 who, in turn, submitted to the higher authorities with his note on 9.7.1989 and the representation was rejected on 11.7.1989.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition holding that there was no undue lethargy or indifference.
In the appeal, by special leave, on behalf of the dete nu, it was contended that the detenu 's representation was not decided within a reasonable time and hence the extraor dinary delay of 27 days was fatal to the detention.
A reply was filed by the same Deputy Superintendent of Police, as Officer Incharge of the case, who filed the affidavit before the High Court, stating that there was no delay in the consideration of the representation.
832 Subsequently, on the direction of the Court, an addi tional affidavit sworn by the Commissioner and Secretary (Home Department) stating that there was no inordinate delay in considering the representation and it was rejected after careful consideration, was filed.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
There is no explanation for the delay from 3rd to 9th July, 1989 i.e. for 7 days, for the Assistant Secre tary to merely put up a note on the basis of comments of the District Magistrate.
The additional affidavit sworn to by the Commissioner and Secretary does not whisper any explana tion as to why such a delay of 7 days had occurred at the hands of the Assistant Secretary.
The order of detention is, therefore, a breach of constitutional obligation as en shrined under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
[841F G; 842F] Rama Dhondu Borade vs V.K. Saraf, Commissioner of Police Smt.
Shalini Soni vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
2.1 A counter affidavit should normally be filed by the detaining authority himself, but this is not a rigid or inflexible rule and, in the absence of any allegations of mala fide or abuse of powers of personal bias attributed to the detaining authority, it may be sworn by a responsible officer who personally dealt with or processed the case or by an officer duly authorised under the Rules of Business of the Government concerned.
However, the practice of allowing a police officer who has not dealt with the case any point of time at any level and who in the very nature of the case could not have any personal knowledge of the proceedings, to swear the counter and reply affidavits on behalf of the appropriate authorities should be highly deprecated and condemned and the counter and reply affidavits sworn by such officer merit nothing but rejection.
[836H; 837A B; 836F G] The State of Bombay vs Purushottam Jog Naik, ; ; Ran]it Dam vs State of West Bengal, ; Shaik Hanifv.
State of West Bengal; , ; J.N. Roy vs State of West Bengal, ; Bhut Nath Mete vs State of West Bengal, ; at page 658; Asgar Ali vs District Magistrate Burdwan & Ors., Suru Mallick vs State of West Bengal, [1975] 833 4 SCC 470; Gulab Mehra vs State of U.P. & Ors., [19881 ] SCR 126; State of Gujarat vs Sunil Fulchand Shah & Anr., ; and Madan Lal Anand vs Union of India, , referred to.
