The appellant, a resident of the once independent State of Udaipur, held 266 shares in the Mewar Industries Ltd., a company registered in that State.
There was no law in the State of Udaipur imposing tax on income and it was on April 1, 1950that for the first time the residents of Rajasthan, in which the State had merged, became liable to pay such a tax.
On January 18, 1950, the Company went into liquidation and on April 22, 1950, the liquidator distributed a portion of the assets among the shareholders, the appellant receiving a sum of Rs. 26,000.
This sum represented the undistributed profits of the company which had accrued during the six accounting years preceding the liquidation.
The income tax authorities included this sum in the taxable income of the appellant for the assessment year 1051 52 holding that it was dividend as defined in section 2(6A)(c) of the Indian Income tax Act.
Under section 2(6A)(c) the distribution of accumulated profits which arose during the " six previous years " preceding the date of liquidation would be dividend.
Section 2(1) defined " previous year " to mean the year which was previous to.the assessment year.
The appellant contended that " previous years " in section 2(6A)(c) must be read in the light of the definition is section 2(1) and as in the present case there had been no law imposing a tax prior to April 1, 1950, the profit for the years 1943 44 to 1948 49 cannot be held to be profits which " arose during the six previous years ", and consequently could not be taxed as dividend as defined in section 2(6A)(c) of the Indian Income tax Act.
Held, that the said sum was dividend within the meaning of section 2(6A)(c) of the Act and was liable to tax.
The definitions given in section 2 Of the Act applied unless there was anything repugnant in the subject or context.
It would be repugnant to the definition of " dividend " in section 2(6A)(c) to import into the expression " six previous years " the definition of " previous year " in section 2(ii) of the Act.
By the expression "previous years " in section 2(6A)(c) of the Act was meant the financial years preceding the year in which liquidation took place.
Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs K. Srisivasan and Gopalan, , referred to. 205
