In a claim for damages for the permanent disability suffered by the claimant, the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal awarded compensation under different beads, viz., (a) com pensation for permanent disability (b) expenses of treat ment, and (c) general damages for pain, suffering and loss of enjoyment of life, against the Insurance Company and the truck owner.
On Separate appeals by the claimant, truck owner and the Insurance Company, the High Court, not only affirmed the award but also improved it by granting interest at 6 per cent per annum on the amount of compensation from the date the claim petition was filed upto the date of payment of compensation.
The truck owner filed an appeal, by special leave, before this Court on several grounds including that when the claimant had not claimed interest in the application, and the Tribunal had not awarded any, the High Court was in error in granting interest under Section 110 CC of the , where the power of the Court of the Tribunal was discretionary, and that the grant of damages on account of mental agony, pain and suffering etc.
was arbitrary and ought to have been taken to be covered by the compensation granted on account of loss of earning.
The claimant also filed an appeal, by special leave praying for more compensa tion, interest etc.
on each account.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, 2 HELD: 1.1 The question of award of interest is dependent on the claim being allowed.
Should the claim be not allowed.
the question of grant of interest would not arise.
and if awardable, it is in addition to the amount of compensation.
The Court of Tribunal, in these circumstances, should deter mine, in the first instance, claim for compensation and in the event of its being allowed can further exercise the discretion to grant simple interest in terms thereof, but as an additive to the amount of compensation.
So, the addition of interest to the compensation, by judicial discretion, is sequential in the eye of law and no claim in that regard, specifically need be laid in so many words in the claim petition.
The grant of interest, is not dependent on any pleading in that regard and can even be orally asked if the contingency arises.
[5B D] In these circumstances, there is no substance in the attack to the grant of interest.
[5D] 1.2 The incapacity or disability to earn a livelihood would have to be viewed not only in presenti but in futuro on reasonable expectancies and taking into account deprival of earnings of a conceivable period.
This head being totally different cannot overlap the grant of compensation under the head of pain, suffering and loss of enjoyment of life.
One head relates to the impairment of a person 's capacity to earn, the other relates to the pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of life by the person himself.
[5F G] In the instant case, the pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of life is a resultant and permanent fact occa sioned by the nature of injuries received by the claimant and the ordeal he had to undergo.
This, on the face of it is a distinct head, quite apart from the inability to earn livelihood on the basis of incapacity or disability which is quite different.
If money be any solace, the grant of Rs.20,000 to the claimant represents that solace.
Money solace is the answer discovered by the Law of Torts.
No substitute has yet been found to replace the element of money.
[5E F] 1.3 In the facts and circumstances of this case, there is no scope for further enhancement of compensation and further enhancement of interest.
