The Indian Independence Act, 1947 had set up two inde pendent dominions known as 'India ' and 'Pakistan '.
A Bound ary Commission was appointed to determine the boundaries of the two dominions, As a result of its Award, certain areas of India became, after the partition, enclaves in East Pakistan.
Similarly, certain East Pakistan enclaves were found in India.
Dehagram and Angarpota were two such Pakis tani enclaves in India.
In view of the Award, Berubari Union No. 12 was treated as part of the Province of West Bengal.
Near about 1952, Pakistan alleged that under the Award the Berubari Union should really have formed part of East Bengal.
Eventually, in 1958 the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan entered into an agreement settling certain boundary disputes.
The agreement inter alia provided for the division of Berubari Union No. 12 between India and Pakistan and exchange of Indian enclaves in Pakistan and Pakistan enclaves in India.
Doubts arose regarding the implementation of the 1958 agreement.
Therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred upon him by clause (1) of Article 143 of the Constitution, the President of India referred the matter to the Supreme Court.
In the light of the opinion rendered by the Supreme Court in Re: The Berubari Union and Exchange of Enclaves, 250, the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960 was passed to give effect to the transfer of the terri tories as envisaged in the 1958 agreement.
25 By an official notification, 17th January 1961 had been appointed as the day for the transfer of the territories of India by way of exchange with the territories of Pakistan in the western region.
No further appointed day was notified so far as the eastern border of India was concerned.
In 1966, writ petitions challenging the validity of the transfer of territories as stipulated in the Ninth Amendment were dismissed by this Court in Ram Kishore Sen & Ors.
vs Union of India; , On or about the 16th May, 1974 an agreement was entered into between the Prime Ministers of India and Bangladesh.
This agreement inter alia provided that India will retain half of Berubari Union No. 12, which under the 1958 agree ment was to be transferred to Pakistan, and in exchange Bangladesh will retain the Dahagram and Angarpota enclaves.
The agreement further provided that India will lease in perpetuity to Bangladesh a small area near 'Tin Bigha ' for the purpose of connecting Dahagram and Angarpota with Pan bari Mouza of Bangladesh.
The 1974 agreement, however re mained unimplemented.
Thereafter, in October 1982 an understanding was reached between the two governments in respect of 'lease in perpetu ity ' by India of the said area near 'Tin Bigha ' to enable the Bangladesh government to exercise her sovereignty over Dahagram and Angarpota.
It was further agreed that the 1982 agreement would be an integral part of the earlier agreement of 1974.
It was also agreed that the sovereignty over the leased area shall continue to vest in India.
Clause 9 of the 1982 agreement provided that India would have no jurisdiction over Bangladesh nationals in respect of any offence committed in the area, and the same shall be dealt with by the Bangladesh law enforcing agency only.
In 1983, Writ Petitions were filed in the Calcutta High Court challenging the validity of the agreement.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petitions (Sugandhra Roy vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1983 Cal.
The learned Single Judge held that (i) Ninth Amendment in so far as it related to exchange of the enclaves in eastern India had not come into being; (ii) implementation of the agreements of 1974 and 1982 did not involve cession of any Indian territory to Bangladesh; (iii) no exclusive or legal possession of Tin Bigha was being transferred 26 to Bangladesh; (iv) there was no question of transfer of sovereignty of India wholly or partially in respect of the said area; (v) certain privileges only had been conferred on Bangladesh and its nationals under the said agreement which otherwise they would not have; (vi) as Dahagram and Angarpo ta would remain as parts of Bangladesh territory, the agree ments were necessary to enable Bangladesh to exercise its sovereignty in full over the said enclaves; and (vii) in spite of the said agreements India would retain sovereignty, ownership and control over Tin Bigha.
Regarding clause 9 of the 1982 agreement, the learned Single Judge held that the conferment of this power under the agreement to Bangladesh and abdication of any such power by India, by itself, did not amount to transfer of sover eignty in respect of the area.
The learned Single Judge, however, noted that merely by virtue of the agreement and without any amendment of the existing Indian law it might not be legally possible to take away existing jurisdiction of the law enforcing agencies of India or the Indian courts.
An appeal was filed before the Division Bench.
It was contended before the Division Bench that (i) the 1974 agree ment specifically provided that the same would be suitably ratified but it had not been ratified; (ii) in the absence of any ratification of the agreement of 1974, India and Bangladesh could not enter into the subsequent agreement in 1982 on the basis of the agreement of 1974; (iii) by reason of the agreement of 1958 between India and Pakistan, which was sanctioned by the Ninth amendment to the constitution, there was automatic exchange of the Pakistani enclaves in the eastern part of India with the Indian enclaves in east ern Pakistan; (iv) neither India nor Bangladesh had formally terminated the treaty of 1958 and as such in so far as the provisions of the said agreement of 1958 concern Berubari union No. 12 and the Cooch Behar enclaves, including Daha gram and Angarpota, they could not be given a go by in the manner purported to have been done, and a further amendment to the Constitution was necessary; and (v) the use of the expression 'residual jurisdiction ' in clause 9 of the agree ment of 1962 indicated that Indian only retained residual sovereignty over the area and the defacto arid real sover eignty in the area had been surrendered to Bangladesh.
The Division Bench repelled these contentions.
The Bench however was of the view that the agreements of 1974 and 1982 providing for exchange of territories would have to be noted in the relevant schedules to the Constitution before any appointed day could be notified in 27 respect of the territories to be transferred to Bangladesh.
According to the Division Bench, this was necessary in order to retain Berubari in India.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court.
HELD: (1) The Division Bench came to the correct conclu sion that in so far as the eastern border of India was concerned, the Ninth Constitutional amendment had not become part of the Constitution as no appointed day had been noti fied, and in that view of the matter, the decision to allow Bangladesh to retain Dahagram and Angarpota under the 1974 and 1982 agreements did not amount to cession of Indian territory in favour of Bangladesh.
[45A B] A.K. Roy, etc.
vs Union of India & Anr., [1982] 2 S.C.R. 272: Maganbhai Ishwarbhai Patel vs Union of India & A nr.; , , referred to.
(2) The Division Bench was pre eminently right in arriv ing at the conclusion that there was no automatic transfer of Dahagram and Angarpota to India under the 1958 agreement in the absence of a notified appointed day, and consequently both defacto and dejure these enclaves remained part of East Pakistan and subsequently Bangladesh.
[44G H] (3) The Division Bench had held that the agreements of 1974 and 1982 did not amount to cession of territory or abandonment of sovereignty.
If that is the position, no constitutional amendment was required for the arrangements entered into either by the agreement of 1974 or 1982.
The Division Bench was therefore in error in expressing a con trary view.
[44B C] (4) In that view of the matter, the agreements of 1974 and 1982 did not require to be suitably notified or included in the official gazette.
Therefore, there was no cause to direct the legislature to amend or pass suitable laws.
[52B] State of Himachal Pradesh vs Umed Ram Sharma, ; ; State of Himachal Pradesh vs A parent of a Stu dent of Medical College, Simla & Ors., [1985] 3 S.C.R. 676, referred to.
(5) The expression 'lease in perpetuity ' has to be understood in the context of and with reference to the objects of the agreement.
The object of the lease was to allow access to Bangladesh to Dahagram and 28 Angarpota for the purpose of exercise of her sovereignty over and in the said areas.
Having examined the rights in the agreements, these do not amount to lease or surrender of sovereignty as understood in the international law.
[47B D] Associated Hotels of India Ltd. vs
R.N. Kapoor; , , referred to.
(6) The Division Bench rightly held that the recital in a deed could not operate as an estoppel against the specific terms and conditions thereof.
On a construction of the agreements, the Division Bench came to the correct conclu sion that the agreements of 1974 and 1982 together in their entirety must be judged.
[47F] (7) An agreement between two countries might be ratified not only by a subsequent formal agreement but by actual implementation or by conduct, and read properly, the subse quent agreement did ratify the previous agreement.
[46G H] (8) The Division Bench rightly held that under the said agreements, specific and limited rights were being granted to Bangladesh.
Such rights were not exclusive and the aggre gation thereof would not amount to a lease, as is commonly understood in favour of Bangladesh.
[49D E] (9) Certain restrictions had been imposed on India over its absolute sovereignty in the area to serve the purpose in favour of and in the interest of Bangladesh.
These are, however, self imposed restrictions.
On a proper construction of the agreements of 1974 and 1982 and the individual clauses, it cannot be said that as a result of the said agreement, India had surrendered its sovereignty over the said area of Teen Bigha in favour of Bangladesh or that Bangladesh has become the sovereign over the said territory to the exclusion of India.
[49G H] (10) Sovereignty is a quality of right.
It is a bundle of rights.
It depends on the facts and the circumstances of each case.
Apart from anything else, the specific clause in the agreement of 1982 that sovereignty over the area shall continue to vest in India stands in the way of a contrary construction.
[50A B] Panama Canal 's case Hudson Cases & Ors.
Materials on international Law, 3rd Edition, 1951 pp 222 3, distin guished.
29 (11) `Sovereignty ' has been defined as "the supreme authority ' in an independent political society.
It is essen tial, indivisible and illimitable.
However, it is now con sidered and accepted as both divisible and limitable.
Sover eignty is limited externally by the possibility of a general resistance Internal sovereignty is paramount power over all action, and is limited by the nature of the power itself.
[41E F] (12) In the present and modern context sovereignty has and must have a more restrictive meaning than it had in the earlier centuries when on the emergence of individual na tional States, no limits on the power of States, were ac knowledged.
Any State in the modern times has to acknowledge and accept customary restraints on its sovereignty inasmuch as no State can exist independently and without reference to other States.
Under the general international law the con cept of interdependence of States has come to be accepted.
Even without the said agreements of 1974 and 1982, so long as Dahagram and Angarpota remain part of Bangladesh, the latter under the general international law and customs would have a right to access to the said enclose through the territory of India.
[50C E] (13) Amicable and peaceable settlement of boundary disputes are in the interests of the international communi ty.
The older and absolute ideas of 'sovereignty and inde pendence has thus necessarily to be modified in the dawn of the 21st century.
A perpetual right to passage and other incidental rights given to Bangladesh for the limited pur pose for exercising the sovereignty over her own two en claves within the territory of India and/or if imposed restrictions on itself by India does not tantamount to transfer of interests in India [52E F]
