In 1944 the respondent instituted a suit for the recovery of money due under an award dated July 31, 1935, whereby the appellant and his brother were directed to pay a certain amount to the respondent.
The suit was dismissed by the trial Court 238 but on appeal the High Court passed a decree on March 9, 1951.
During the pendency of the appeal in the High Court the Madras Agriculturists Relief Act, 1938, was amended by Act XXIII of 1948, which inter alia by adding sub section (2) to section 19 of the main Act enabled decrees passed after the commencement of the Act to be scaled down under the provisions of the Act.
By cl.
(ii) to section 16 of the amending Act, which came into force on January 25, 1949, it was provided that " that the amendments made by this Act shall apply to. . all suits and proceedings instituted before the commencement of the Act, in which no decree or order has been passed before such commencement ".
On October 5, 1951, the appellant made an application to the trial court for scaling down the decremental debt under section 19(2) Of the Madras Agriculturists Relief Act, 1938, as amended, but the application was dismissed on the ground that the trial court had no jurisdiction to act under that sub section as the decree sought to be scaled down had been passed by the High Court.
The appellant preferred an appeal to the High Court and also made a separate application for scaling down the decretal debt under section 19(2) Of the Act.
The High Court took the view that section 19(2) was controlled by section 16 of the amending Act and that cl.
(ii) of section 16 was applicable to the case, but that as the appellant whose appeal was pending at the commencement of the amending Act did not apply for scaling down before the decree was passed although he had the opportunity to do so, his application subsequent to the decree was barred by the principle of Yes judicature.
Held, that the High Court erred in its view that in order to get relief under section 19(2) Of the Act, read with cl.
(ii) of section 16 of the amending Act, the appellant must have made the application when the appeal was pending and before a decree had been passed.
For the application of cl.
(ii) of section 16 of the amending Act, the true test is whether the suit or proceeding was instituted before January 25, 1949, and whether no decree or order for repayment of a debt had been passed before that date, and it is not necessary that the suit or proceeding should be pending on the date of the application under section 19(2) Of the Act.
In cases covered by that clause a party can ask for relief under the Act at two stages before a decree for repayment of the debt bad been passed, and also after such a decree had been passed, and since section 19(2) of the Act in express terms enables a debtor to claim a relief under the provisions of the Act after a decree had been passed, the appellant is entitled to the benefit of section 19(2) of the Act read with section i6, cl.
(ii), of the amending Act.
While cl.
(ii) of section i6 applies to suits and proceedings which were instituted before January 25, 1949, but in which no decree or order had been passed, or the decree or final order passed had not become final, before that date, cl.
(iii) applies to decrees or orders, which, though they had become final before January 25, 239 1949, were still in the state of unfinished execution and at the stage at which satisfaction had not been fully received.
Venkataratnam vs Seshatnma, 1.
L. R. , approved.
The question whether cl.
(ii) refers to decrees and orders of a declaratory nature, which are not executable but which have become final before January 25, 1949, left open.
The opinion expressed in jagannatham Chetty vs Parthasarathy Iyengar, A.I.R. 1953 Mad. 777, that the word 'proceedings ' in section i6 of the amending Act must relate to proceedings instituted for repayment of a debt and not to execution proceedings which are for enforcement of a decree or order, doubted and the question left open.
