The appellant, Oil & Natural Gas Commission.
is a statu tory corporation constituted by and under the Oil and Natu ral Gas Commission Act, 1959.
In most of its oil fields situated in Gujarat, gas comes out along with crude oil as "free gas".
The appellant had agreed to supply this gas to the Gujarat State Electricity Board (GSEB) and the Gujarat State Fertiliser Corporation (GSFC) at a price related to fuel oil price on the basis of thermal value equivalence, without any reference to the cost of production of gas as such.
Public discontent over the alleged high price charged was expressed and eventually the dispute was referred to the sole arbitra tion of Dr. V.K.R.V. Rao who gave his award.
Dr. Rao made the "cost plus" method the basis of his award in preference to the basis of thermal equivalence of alternate fuel (thermal equivalence basis).
In July 1967, the supply of gas to some of the indus tries in and around Vadodara city was started, on the basis of individual annual contracts.
Aggrieved by the steady rise in the prices, the respondents Association of Natural Gas Consuming Industries and Others moved the Bombay High Court in March 1979 by way of a writ petition In the petition it was, inter alia, prayed that the ONGC be directed (i) to 158 continue to supply the gas to the respondents despite the contracts in their favour having lapsed; (ii) to discuss and negotiate a fair, reasonable and just price for supply of gas; (iii) to stop charging discriminatory prices for the supply of gas to the respondents in comparison with the price charged to public sector undertakings; and (iv) to restrict the minimum guaranteed quantity of offtake.
The High Court passed an interim order directing the ONGC to continue the supply of gas to the respondents, at the existing rate of Rs.504 per unit which was later raised by the Court to Rs. 1000 per unit.
The High Court held; (i) The Oil and Natural Gas Commission is a public Utility Undertaking and has a duty to supply gas to anyone who requires it so long as there is enough supply available; (ii) Price fixation is generally a legislative function.
But the Oil and Natural Gas Commission being a State instrumentality, is bound to act reasonably in the matter of fixation of price; such price is bound to be determined by following any one of the modalities suggested in the judgment of the High Court; (iii) There was no dis crimination by the Oil and Natural Gas Commission between the public sector undertakings on the one hand and the respondents ' undertakings on the other in charging differen tial prices; and (iv) The clause regarding minimum guaran teed offtake was valid and enforceable.
Before this Court.
the appellant primarily challenged the finding of the High Court that the ONGC was a 'public utility undertaking ' which was bound to supply gas at the request of any member of the public at large.
The appellant also contested the correctness of the High Court 's conclu sion that the price of gas must be determined on the basis of cost of production plus a reasonable return for the investment made.
The appellant submitted that (i) the prices under the contracts entered into with the respondents had been determined on the basis of a wellknown principle.
viz. the ruling prices for an alternate fuel and this could not be said to be either arbitrary or unreasonable particularly when a large number of industries were willing to take the supply of gas at the prices fixed on that basis; (ii) while public sector units and State instrumentalities ought not to be allowed to exploit the consumers.
it was equally neces sary to ensure that such units and instrumentalities were enabled to make reasonable profits; (iii) in the context of the integrated activity of production of crude oil and gas.
it was almost impossible to work out the cost in respect of any particular area or of a particular bye product; (iv) the cost plus basis was fixed by the Award several years ago and that too in the context of supply to certain State 159 undertakings which, in turn, supplied essential commodities like electricity and fertilizers; and (v) the onus of show ing that the prices charged were unreasonable or arbitrary was on the respondents and they had done nothing to dis charge this onus.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that a public utility undertaking could not arbitrarily discontinue its supply or services merely because the customer was unwilling to pay the price asked for as unconscionable and unreasonable.
It was further contended that the price fixed must be reasonable and fair so as to give the undertaking a reasonable return on the capital employed and that there could not be any discrimination against industrial consum ers.
According to the respondents.
this was the only reason able way of price fixation and referred to the Award in support of this proposition The respondents further urged that to allow Oil and Natural Gas Commission to sell gas at a higher price than this merely because.
otherwise.
but for the availability of gas, the consumers would have to spend more for their sources of energy.
will really amount to introduction an irrelevant element in the process of price fixation and result in allowing the Oil and Natural Gas Commission to make unreasonable profits at the expense of unhappy consumers.
It was argued that these principles were applicable with greater force in the context of the consti tutional discipline over state instrumentalities under Article 38 & 39 of the Constitution.
Bolt vs Stennett CJ E.R.__Revised p.
1572; Allnutt vs Inglis CIV E.R. Revised p. 206; Ira Y. Munn vs People, ; United Fuel Gas Co. vs Railroad Commission, 73L. Ed. 390; Los Angeles Gas & Electric Corporation vs Railroad Commission. ; ; Leo Nabbia vs People.
78 L.Ed. 940; Harold E. West vs Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Com., ; ; Federal Power Commission vs Hope Natural Gas Co., ; ; premier Automobiles vs Union, ; ; Panipat Cooperative Sugar Mills vs Union, [1973] 2 S.C.R. 860; Shree Meenakshi Mills vs Union, ; Saraswati Industrial Syndicate vs Union, ; ; Prag Ice and Oil Mills vs Union, ; ; Union of India vs Cynamide India Ltd., [1987] 2 S.C.C. 720, relied upon.
Allowing the appeals and upholding the prices charged by the Oil and Natural Gas Commission, this Court, HELD: (1) The Oil and Natural Gas Commission does not satisfy the primary conditions for being a public utility undertaking as it has not so far held itself out or under taken or been obliged by any law to 160 provide gas supply to the public in general or to any par ticular crosssection of the public.
The proviso to Section 14(1)(e) of the Act which lays down that the setting up of industries to be run with the aid of gas was not to be undertaken by the Oil and Natural Gas Commission without the Central Government 's approval also gives an indication that the supply of gas to various industries on a general basis was not in the immediate contemplation of the Act but was envisaged as a future expansion to be initiated with Central Government 's approval.
Perhaps a stage in the developmental activities of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission will soon come when such an obligation could be inferred but, at present, the Oil and Natural Gas Commission supplies gas only to certain selected contractees.
[181E G] (2) It is however not necessary in this case to express any final opinion on the issue whether the ONGC was a public utility undertaking except to say, prima facie, that it could not be placed on par with a public utility undertak ing.
All that the respondents wanted was a declaration that they were entitled to the supply of gas at a reasonable price.
It was sufficient, for disposing of this claim, to deal with this aspect of the matter and the larger aspect of Oil and Natural Gas Commission being a public utility under taking could be left out of account.
[183E F] (3) The treatment of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission as a public utility undertaking for the supply of gas will raise innumerable basic questions totally inconsistent with the present system of selective supply which the respondents want to be continued.
It will transpose the area of contro versy to a totally different and wider plane.
The Court would then be constrained to hold that the present system of supply was inconsistent with public law and the constitu tional requirements of a public utility undertaking.
[183C D] (4) The main activity of the Oil and Natural Gas Commis sion is that of exploration and prospecting for petroleum and petroleum products.
So far as gas, which is a bye product, is concerned, the Oil and Natural Gas Commission has not so far been able to voluntarily or constrained statutorily to harness and utilise its production for con sumption by the public.
[181H; 182A] (5) There is no doubt that Dr. Rao made the cost plus method the basis of his award in preference to the basis of thermal equivalence of alternate fuel (thermal equivalence basis).
But, the cost plus basis fixed by Dr. Rao in the background of the real nature of the dispute before him three decades ago could not be taken as conclusive in the present 161 situation.
Dr. Rao was concerned primarily with an issue raised by the public of Gujarat as against the Oil and Natural Gas Commission.
He was really adjudicating upon the price which the Oil and Natural Gas Commission should charge to public sector undertakings catering to the essential needs of the State.
In that context, his objective was, understandably, to fix the price as low as possible.
The consumer under consideration by him represented the public need of the State of Gujarat and, as against such public interest, the Oil and Natural Gas Commission 's profit re quirements paled into insignificance.
[189C; G; D E] (6) Here, the Court is dealing with a price to be fixed under a contract between the Oil and Natural Gas Commission and one set of industries in the State who wish to make a change over from the furnance oil system to that of gas supply with a view to increase their own profitability and gain an advantage, if possible, over other industries in the State.
In this context, Oil and Natural Gas Commission is entitled to a larger latitude and charge a price which the market can bear.
The only restriction is that, being a State instrumentality, it should not be a whimsical or capricious price but should be one based on relevant considerations and on some recognised basis.
[189H; 190A] (7) Cost plus is not a satisfactory basis in all situa tions.
May be the cost plus is an ideal basis where the commodity supplied is the product of a monopoly vital to human needs.
In that context the price fixed should be minimum possible as the customer or consumer must have the commodity for his survival and cannot afford more than the minimum.
Per Contra, there can be situations where the need of the consumer is not so vital and the requirements of the economic scene are such that the needs of the producer should be given greater consideration.
In such situations, the "plus" element in the cost plus basis (namely, the allowable profit margin) should not be confined to "a rea sonable return on the capital" but should be allowed to have a much larger content depending on the circumstances.
Given a favourable area of operation, commercial profits need not be either anathema or forbidden fruit even to public sector enterprises [191D E; G H] Anakapallee Case; , ; Venkatachalam vs Deputy Transport Commissioner; , , referred to.
(8) It would not be right to insist that the Oil and Natural Gas Commission should fix oil prices only on cost plus basis.
Indeed, its policy of pricing should be based on the several factors peculiar to the industries and its current situation.
and so long as such a policy is not 162 irrational or whimsical, the court may not interfere.
[195D] (9) Price fixation is generally a legislative function.
But Parliament generally provides for interference only at a stage where in pursuance of social and economic objectives or to discharge duties under the Directive Principles of State Policy, control has to be exercised over the distribu tion and consumption of the material resources of the commu nity.
[195F] M/s. Shri Sitaram Sugar Company Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union, J.T. ; Jagadamba Paper Industries vs Har yana State Electricity Board; , ; Kerala State Electricity Board etc.
vs M/s. S.N. Govinda Prabhu & Bros. & Ors.
, , referred to.
(10) It cannot be said that the Oil and Natural Gas Commission has acted arbitrarily in fixing the prices on the thermal equivalence basis; the fact that it has not done it on cost plus basis does not vitiate the price fixation.
The only question to be considered is as to whether the Oil and Natural Gas Commission has fixed a price based on relevant materials and on some known principle.
[200C] (11) The manufacture, distribution and consumption of gas has yet not attained the status of an essential commodi ty till recently.
At present, the industry is in the penum bral region where the commodity is free to be distributed at the manufacturer 's choice, but yet where such manufacturer being a State instrumentality, has to conform to Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution.
At this stage of development of the industry a much wider latitude is permissible in the fixation of prices than the imposition of a "no profit, no loss" basis or a "cost plus" basis on the producer.
[200E G] (12) It is now well settled that a favourable treatment of public sector organisations, particularly ones dealing in essential commodities or service, would not be discriminato ry.
No tangible material has been brought to the Court 's notice which would support the plea of unfair discrimina tion.
[203E F] (13) The High Court rightly upheld the Oil and Natural Gas Commission 's right to insist on a munimum off take guar antee.
[202G] Amalgamated Electricity Co. Ltd. vs Jalgaon Borough Municipality, ; 163
