The appellants are two different trade unions of Barauni Refinery of the respondent, Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL).
The IOCL is comprised essentially of two divisions: (1) Marketing Division, and (2) Refinery and Pipe Lines Division.
The age of superannuation of the staff in the Marketing Division was 60 years whereas for the Refinery and Pipe Lines Division it was fixed at 58 years under Clause 20 of the Standing Orders concerning Barauni Refinery.
In December 1981, 14 recognised Unions representing the employees of the IOCL working in different refineries and pipe lines divisions submitted a charter of demands.
By clause 18 of this charter the superannuation age was sought to be enhanced to 60 years.
A similar charter of demands was separately submitted by the Barauni Telshodhak Mazdoor Union.
As a result of discussions a general settlement was mutually arrived at by and between the parties on May 24, 1983.
Subsequently, a separate Memorandum of Settlement dated 4th August, 1983 concerning Barauni Refinery was signed by the parties under sections 12(3) and 18(3) of the in conciliation proceedings.
Both the general settlement and the special settlement concerning Barauni Refinery were to remain in force till 30th April, 1986.
Despite the specific demand made in the two charters of demand for the upward revision of the age of superannuation, no specific provision was made in that behalf either in the general settlement or in the special settlement.
On the contrary, clause 19 of both the settle ments provided that the 283 terms and conditions of service which were not changed under the settlements shah remain unchanged and operative during the period of settlement, further, clause 21 did not permit raising of any demand throwing an additional burden on the corporation during that period.
Later, the Petroleum and Chemical Mazdoor Union served notice on the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) under section 10(2) of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1948 for modification of clause 20 of the Certified Standing Orders of Barauni Refinery for raising the age of superannuation from 58 years to 60 years.
This demand was based on the averment that the nature of work performed by the workmen in the Refinery and Pipe Lines Division and their payscales were identical to the staff members of the Marketing Division.
The Regional Labour Commissioner allowed the application for modification of clause 20 of the Certified Standing Orders.
The Appellate Authority dismissed the appeal of the Corporation, but at the same time directed a slight modifi cation in clause 20 of the Standing Orders.
The IOCL preferred a writ petition in the High Court for quashing the orders of the Regional Labour Commissioner as well as the Appellate Authority.
On the other hand, the Union, feeling aggrieved by the order of the Appellate Authority, preferred a writ petition against that order.
The High Court inter alia held that the settlement arrived at in the conciliation proceedings was binding on the workmen, and as clause 19 of the settlement kept the service conditions which were not changed in tact and clause 21 of the settlement did not permit raising of any demand throwing an additional burden on the Corporation, it was not permissible to modify the certified Standing Orders by an amendment, as that would alter the service conditions and increase the financial burden on the management.
Dismissing the appeals by the two trade unions this Court, HELD: (1) The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1948 was enacted to define with sufficient precision the conditions of employment for workers employed in indus trial establishments and to make the same known to them.
[289B] (2) According to sub sections (1) and (3) of section 18 of the , settlements are divided into two categories, namely, (i) those arrived at outside the conciliation proceedings and (ii) 284 those arrived at in the course of conciliation proceedings.
A settlement which belongs to the first category has limited application in that it merely binds the parties to the agreement but the settlement belonging to the second catego ry has extended application since it is binding on all parties to the industrial dispute.
[292A B] (3) A settlement arrived in the course of conciliation proceedings with a recognised majority union will be binding on all workmen of the establishment, even those who belong to the minority union which had objected to the same.
To that extent it departs from the ordinary law of contract.
[292C] (4) The object is to uphold the sanctity of settlement reached with the active assistance of the Conciliation Officer and to discourage an individual employee or a minor ity union from scuttling the settlement.
There is an under lying assumption that a settlement reached with the help of the Conciliation Officer must be fair and reasonable and can, therefore, safely be made binding not only on the workmen belonging to the union signing the settlement but also on others.
The High Court was, therefore, right in coming to the conclusion that the settlement dated 4th August, 1983 was binding on all the workmen of the Barauni Refinery including the members of Petroleum and Chemical Mazdoor Union.
[292D E] (5) The age of retirement prescribed by clause 20 of the Certified Standing Orders was undoubtedly a condition of service which was kept in tact by clause 19 of the settle ment.
[292G] (6) During the operation of the settlement it was not open to the workmen to demand a change in clause 20 of the certified Standing Orders because any upward revision of the age of superannuation would come in conflict with clauses 19 and 21 of the settlement.
[293E F]
