M/s Dabur India Limited, petitioner in one set of peti tions, is a public limited company engaged in the manufac ture of Ayurvedic as well as Allopathic medicaments, along with cosmetics.
It used to manufacture for and on behalf of M/s Sharda Boiren Laboratories The petitioner in the second set of petitions a Homeopathic tooth paste called 'Homeo dent ' out of the raw materials supplied by M/s Sharda, on job basis.
It accordingly manufactured Homeodent during 1985 to 1988, duly paying duties of excise on Homeodent under the Central Excises & Salt Act, 1944.
The Superintendent of State Excise visited the factory of M/s Dabur on 18th January, 1988 and enquired about the excisability of Homeodent under the Medicinal & Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955.
He was told that Homeodent had been classified under the 1944 Act in view of the orders passed by the Central Excise authorities.
Howev er, when it was revealed that the Homeodent tooth paste was toilet preparation containing alcohol, within the meaning of section 2(k), read with Item 4 of the Schedule, referred to in section 3 of the 1955 Act, the District Excise Officer caused a common notice dated 17.3.1988 to be served on M/s Dabur requiring it to pay duty aggregating to Rs.68,13,334.20 under the provisions of the 1955 Act on such 295 goods manufactured and cleared between January 1985 and January 1988.
This order was passed without issuing any notice to show cause, and without affording any opportunity of hearing, to the petitioner.
The Petitioner sent a representation requesting for compliance with the principles of natural justice and also disputing the amount claimed as duty.
On 18th March, 1988 the Superintendent of State Excise modified the earlier order and confirmed the demand of duty amounting to Rs.46.67 lakhs, on provisional basis.
On that day the petitioner deposited a sum of Rs. 11.66 lakhs and further executed a bank guarantee for the balance.
Simultaneously, the peti tioner appealed against the order dated 18th March, 1988.
The Excise Commissioner dismissed the appeal.
No appeal was filed by M/s Sharda against the demand notice of excise duty under the 1955 Act.
The petitioner moved the High Court.
On 13th May, 1988 the High Court directed the petitioner to file a revision petition with the Central Government.
Both the petitioners then approached the Central Government in revision.
On 22nd September, 1988 the Additional Secretary to the Government of India in exercise of his revisional powers allowed the revision filed by M/s Dabur and declared the orders of the District Excise Officer and the Excise Commissioner as null and void having been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice.
The revision filed by M/s Sharda was not entertained by the Central Government on the ground that a right of appeal was vested in Sharda, which was not availed of.
The High Court dismissed Sharda 's petition challenging the order of the Central Government declining to entertain its review.
Against the order of the High Court M/s Sharda have filed the special leave petition in this Court.
On the basis of the revision order, the petitioners called upon the District Excise Officer to refund the amount of Rs.46.67 lakhs recovered from it by way of cash payment and encashment of bank guarantee.
The State Excise authori ties however failed to grant the refund, and instead issued a fresh show cause notice to the petitioners jointly on 2nd November, 1988.
In December 1988, M/s Dabur moved the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution for quashing and setting aside the showcase notice dated 2.11.1988 and for refund of duty amounting to Rs.46.67.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
The High Court was 296 of the opinion that the question whether Homeodent tooth paste was sans alcohol could not be adjudicated upon under the extraordinary writ jurisdiction.
The High Court however came to the conclusion that both the 1944 and 1955 Acts operated in different fields and there was no overlapping between the two.
The High Court further observed that where the parties fully acquiesced with the matter and subjected themselves to the statutory procedure, no action should be allowed to be taken under Article 226 of the Constitution unless the case was patently without jurisdiction.
In this connection, it was emphasised by the High Court that once the parties chose the statutory procedure they must go to the logical end.
It was inter alia urged before this Court on behalf of the petitioner that it was not seeking to circumvent the alternative remedy provided under the Act but in view of the conflicting claims of the Central and State Excise authori ties seeking to classify Homeodent tooth paste under the respective Acts of 1944 and 1955, the petitioner was left with no other alternative but to challenge the actions by way of writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
It was further contended that Homeodent did not contain alcohol but contained ingredient "mother tincture" contain ing alcohol, which had a tendency to evaporate during the process of manufacture of Homeodent; that no test result as required under the 1955 Act was obtained to establish wheth er Homeodent contained alcohol or not; and that on 31st August, 1987 the Assistant Collector of Central Excise had already passed an order classifying Homeodent under the Act of 1944 which order had been upheld by the Collector of Central Excise (Appeals).
The main point that the petitioner sought to emphasis was that the High Court ought to have appreciated that Homeodent tooth paste having been subjected to duty under the provisions of the 1944 Act, the question of levying and recovering duty under the 1955 Act did not and could not arise.
Dismissing the petitions, this Court, HELD: (1) Homeodent is a homeopathic preparation but it is also a tooth paste.
Therefore, it is a toilet prepara tion.
Whether or not such Homeodent would not be dutiable under the Medicinal & Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955 would depend upon whether it contained alcohol or not.
[315E] (2) It is undisputed that mother tincture was one of the components that was used in the preparation of Homeodent and it has been found that alcohol was there and mother tincture was added in the 297 medicinal preparation as its component.
[315G] M/s Baidyanath Aryurved Bhawan (Pvt.) Ltd. Jhansi vs The Excise Commissioner U.P., , referred to.
(3) The authorities charged with the duties of enforcing a particular Act are enjoined with the task of determining the question whether alcohol is contained therein or not.
[310D] (4) It has been determined by the authorities enjoined to enforce the 1955 Act that Homeodent was a medicinal and toilet preparation and liable to excise duty, and such finding has not been assailed on any cogent ground in any proper manner.
If that is the position, then it must be upheld that Homeodent was dutiable.
[317D] Union of India vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd., ; ; Mohanlal Magan Lal Bhavsar vs Union of India, and N.B. Sanjana, Assistant Collector of Central Excise, Bombay vs The Elphinston Spinning and Weav ing Mills Co. Ltd.; , , referred to.
(5) Provisions for rebate of duty on alcohol contained in section 4 of the 1955 Act show that multipoint tax on medicinal preparations containing alcohol was within the contemplation, otherwise there was no purpose in incorporat ing section 4 into the Act.
[316B] (6) Justice requires that provisions for claiming refund of this duty should be made more clear.
However, in the view of the facts and the circumstances that have happened, it is directed that if the petitioners are entitled to any refund of the duty already paid to the Central Government in view of the duty imposition now upheld against them in favour of the State Government such refund application should be entertained and considered in accordance with law.
[316E F] (7) In a case of this nature, where there is some doubt as to whether duty was payable to the Central Government under the 1944 Act or whether the item was dutiable under the 1955 Act, it would be just and proper and in consonance with justice infiscal administration that the Central Gov ernment should consider in the light of the facts found, if an application is made under section 11B of the 1944 Act, and circumstances of this case, the limitation period under section 11B of the 1944 Act should not apply.
This direction must be confined in the facts and the circumstances of this case only.
[316G H; 317A] 298 Citadel Fine Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. vs D.R.O., [1973] Mad.
Law Journal 99; Union of India vs Bombay Tyre Interna tional Ltd.; , and Assistant Collector of Central Excise vs Madras Rubber Factory Ltd., [1986] supp.
SCC 751, referred to.
(8) Government should consider feasibility of a machin ery under a Council to be formed under Article 263 of the Constitution to adjudicate and adjust the dues of the re spective Governments.
[318D] (9) This Court would not like to hear from a litigant in this country that the Government is coercing citizens of this country to make payment which the litigant is contend ing not leviable.
Government, of course, is entitled to enforce payment and for that purpose to take all legal steps but the Government, Central or State, cannot be permitted to play dirty games with the citizens to coerce them in making payments which the citizens were not legally obliged to make.
If any money is due to the Government, the Government should take steps but not take extra legal steps or manoeu vre.
Therefore, the right of renewal of the petitioner of licence must be judged and attended to in accordance with law and the occasion not utilised to coerce the petitioners to a course of action not warranted by law and procedure.
[318A C]
