The petitioners are retired railway employees who were covered by the Railway Contributory Provident Fund Scheme.
The Provident Fund Scheme was replaced in the year 1957 by the Pension Scheme.
The employees who entered Railway serv ice on or after 1.4.1957 were automatically covered by the Pension Scheme instead of the Provident Fund Scheme.
The employees who were already in service on 1.4.1957 were given an option either to retain the Provident Fund benefits or to switch over to the pensionary benefits.
The petitioners had opted for Contributory Provident Fund Scheme.
The petitioners ' case is that till 1.4.1957 or even sometime thereafter, the pensionary benefits and the alter native Contributory Provident Fund benefits were considered to be more or less equally beneficial; at the time when the option was given to choose between pension and Provident Fund, the employees had no idea that in future improvements would be made to either of them; and that as a result of the decision of the Railways to implement the judgment of this Court in D.S. Nakara vs Union of India, ; , and to extend the liberalised pension benefits even to those railway employees who had retired long before the liberali sations of pension were introduced, the pension retirees derived manifold benefits while P.F. retirees ' benefits remained stagnant.
The main legal contention of the petitioners is that the Railways had issued twelve notifications giving option to certain Provident Fund retirees after the respective cut off dates, to opt for the Pension Scheme 353 even after their retirement, but the same options were not given to other similarly situated Provident Fund retirees beyond the respective cut off dates, which was discriminato ry and hence violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
It is further contended that the notifications specifying cut off dates were arbitrary and un related to the objects sought to be achieved by giving of the option, and therefore violative of Article 14 and also of the principle laid down in Naka ra 's case.
According to counsel, the principle is that pension retirees could not be divided by such arbitrary cut off dates for the purpose of giving benefits to some and not to other similarly situated employees.
It is submitted that by analogy the principle is equally applicable to the Provident Fund retirees as a class.
On these grounds, it is prayed that applying the law laid down in Nakara 's case this Court should simply strike down or read down paragraph 3.1 of the 12th option dated 8.5.1987.
That paragraph said that all Contributory Provi dent Fund beneficiaries who were in service on 1.1.86 and who were still in service on the date of the order would be deemed to have come over to the pension scheme.
It is sub mitted that once this limiting requirement is removed all the Contributory Provident Fund beneficiaries shall be eligible and will be deemed to have come over to the pension scheme.
As the basis for striking or reading down paragraph 3.1 on Nakara 's ratio, it is urged that all the Railway employees both in service and pensioners constitute one family and must be treated as one class, and Government 's obligation to look after the retired Railway employees both under the pension scheme and the provident fund scheme being the same, they could not be treated differently, and any differential treatment will be discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In Nakara 's case the date arbitrarily chosen was struck down and, as a re sult, the revised formula for computing pension was made applicable to all the retired pensioners.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that the options were meant to give the Provident Fund retirees after the specified dates option to switch over to Pension Scheme and that each specified date had nexus with the reason for granting the particular option.
It is further submitted that the petitioners ' basic assumption is erroneous inasmuch as Nakara 's case did not hold that whenever there was a liber alisation of pension, aH other pension retirees and Provi dent Fund retirees must be given the option, and that the older system of pension or Provident Fund was always insuf ficient.
Dismissing the writ petitions and the Special Leave Petition, this Court, 354 HELD: (1) The doctrine of precedent, that is, being bound by a previous decision, is limited to the decision itself and as to what is necessarily involved in it.
It does not mean that this Court is bound by the various reasons given in support of it, especially when they contain "propo sitions wider than the case itself required." [374A B] (2) The enunciation of the reason or principle upon which a question before a court has been decided is alone binding as a precedent.
The ratio decidendi is the underly ing principle, namely, the general reasons or the general grounds upon which the decision is based on the test or abstract from the specific peculiarities of the particular case which gives rise to the decision.
[382A; 374D] Caledonian Railway Co. vs Walker 's Trustees, and Quin vs Leathern; , (502), referred to.
(3) Apart from Article 141 of the Constitution the policy of courts is to stand by precedent and not to disturb settled point.
When court has once laid down a principle of law as applicable to certain state of facts, it will adhere to that principle, and apply it to all future cases where facts are substantially the same.
[381F G] (4).
In Nakara 's case it was never required to be decid ed that all the retirees formed a class and no further classification was permissible.
At the same time it was never held in that case that both the pension retirees and the Provident Fund retirees formed a homogeneous class and that any further classification among them could be viola tive of Article 14.
On the other hand, the Court had clearly observed that it was not dealing with the problem of a "fund".
[380H] (5) The Railway Contributory Provident Fund is by defi nition a fund.
Besides, the Government 's obligation towards an employee under Contributory Provident Fund Scheme to give the matching contribution begins as soon as his account is opened and ends with his retirement when his rights qua the Government in respect of the Provident Fund is finally crystalized, and thereafter no statutory obligation contin ues.
Whether there still remained a moral obligation is a different matter.
On the other hand, under the Pension Scheme the Government 's obligation does not begin until the employee retires when only it begins and it continues till the death of the employee.
Thus, on the retirement of an employee Government 's legal obligation under the Provident Fund account ends while under the Pension Scheme it begins.
Therefore, the provident fund retirees could not be treated at par with the living 355 pensioners.
There was, therefore, no discrimination, and the question of striking down or reading down clause 3.1 of the 12th option does not arise.
[380H; 381A B; 382F] Union of India vs Ghansham Das & Ors., S.L.P. No. 5973 of 1988 and Union of India vs Bidhubhushan Malik, ; , distinguished.
(6) The rules governing the Provident Fund and its contribution are entirely different from the rules governing pension.
It would not, therefore, be reasonable to argue that what is applicable to the pension retirees must also equally be applicable to Provident Fund retirees.
[381C] (7) An imaginary definition of obligation to include all the Government retirees in a class was not decided and could not form the basis for any classification for the purpose of this case.
Nakara cannot, therefore, be an authority for this case.
[381E] D.S. Nakara vs Union of India, , explained.
(8) The argument is that the State 's obligation towards pension retirees is the same as that towards Provident Fund retirees.
That may be morally so.
But that was not the ratio decidendi of Nakara.
Legislation has not said so.
To say so legally would amount to legislation by enlarging the circum ference of the obligation and converting a moral obligation into a legal obligation.
[380C D] (9) The statements made on behalf of the respondents to the effect that cut off dates had nexus with the reason for granting the particular option, has been substantiated by facts.
The cut off dates were not arbitrarily chosen but had nexus with the purpose for which the option was given.
[382B D] (10) That the Pension Scheme and the Provident Fund Scheme are structurally different is also the view of the Central Pay Commissions, and hence ex gratia benefits have been recommended, which may be suitably increased.
[383E]
