The appellants plaintiffs are ' four brothers.
They filed a suit against defendant No. 1, Smt.
Mahboobunnisa.
Begum, (Since deceased and represented by legal heirs) for specific performance of oral contract of sale of a building in Hyd erabad The property was later sold by defendant No.1 to defendants Nos. 3 and 4.
The plaintiffs ' case was that plaintiffs Nos. 1 and 2, on behalf of themselves and their younger brothers, plain tiffs Nos. 3 and 4, had preliminary negotiations for the purchase of the suit property through Shri Arif Ali, advo cate; that eventually on 3rd May, 1979 they met Arif Ali and offered to pay Rs. 10,00,000, which was the price demanded by the owner; that Arif Ali, after getting the confirmation of the said offer from the first defendant on phone, said that the plaintiffs should meet the first defendant on 6th May, 1979 and that she would in the meanwhile purchase the stamp papers for making the formal agreement of sale incor porating the oral agreement arrived at on 3rd May, 1979; that on 6th May, 1979 the plaintiffs met the first defendant in the presence of Arif Ali and other, wherein the amount of earnest money to be paid, time for registration of the sale deed etc.
were decided; that at that meeting Shri Arif Ali, prepared first and the final drafts of the receipt in his own handwriting and handed over these drafts to the first plaintiff to get the final draft typed and duly stamped; that Arif Ali also delivered the stamp papers to the first plaintiff for typing the formal agreement of sale; that at the meeting held on 6th May, 1979 the plaintiffs Nos. 1 and 2 were also permitted to proceed with the publication of the notices in the newspapers; that after the public notice was published, the first defendant got a reply notice published and got 414 issued a legal notice dated 8.5.79 through her advocate, alleging that there was no agreement for sale; that thereaf ter, the first and second plaintiffs made sincere and re peated attempts to convince the first defendant that there was in existence a concluded contract for sale of the suit property, and that the execution of the agreement of sale was a mere formality.
On these allegations, the plaintiffs sought the relief of specific performance of the agreement.
The first defendant in her written statement stated that certain negotiations had taken place between her and plain tiffs Nos. 1 and 2, but the negotiations had failed.
It was further stated that there was no concluded or enforceable contract between the parties; that no price was settled or agreed upon and even the condition for advance payment and other terms and conditions were not agreed upon; that no final receipt or document had been prepared; and that the first defendant never asked for the purchase of stamp pa pers.
The Trial Court found that on the facts and circum stances of the case, it was established that the plaintiffs had entered into an oral contract of sale with the first defendant on 3.5.79.
The Trial Court accordingly decreed the plaintiffs ' suit for specific performance.
Two separate appeals were filed in the High Court.
A Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeals and set aside the decree passed by the trial court.
The High Court held that in order to determine the binding nature of a contract between the parties, the mere acceptance of sale price was not sufficient.
The High Court further observed that in the absence of evidence that the other terms also were discussed over the phone and settled on 3.5.79, it could cot be said that there was a concluded contract on 3rd May, 1979, and that it was obviously for that reason that a further meeting was fixed at the house of the 1st defendant on 6th May, 1979.The High Court did not agree with the contention of the plaintiffs that all the terms of contract, including the stipulation with regard to the payment of advance amount and the vendor 's responsibility to obtain the permission from the Urban Land Ceiling Authority, had been settled by 3.5.79 and what was left to be done on 6.5.1979 was merely to incorporate the terms already arrived at into a formal document on stamp paper.
Before this Court lit was contended on behalf of the appellants that an agreement for sale of immovable property could be made orally; that in the facts and circumstances of the case all the fundamental and vital terms of the contract were settled and concluded on 3.5.1979 itself and 415 even if the other details like mode of payment of considera tion, obtaining of no objection certificate from Land Ceil ing Authorities etc.
remained unsealed, the same could be settled subsequently or determined in accordance with sec.
55 of the Transfer of Property Act; that the only vital terms for a valid agreement of sale of an immovable property were the identity of the property and the price; that both these vital terms were settled and concluded on 3.5.79; and that the act of purchasing stamps on 3.5.79 by defendant No. 1 and the draft receipts, prepared by Shri Arif Ali, clearly lent support to the case of the plaintiffs.
Kollipara Sriramulu vs T. Aswathanarayana & Ors., ; and Nathulal vs Phoolchand, [1970] 2 SCR 854, relied upon.
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the respondents that no vital or fundamental terms of the con tract were discussed, agreed or settled on 3.5.79; that neither any earnest/advance money to be paid was settled, nor, any time for the payment of such money or time for execution of agreement of sale or final sale deed and its registration, was settled; that even if time may not be an essence of a term of contract for sale of immovable proper ty, it was a vital term without which no concluded contract could be arrived at; that any agreement in the third week of April, 1979 to the effect that defendant No. 1 would bring the no objection certificate from the Urban Land Ceiling Authorities was found not proved by the High Court and as such there was no question of applying the principles con tained in section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act; that a no objection certificate was necessary to be obtained from Urban Land Ceiling Authorities and the defendant No. 1 and her husband being old persons had clearly taken the stand that they would not bring such certificate; and that there fore no final and concluded contract took place on any date.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: (1) There is no requirement of law that an agree ment or contract of sale of immovable property should only be in writing.
However, in a case where the plaintiffs come forward to seek a decree for specific performance of con tract of sale of immovable property on the basis of an oral agreement along, heavy burden lies on the plaintiffs to prove that there was consensus ad idem between the parties for a concluded oral agreement for sale of immovable proper ty.
Whether there was such a concluded oral contract or not would be a question of fact to be determined in the facts and circumstances of each individual case.
It 416 has to be established by the plaintiffs that vital and fundamental terms for sale of immovable property were con cluded between the parties orally and a written agreement if any to be executed subsequently would only be a formal agreement incorporating such terms which had already been settled and concluded in the oral agreement.
[429B D] (2)From a perusal of the evidence it would be abun dantly clear that nothing was settled on 3.5.79 except the fact that the plaintiffs had conveyed their offer to pur chase the suit property for Rs. 10,00,000 and Shri Arif Ali, after speaking to defendant No. 1 on phone conveyed that she was willing to sell the property for Rs. 10,00,000.
[431B] (3) No averment was made in the plaint that defendant No. 1 had agreed to obtain the permission from the Urban Land Ceiling Authority in the meeting held in the third week of April, 1979.
The High Court was right in concluding that it was unbelievable that in the third week of April, 1979 when still there was a wide gap of Rs.2,00,000 in the price payable for the suit building, the parties would have stipu lated about the condition as to who should obtain the per mission under the Urban Land Ceiling Act.
[431C F] (4) The High Court rightly believed the contention of defendant No. 1 that the agreement fell through because the plaintiffs insisted that defendant No. 1 should obtain the permission from the Urban Land Ceiling Authority while defendant No. 1 did not agree for the same.
[432C] (5) The general principles contained in section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act regarding rights and liabili ties of buyer and seller can only apply in the absence of a contract to the contrary and not in a case where the parties consciously negotiated but failed in respect of any term or condition, as a result of which the agreement itself could not be settled or concluded.
[432E] (6) Once it is held/established in the present case that no agreement was finally concluded or settled on 6.5.79 and negotiations failed, as before this date it was never set tled that defendant No. 1 would bring the no objection certificate from Urban Land Ceiling Authority, there was no question of applying general principles contained in section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act.
[432F] Kollipara Sriramulu vs T. Aswathanarayana & Ors.
, ; , distinguished.
