The respondents in the civil appeals and the petitioner in the writ petition were landlords in Goa, whose lands were in the possession of the cultivating tenants.
Prior to the enactment of the Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy (5th Amendment) Act, 1976 the nature of the rights of the landlords and tenants were governed by the Goa.
Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1964.
By Chapter III of the 1964 Act the landlord was permitted to resume his land for bona fide personal cultivation, subject to a ceiling.
Chap ter III, however, was to come into force only on a notifica tion for the purpose, which was never issued.
The impugned 5th Amendment omitted Chapter III from the 1964 Act and in its place included Chapter IIA.
By the provisions of section 18A of Chapter IIA the land belonging to a landlord not in his cultivating possession on the tiller 's day got trans ferred to the tenant in possession for a price to be paid to the landlord.
The respondents filed writ applications in the Court of the Judicial Commissioner challenging the validity of the 5th Amendment Act.
The writ petitions were allowed by the Judicial Commissioner who held that the Amendment Act vio lated Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution and that the protection of Article 31A was not available as the scheme of the Amendment Act did not constitute agrarian reform.
498 During the pendency of the present appeals the impugned Amendment Act along with the main Act were included in the 9th Schedule of the Constitution.
The writ petition filed in this Court under Article 32 has challenged this constitu tional amendment as illegal and ultra vires.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the respondentslandlords that fixation of ceiling was the heart and soul of agrarian reform; that provisions regarding ceiling were essential for a statute enacted as a measure of agrarian reform and in their absence the same could not claim protection of Article 31A of the Constitution; that in the absence of provisions for ceiling the impugned Amendment Act had bestowed undeserved benefit on the tenants at the cost of the landlords, without reference to the respective areas in their possession.
In this connection it was submit ted that in many a case, a cultivating tenant in possession of lands under different landlords might be having far larger area of land than his landlords and there could not be any preference to clothing such a tenant with title to the land at the cost of his comparatively poor landlords.
Allowing the appeals and dismissing the writ petition this Court, HELD: (1) It is well settled that the protection of Article 31A is limited to the laws which serve the purpose of agrarian reform.
[504D] (2) It cannot be denied that the appropriately enacted statutes having provisions for fixing ceiling of holdings do fall in the category of legislation for agrarian reform, but that proposition does not say and cannot be interpreted as holding that fixing ceiling areas is a basis and essential feature of agrarian reform without which a law cannot be included in the category.
A proper statute even without including provisions regarding ceiling may be entitled to the protection of Article 31A provided it is otherwise a measure of agrarian reform.
[505C, F] Sri Ram Ram Narain Medhi vs The State of Bombay, [1959] Supp. 1 SCR 489; Godavari Sugar Mills Ltd. vs S.B. Kamble & Ors., ; and Balmadies Plantations Ltd. & Ant.
vs State of Tamil Nadu; , , referred to.
(3) The title to the land shall vest in the tiller and the landlord shall get the compensation.
Earlier also his right to resume the land for personal cultivation was con siderably restricted by the provisions of the 1964 Act.
As a result of the impugned 5th Amendment Act he has been 499 divested of this limited right for a price, and the tiller shall no more be under a threat of dispossession.
The im pugned provisions must therefore be accepted as a measure of land reform.
[509G H; 510A] (4) The argument of the respondents that in absence of provisions fixing ceiling on the area of land which can be held by a person a statute cannot be accepted as a measure of land reform is, accordingly, rejected.
The 5th Amendment Act is.
therefore, entitled to the protection of Article 31A and it cannot be struck down on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution.
[510A B] Sri Ram Ram Narain Medhi vs The State of Bombay, [1959] Supp. 1 SCR 489; Sonapur Tea Co. Ltd. vs Must.
Mazirunnes sa; , ; Purushothaman Nambudiri vs The State of Kerala, [1962] Supp. 1 SCR 753; Fida Ali & Ors.
vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, ; ; Dattatraya Govind Mahajan vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; K.K. Kochuni vs The State of Madras, and Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing Company vs Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. & Anr., ; , distinguished.
