By Finance Act, 1987, clause (10 C) was inserted in section 10 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The effect of this clause was to grant tax exemption to employees of the public sector in respect of the amount received under the voluntary retirement scheme approved by the Central Government.
The petitioners an employee of a private sector company and the trade union of the said private company flied a writ petition in this 442 court challenging the validity of clause (10 C) contending; (i) the denial of benefit of tax exemption to employees of private sector company being arbitrary and discriminatory, the impugned clause was unconstitutional as violative of Article 14: (ii) the heading 'Welfare Measures ' to the Memorandum explaining the provisions in the Finance Bill 1987 proposing insertion of clause (10 C) in section 10 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 was decisive of the object of its enactment; the tax benefit being in the nature of welfare measure the impugned clause must be so construed as to apply to all employees equally, whether of the public sector or private sector in order to uphold its validity.
Dismissing the petition, this Court, HELD: There is a distinction between the public and private sectors.
The Government or the public sector under takings are as a distinct class separate from those in the private sector and the fact that the profit earned in the former is for public benefit instead of private benefit, provides an intelligible differentia from the social point of view which is of prime importance for the national econo my.
Thus, there exists an intelligible differentia between the two categories which has a rational nexus with the main object of promoting the national economic policy or the public policy.
This element also appears in the impugned enactment itself wherein 'economic viability of such compa ny ' is specified as the most relevant circumstance for grant of approval of the scheme by the Central Government.
This intrinsic element in the provision itself supports the view that the main object thereof is to promote and improve the health of the public sector companies even though its effect is a benefit of its employees.
The economic status of em ployees of a public sector company who get the benefit of the provision is also lower as compared to their counterpart in the private sector.
Viewed in this perspective, the very foundation of the challenge to the impugned provision on the basis of economic equality of employees in both sectors is non existent.
Once the stage is reached where the differen tiation is rightly made between a public sector company and a private sector company and that too essentially on the ground of economic viability of the public sector company and other relevant circumstances, the argument based on equality does not survive.
This is independent of the dis parity in the compensation package of employees in the private sector and the public sector.
The argument of dis crimination is based on initial equality between the two classes alleging bifurcation thereafter between those who stood integrated earlier as one class.
This basic assumption being fallacious, the question of any hostile discrimination by granting the benefit only to a few in the same class denying the same to those left out does not arise.
[465D H; 466A B] 443 2.
The purposes of the impugned legislation include reduction in the existing gap between the lower compensation package in public sector and the higher compensation package of the counterpart in private sector in addition to prevent ing misuse of the benefit in private sector which is not subject to the control of administration by Government like that in the public sector.
One of the purposes is streamlin ing the public sector to cure it of one of its ailments of overstaffing.
The provision is an incentive to the unwanted personnel to seek voluntary retirement thereby enabling the public sector to achieve the true object indicated.
The personnel seeking voluntary retirement no doubt get a tax benefit but then that is an incentive for seeking voluntary retirement and at any rate that is the effect of the provi sion or its fallout and not its true object.
The real dis tinction between the true object of an enactment and the effect thereof, even though appearing to be blurred at times, has to be borne in mind, particularly in a situation like this.
[466F H; 467A B] 2.1 Keeping in view the true object of the impugned enactment, there is no doubt that employees of the private sector who are left out of the ambit of the impugned provi sion do not fall in the same class as employees of the public sector and the benefit of the fall out of the provi sion being available only to the public sector employees cannot render the classification invalid or arbitrary.
The other clauses in section of the Act further show that the scheme of section 10 contemplates a distinction between employees based on the category of their employer.
This classification cannot, therefore, be faulted.
[67B C] Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd. vs Government of Kerala vs Union of India & Ors.
, Judgments Today ; L.K. Jha Memorial Lecture, delivered on the 6th December 1988, by Shri R.N. Malhotra, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, on "Growth and Current Fiscal Challenges", re ferred to.
Hindustan Antibiotics vs Workmen, ; and S.K. Dutta, 1.
T.O. vs Lawrence Singh Ingty, , distinguished and held inapplicable.
R.D. Shetty vs International Airport Authority of India, ; , cited.
2.2 In view of the simultaneous definition of 'public sector company ' in the Income Tax Act, there can be no occasion to construe this 444 expression differently without which a private sector compa ny cannot be included in it.
It is, therefore, not possible to construe the impugned provision while upholding its validity in such a manner as to include a private sector company also within its ambit.
[468C D] 3.
The principles of valid classification are that those grouped together in one class must possess a common charac teristic which distinguishes them from those excluded from the group; and this characteristic or intelligible differen tia must have a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the enactment.
[449D] Re The Special Courts Bill, 1978, , referred to.
The latitude for classification in a taxing is much greater; and in order to tax something it is not necessary to tax everything.
These basic postulates have to be borne in mind while determining the constitutional validity of a taxing provision challenged on the ground of discrimination.
1451C] P.H. Ashwathanarayana vs State of Karnataka, [1989] (Supp.) 1 S.C.C. 696; Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association of India vs Union of India, [1989] 178 I.T.R. 97; Kerala Hotel and Restaurant Association & Ors.
vs State of Kerala & Ors.
, ; and 1. T.O. vs N. Takin Roy Rymbai, SC, referred to.
East India Tobacco Co. vs Andhra Pradesh, ; ; Vivian Joseph Ferriera vs Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, ; and Jaipur Hosiery Mills vs State of Rajasthan, ; , cited.
The Court should, therefore, look beyond the obsten sible classification and to the purpose of the law and apply the test of 'palpable arbitrariness ' in the context of the felt needs of the times and societal exigencies informed by experience to determine reasonableness of the classifica tion.
[453B] 5.1 It is necessary to discern the true purpose or object of the impugned enactment because it is only with reference to the true object of the enactment that the existence of a rational nexus of the differentia on which the classification is based, with the object sought to be achieved by the enactment, can be examined to test the validity of the classification.
[453E F] 445 5.2 There is a clear distinction between the legislative intention and the purpose or object of the legislation.
While the purpose or object of the legislation is to provide a remedy for the malady, the legislative intention relates to the meaning or exposition of the remedy as enacted.
While dealing with the validity of a classification, the rational nexus of the differentia on which the classification is based has to exist with the purpose of object of the legis lation, so determined.
[453H; 454A] Francis Bennion 's Statutory Interpretation, 1984 edi tion, page 237, referred to.
For determining the purpose or object of the legisla tion, it is permissible to look into the circumstances which prevailed at the time when the law was passed and which necessitated the passing of that law.
For the limited pur pose of appreciating the background and the antecedent factual matrix leading to the legislation, it is permissible to look into the statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill which actuated the step to provide a remedy for the then existing malady.
[454B C] A.
Thangal Kunju Musaliar vs M. Venkitachalam Potti & Anr., ; ; State of West Bengal vs Union of India, [1964] 1 S.C.R. 371 and Pannalal Binjraj vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
6.1 To sustain the presumption of constitutionality, consideration may be had even to matters of common knowl edge; the history of the times; and very conceivable state of facts existing at the time of legislation which can be assumed.
Even though for the purpose of construing the meaning of the enacted provision, it is not permissible to use these aids, yet it is permissible to look into the historical facts and surrounding circumstances for ascer taining the evil sought to be remedied.
The distinction between the purpose or object of the legislation and the legislative intention is significant in this exercise to emphasise the availability of larger material to the Court for reliance when determining the purpose or object of the legislation as distinguished from the meaning of the enacted provision.
[454F H] 7.
An explanatory memorandum is usually 'not an accurate guide of the final Act '.
[455C] Francis Bennion 's Statutory Interpretation, 1984 Edn.
page 529,referred to. 446
