The respondent landlady filed a suit for eviction of the appellanttenant on the ground of default in payment of rent.
The appellant deposited the rent and made an application under section 17(2) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956.
The Trial Court determined the rent payable and di rected deposit of the arrears of rent.
The suit was subse quently compromised.
The appellant again committed a default in payment of rent and the respondent filed another suit for eviction.
The appellant filed petition under section 17(2) and (2A), disputing the amount of rent and also seeking permission to deposit rent by installments.
The Trial Court decided the rent payable and directed the appellant to deposit the arrears of rent in monthly installments by the 15th of each month.
Thereupon the appellant tenant claimed protection under section 17(4) which was resisted by the landlady on the ground that (i) the protection cannot be granted as per the proviso to section 17(4), since he has already been granted relief once in the earlier suit, and (ii) Appel lant 's non compliance with the Court 's order in depositing the rent disentitled him from claiming relief under section 17(4).
The Trial Court decreed the respondent 's suit and the first appellate Court as well as the High Court confirmed the same by dismissing the appeals preferred by the appel lant.
611 In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that since the follow up action of the Court under section 17(3) viz. striking off the defence has not been ordered, it should be presumed that the delay in depositing the rent was condoned thereby entitling the appellant to relief under section 17(4).
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The mere fact that the Court has not passed an order striking off the defence as contemplated under Section 17(3) because of the tenant 's failure to deposit within the time specified in the order passed under Section 17(2) and 17(2A), does not necessarily lead to a presumption that the time was extended.
On the other hand Section 17(2B) which is a mandatory provision lays down that no application for extension of time for the deposit or payment of any amount under clause (a) of sub section (2A) shall be entertained unless it is made before the expiry of the time specified in sub section (1).
[615H; 616C] In the instant case no application for extension of time was made by the appellant.
Therefore, in the absence of such application it cannot be contended that the Court is deemed to have condoned the delay.
[616G] Since deposit of rent as per Court 's order under Section 17(2) and (2A) is the condition precedent for seeking relief under section 17(4) the appellant who has not fulfilled the same cannot claim the said relief.
The orders of the Court below are therefore confirmed.
[616H]
