The appellant 's father executed a Will, just one day prior to his death, bequeathing all his property in favour of the sons of appellant 's only sister.
The testator was ill and lived with the beneficiaries six months prior to his death.
Though the testator could sign, he put his thumb impression on the Will.
The disinherited daughter challenged the genuineness of the Will on the ground that there were suspicious circum stances and the propounder took active part in the execution of the Will.
The Courts below right up to High Court held that the execution of the Will was beyond doubt.
Aggrieved, she has preferred this appeal, by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Although freedom to bequeath one 's own proper ty amongst Hindus is absolute both in extent and person, including rank stranger, yet to have testamentary capacity or a disposable mind what is required of propounder to establish is that the testator at the time of disposition knew and understood the property he was disposing and per sons who were to be beneficiaries of his disposition.
Pru dence, however, requires reason for denying benefit to those who too were entitled to bounty of testator as they had similar claims on him.
Absence of it may not invalidate a Will but it shrouds the disposition with suspicion as 814 it does not give any inkling to the mind of testator to enable the Court to judge if the disposition was voluntary act.
Taking active interest by propounder in execution of Will raises another strong suspicion.
Mere execution of Will by producing scribe or attesting witnesses or proving genu ineness of testator 's thumb impressions by themselves was not sufficient to establish validity of Will unless suspi cious circumstances, usual or special, are ruled out and the Court 's conscience is satisfied not only on execution, but its authenticity.
[815D G] H. Venkatachalliah vs
N. Themmajamma; , and Kalyan Singh vs Smt.
Chhoti & Ors., , relied on.
1.2 Happy marriage or financially well settlement of appellant could not add to genuineness of Will.
The High Court in recording this finding, completely misdirected itself.
More so, when no finding of dire circumstances of respondent to help out of which testator dis inherited the other daughter, was recorded by any courts.
[817A B] 2.
Although this Court does not normally interfere with findings of fact recorded by courts below, but if the find ing is recorded by erroneous application of principle of law, and is apt to result in miscarriage of justice then this Court will be justified in interfering under Article 136.
[817E F] Malkani vs Jamadar, AIR 1987 SC 767, distinguished.
