The respondent imported certain goods and claimed in its Bills of Entry that the imported goods fell under Tariff Item No. 84.60.
The Customs Authorities rejected the claim by holding that the goods were classifiable under Tariff Item No. 73.15(2).
The respondents preferred an appeal before the Collector of Customs which was also dismissed.
Thereafter, the respondent filed a second appeal before the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal con tending that in view of the earlier decision of a Bench of three members of the Tribunal in Bakelite Hylam Ltd. Bombay E.L.T. 240 an identical classification ought to have been adopted by the Customs authorities for identical goods.
By its order dated 22.10.1986 a Bench of two members of the Tribunal stated that they doubted the correctness of the earlier decision of a Bench of the three members of the Tribunal and they referred the case to the President of the Tribunal for constituting a larger Bench.
By its order dated 4.3.1987 the President of the Tribunal referred the case to a larger Bench of five members.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the orders of the Bench of two members and that of the President of the Tribunal, which struck down both the orders by holding that the Bench of two members ought to have followed the earlier decision of the larger Bench of 3 judges and a reference of the case to a still larger Bench was contrary to judicial precedent and judicial discipline.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the Union of India that Section 129 C of the empowers the Presi 790 dent of the Tribunal to constitute larger Benches to resolve conflicts in opinion arising between members of a Bench or between Benches of the Tribunal.
The Tribunal has ample powers to regulate its own procedure, apart from the express provisions of the statute in that behalf.
On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that the Tribunal is a creature of the Statute.
Its jurisdiction is limited to the specific powers conferred by the statute.
It has no inherent jurisdiction and its powers are not plenary and are limited to the express provisions contained in the statute.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
There is no doubt that the Tribunal functions as a. Court within the limits of its jurisdiction.
It has all the powers conferred expressly by the statute.
Further more, being a judicial body, it has all those incidental and ancillary powers which are necessary to make fully effective the express grant of statutory powers.
Certain powers are recognised as incidental and ancillary, not because they are inherent in the Tribunal, nor because its jurisdiction is plenary, but because it is the legislative intent that the power which is expressly granted in the assigned field of jurisdiction is efficaciously and meaningfully exercised.
[794F G] 1.1 Where an Act confers a jurisdiction, it impliedly also grants the power of doing all such acts, or employing such means, as are essentially necessary to its execution.
[795A] Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes, Eleventh edition and Income Tax Officer, Cannanote vs M.K. Mohammad Kunhi, 15, referred to. 2.
It is true that sub section (5) refers to difference of opinion arising amongst members of a Bench in a particu lar case, and not specifically where the members of a Bench doubt the correctness of an earlier decision.
However, section 129 C confers power of reference upon the President.
That power should be construed to be wide enough to enable the President to make a reference where members of a Bench find themselves unable to decide a case according to what they perceive to be the correct law and fact because of an impediment arising from an earlier decision with which they cannot honestly agree.
In such cases, it is necessary for the healthy functioning of the Tribunal that the President should have the requisite authority to refer the case to a larger 791 Bench.
That is a power which is implied in the express grant authorising the President to constitute Benches of the Tribunal for effective and expeditious discharge of its functions.
[795H; 796A B] 2.1 It is true that a Bench of two members must not lightly disregard the decision of another Bench of the same Tribunal on an identical question.
This is particularly true when the earlier decision is rendered by a larger Bench.
The rationale of this rule is the need for continuity, certainty and predictability in the administration of justice.
Persons affected by decisions of Tribunals or Courts have a right to expect that those exercising judicial functions will follow the reason or ground of the judicial decision in the earlier cases on identical matters.
Classification of particular goods adopted in earlier decisions must not be lightly disregarded in subsequent decisions, lest such judicial inconsistency should shake public confidence in the adminis tration of justice.
It is, however, equally true that it is vital to the administration of justice that those exercising judicial power must have the necessary freedom to doubt the correctness of an earlier decision if and when subsequent proceedings bring to light what is perceived by them as an erroneous decision in the earlier case.
In such circum stances, it is but natural and reasonable and indeed effica cious that the case is referred to a larger Bench.
[795B E]
