The Syndicate Bank Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Employees Associated representing the interests of SC/ST employees throughout the country and three Assistant Manag ers of the Bank have filed this petition under article 32 of the constitution of India.
Their case is as follows: That Group 'A ' Officers posts are class I posts with Grade Scale I to Grade Scale VII.
Criteria for promotion from Grade I to the next Grade and onwards is regulated by a promotion policy dated 17.9.1985.
Being a nationalised Bank all policy decisions are controlled and governed by rules framed by the Central Government from time to time.
In order to implement the principles enshrined in the Constitution of granting benefit of members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, the Government has evolved the policy of reservation for them in the ratio of 5% and 7 1/2% respectively both at the time of initial recruitment as well as at the time of promo tions in all government establishments.
Though this policy was extended to the Banking Industry in 1972 it remained restricted to appointments by direct recruitment only.
Later the Central Govt.
by its D.C. letter dated 31.12.1977 ad dressed to all the nationalised banks required them to implement the reservation policy to promotional posts also.
But the respondent bank did not follow the policy within the Officers cadre on the mistaken impression that the reserva tion in promotional cadres through selection is barred.
To this the petitioners submitted that the Home Ministry 's O.M. issued as early as on 26.3.1970 clearly provided 714 reservations for SC & ST Officers ' promotion within class I posts including officers drawing a basic pay of Rs.2,000 per month or less.
This was later followed by O.M. dated 23.12.1974 issued by the department of Personnel and Admin istrative Reforms to all the Ministries on the same lines.
However the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic affairs (Banking Division) issued a circular dated 30.5.1981 to all the nationalised banks that there is no reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in 'Promotion by Selection ' within the officers cadre; that the concessions to SC & ST employees mentioned in Home Ministry 's O.M. dated 26.3.1970 would be available to them in ' Promotion by Selection ' to posts within the officers cadre upto scale III only and all the banks were required to implement instruc tions contained in Home Ministry 's O.Ms.
dated 26.3.1970 and 23.12.1974 with such modifications as may be necessary in the light of the circular dated 30.5.1981.
The petitioners have contended that the Central Government wrongly and erroneously interpreted these circulars in taking the view that there was no reservation in the promotional posts within the officers cadre.
Finally they say that despite the unequivocal directions from the Govt.
of India, Ministry of Finance contained in its letter dated 28.11.1986 to all the nationalised banks clarifying the position in regard to reservations for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for promotions and the decision of this Court in Bihar State Harijan Kalyan Parishad vs Union of India & Ors., which applied in all force to the case of the petitioners, the Respondent Bank failed to make reservations within the officers cadre and continues to follow the selection method of promotion which has lead to the filing of this Petition.
Allowing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: Even though the promotion posts are based on selection method, the rule of reservation will supply to posts within group 'A ' and the benefit of reservation policy to members of SC and ST cannot be denied on the ground that promotional posts are to be filled by method of selection.
Government of India committed a clear mistake in not apply ing the principle already decided in Bihar State Harijan Kalyan Parishad 's case to the Syndicate Bank and in not giving it a clear direction this regard.
[725G H; 726A] There can be no manner of doubt that the management of the Syndicate Bank was not at fault as they were bound by the instructions and policy laid down by the government of India and in the absence of a clear direction from the Government it was not possible for them to grant relief to the SC/ST employees of the bank.
[726B] 715 Though Group 'A ' posts were selection posts still the reservation policy is applicable to such posts and the respondents are directed to compute the backlog of unfilled reserved quota available to SC/ST officers in the promotion al posts with effect from 1.1.1978, the date of introduction of reservation policy in the respondent bank.
The respond ents are further directed to grant promotion to the SC/ST employees of the Syndicate Bank with all consequential benefits of salary and allowances from the respective dates they should have been promoted, after applying the roster system in their favour.
[726D E] Bihar State Harijan Kalval Parishad vs Union of India & Ors. ; , followed.
