For the purposes of a housing project, some land was acquired by way of a notification under the Land Acquisition Act.
The Respondent Society claiming that it had entered into a contract with the owners for purchasing the very property, applied for exemption under the Urban Ceiling Act.
The exemption prayed for was refused initially, but was granted later.
Both the Respondent Society and the owners of the said land filed Writ Petitions before the High Court for quashing of the acquisition proceedings.
The acquisition was upheld by Single Judge, but on appeal by Respondent Society, the Full Bench held the acquisition proceedings to be inopera tive.
Against these orders, the appellant Society which had entered into an agreement with the Municipal Corporation, and as such interested in the acquisition, has preferred the appeals.
Meanwhile, the State Government withdrew the exemption granted under the Urban Ceiling Act.
One of the owners filed a Writ Petition before the High Court challenging the with drawal.
The High Court took note of the fact that the mat ters were pending in this Court and dismissed the petition.
Aggrieved against the order of dismissal, a petition for special leave has been filed.
The Respondent Society also moved the High Court by way of a Writ Petition challenging the withdrawal of exemption, which was pending and this Court transferred the same to itself, to be heard with the pending cases.
On 7.8.1985, this Court gave time to Counsel to consider various compromise proposals.
However, the desired compro mise did not come through.
On 23.8.1988 this Court passed an order holding that the 783 acquisition proceedings have to be revived.
However, no formal disposal was recorded since a settlement was being negotiated.
Even after about 2 yrs.
the settlement did not fructify.
Remitting the matters to the High Court, HELD: 1.
If the settlement does not fructify, the effect of the decision that the acquisition proceedings are to revive, would be that the claim to the land by Respondent Society would come to an end.
In that event, at the most that Society would only be entitled to such compensation as may be awardable in law.
If the acquisition proceeds the appellant Society and the Municipal Corporation would have to workout their mutual rights.
Apart from these, the two writ petitions challenging the withdrawal of the exemption by order dated 23.6.1983 would also have to be disposed of on merits.
In view of the fact that the owner 's writ peti tion was dismissed not on merits but on other considera tions, the said dismissal should be vacated and that writ petition should be heard along with Writ Petition No. 6500/83 as a common question arises for determination.
The order of the High Court dated 13th of June, 1988, is set aside and the High Court is directed to dispose of the Writ Petition afresh on merits.
[787B D] 2.
If the High Court is of the opinion that the matter should be settled and the entire land of the owners amount ing to 18 acres and 3 gunthas should be divided between the two Societies, it will be free to do so if Government also agrees thereto.
Since that arrangement would be with the consent of the State Government it would in such an event be open to the High Court to nullify the acquisition.
The observations made at different stages during the pendency of the proceedings in this Court may not be taken to be expres sion of opinion on merits and the High Court would be free to deal with the matter on its own discretion and in accord ance with law.
[787F G] 3.
In the event of the settlement not coming through, the acquisition proceedings would continue under the law and be concluded by the Land Acquisition Officer in accordance with law.
In the event of the acquisition working out, the two writ petitions against the withdrawal of exemption would not be sustainable as the land would vest in Government as a result of acquisition.
It would be open to the Government or the acquiring authority to take into account the effect of the laws of urban ceiling.
[787H; 788A] 4.
The civil appeals are also remitted to the High Court limited to 784 the consideration of the proposals ' for settlement in the light of the observations made in this Judgment.
Otherwise, they must be taken to have been concluded in this Court on the finding that acquisition proceedings are valid and shall be entitled to continue.
The special leave petition is disposed of with a direction that the writ petition in the High Court shall be re heard.
The transferred writ petition remitted to the High Court for disposal, [788B C] 5.
Money, if any, in deposit in the Registry of this Court to the credit of the parties shall be transferred to the High Court and shall be subject to such directions as the High Court may issue upon a final decision of the rele vant issues arising in the proceedings.
[788D]
