The respondent, a bus conductor in the appellant State Road Transport Corporation, was dismissed on the charge that he had erased the way bills and resold some already sold tickets.
He filed a suit challenging the dismissal order on the ground that carbon copies of certain important documents were not made available to him during the enquiry and this had caused serious prejudice to him.
The trial court dis missed the suit and the first appellate court also dismissed his appeal.
However, the High Court allowed his second appeal, and held that the important documents had been purposely withheld, which had resulted prejudice to the employee.
The appellant Corporation filed a Special Leave Petition before this Court, contending that the High Court had gross ly erred in interfering in second appeal with the concurrent findings, and that the failure to produce the carbon copies of some of the documents did not cause any prejudice and.
at any rate, it was a question of fact.
Disposing of the appeal, by special leave, this Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court has not committed any error which warrants interference.
1780E] The respondent 's plea has been that from the carbon copies he would have shown that he could not have carried on the erasures or made false entries and, therefore; non supply of these carbon copies had caused great prejudice to him.
However, the trial court and the first appellate court held that no prejudice was caused since he was 778 shown the originals.
The High Court no doubt has considered this aspect in detail and in doing so referred to the con tents of various documents.
From this alone it cannot be said that the High Court has not kept in view the scope of second appeal.
[779G H; 780A B] Since the employee has been throughout pleading that he did not make the erasures or any other false entry, it naturally became necessary to see whether they were also found in carbon copies.
Therefore, the High Court considered the various figures and entries in the originals in which such erasures were alleged to have been made by the employee and eventually observed that the entire enquiry was based on some of these documents, and if a carbon copy of the docu ments had been shown, the authority may well have been convinced that the charge levelled against him was not correct, and that, therefore, the non supply of these docu ments had caused prejudice.
[780 D E] 2.
The litigation is going on for the last 25 years and the respondent has already reached the age of superannua tion.
Hence the parties need not be driven to go through the indefinite execution proceedings again for backwages and allowances and ends of justice require that a lump sum compensation should be granted.
Accordingly, a lump sum amount of Rs.35,000 is awarded and the amount should be paid to the respondent without deducting the income tax.
The respondent may make an application under Section 89 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 for spreading over this amount, and the concerned Income Tax Officers should also give the necessary relief without any further enquiry.
[780F; 781C E] Sohan Singh vs Union of India & Anr., and Sundaram Motors Pvt. Ltd. vs Ameerjan & Ant., , relied on.
