The appellants and the respondents who were originally appointed as Junior Engineers in the Andhra Pradesh Elec tricity Subordinate Service, were subsequently transferred along with other Junior Engineers to the State Electricity Board with effect from October 1, 1973 on the basis of options exercised by them to join the Board.
in response to G.O.Ms.
No. 1651 dated 28.12.1972.
The terms and conditions of transfer were stipulated in G.O.Ms.
No. 1166 dated 7.11.1973.
On the date of transfer, the seniority list of the Junior Engineers had not been finalised.
However a seniority list prepared by the State Public Service Commission, taking into account the deletion of rule 22(ii)(c) of the Andhra Pradesh State and Subordinate Rules with retrospective effect from April 1, 1964, had been circulated among the concerned Junior Engineers for objections, if any, and most of them.
including the petitioners and respondents, had submitted their objections before October 1, 1973.
After the transfers were effected, the State Electricity Board prepared a revised seniority list but the High Court struck down the same on the ground that the Board had no power to alter the seniority of the transferred employees, whose seniority was fixed by the Government.
However, it observed that if the Government had retained any power under the transfer order it would be at liberty to revise the seniority list.
In view of the aforesaid observations, the Government issued show cause notices once again to all the persons belonging to backward classes (the respondents) for revising the seniority.
913 In a writ petition filed by the respondents for re straining the Government from revising the seniority, a Single judge of the High Court, upheld the power of the Government to revise the seniority list.
During the pendency of appeal before the Division Bench, the Government issued a final revised seniority list, vide G.O. No. 233 of May 23, 1981.
Thereafter, the Division Bench quashed the revised seniority list on the grounds that there was a declaration in G.O. of November 7, 1973 that the exercise of the option was final, and since the Government and the Board had acted upon the option exercised by the employees and transferred them from Government service to the service of the Board, they were estopped from revising the seniority and similar ly, the employees were estopped from claiming that their seniority should be revised on any grounds whatsoever, that since the transfers were on "as is" basis which included seniority, the seniority could not be disturbed on any ground whatsoever, that the Government had no power to alter the seniority of the employees after October 1, 1973 since they had ceased to be Government employees, and the power given under Rule 36A of the Rules to review the seniority could not be exercised to rectify the mistake, and that merely because the Board had no jurisdiction to disturb the seniority so fixed, it did not follow that the Government continued to have jurisdiction in respect of those employees who were no more its employees.
This decision was challenged in the appeals before this Court.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The Government had reserved the power, as it had every right to do so, to change the seniority of the employees as on October 1, 1973 or prior to that date when they were employees of the Government.
It had not reserved the power, as it could not, to change the seniority of the employees after October 1, 1973.
Even if it so willed, it could not have reserved power to change the seniority of the employees after October 1, 1973.
Conversely the Government had always the power to revise the seniority list of the employees as on October 1. 1973 on account of reasons accru ing prior to the said date.
To do it, it was not necessary for it to reserve any power, for it had inherent power to do so.
[925B; 924H; 925A] 1.2 By a mere reading of two Government Orders, and particularly, G.O. No. 1166 it is clear that seniority of the appellants as on October 1, 1973 was liable to be re vised by the Government at any time.
Clause (3) of paragraph 6 makes it clear that the names in the Annexure sent along with the order were not arranged in the order of seniority, 914 and did not.
therefore, confer any right for seniority on that basis.
This shows that the Government had not finalised the seniority list and the list which was sent to the Board with the said order was a provisional one.
The Government had to say so.
because, admittedly, as on that day the seniority of the employees was in a flux on account of various reasons.
viz., non receipt of options of non gazet ted technical staff and pendency of appeals of the gazetted technical staff, like the appellants and non technical staff against the Common Gradation Lists prepared as per the recommendations of various committees with reference to seniority position between November 1, 1956 and October 1, 1973, sequel to reorganisation of the States and amalgama tion of different regions in the State.
Besides.
the Govern ment could not have ignored the position that as on October 1, 1973 the dispute with regard to the seniority of the appellants and the respondents was pending in the High Court right from November 1966 when, 10 Junior Engineers including some of the present appellants had filed Writ Petition giving rise to further proceedings.
In these circumstances, it cannot be held that whereas the Government reserved power and could reserve power to revise the seniority list on account of the disputes about seniority arising out of the States re organisation and/or on account of the non receipt of options of the non gazetted technical staff etc.it did not or could not reserve such power to meet the situations arising out of the orders of the courts in the disputes pending between the appellants and the respondents.
There fore, even if no such powers were specifically reserved in the said Government order, the Government would have been obliged to revise the seniority list to comply with such orders.
[923B H; 924A] 1.3 Since the Government had not sent the list of the employees to the Board arranged according to seniority, the expression "as is" in clause (3) of paragraph 6 of the Government Order in the circumstances referred to service conditions other than seniority.
Even if the word "etc" at the end of clause (4) was construed to exclude the dispute with regard to seniority pending in the court, that would not have exempted the Government from complying with the orders of the Court.
To hold that the Government by its own order, such as the present one, could prevent operation of the order of any court is to invite conflict in the juris diction of the executive and the judiciary.
Similarly, the Government could not have forced the employees to accept the term with regard to the seniority as an immutable one.
In fact the said Government Order did not lay down any such term.
Hence, it cannot be said that the appellants had accepted the seniority as was forwarded by the Government to the Board and they were estopped thereafter from agitating against it.
The decision of the Court being the law, no plea of 915 estoppel could be raised against it.
[925C F] 1.4 It is well settled that there cannot be a right without a remedy.
Law abhors such vacuum.
But, there are two periods with respect to which the power to alter seniority has to be examined.
The first period is upto October 1, 1973 and the second commences thereafter.
In the first period, there was a relationship of employer employee between the Government and the transferred employees.
Hence, the Govern ment had every right to correct or amend the seniority of the employees upto that date.
If, therefore, the Government had advertently or inadvertently committed any error in preparing the seniority list upto October 1, 1973, or be cause of the decisions of the courts it had to amend the said seniority list, not only it had power to do so but it was the only authority which could do it.
The seniority list which was corrected by the Government was the seniority list as on or before October 1, 1973.
[925H; 926A B] In the circumstances, the decision of the High Court suffers from legal infirmities and has to be set aside.
The revised seniority list sent by the Government to the Board with Government Order No. 233 of May 23, 1981 is restored and the respondent Electricity Board is directed to act on the same.
[926C]
