The appellants are junior doctors who were in a house job on 22.8.1989.
They had been admitted to post graduate degree course (second year) in the M.L.N. Medical COllege under the "Residency Scheme" for junior doctors, which was notified on 22.8.1989 but was given retrospective effect from 1.8.1987.
They, however, lost their seats as a result of the High Court 's decision allowing the writ petitions flied by the respondent doctors whose applications for admission to the same course had been rejected.
The modifications introduced by the Residency Scheme needed certain transitory provisions being made for two purposes.
The first was to devise a formula of equating between the old and the new systems.
This was done by redes ignating all students, junior doctors, house officers and others in position in the manner set out in para 5 of the scheme.
The second provision necessary was in regard to their admission to the post graduate courses.
This was done by the second sub para of para 5.
The respondent doctors who had done their M.B.B.S., internship and house job by April 1988 and who had even obtained admission, in March 1989, into a diploma course, sought admission in the M.L.N. College into the second year of a degree course by taking advantage of clause 5 of the Residency Scheme.
Their applications were rejected on the ground that the clause 5 of the scheme was a transitory provision intended to benefit only persons who were on a house job as on 22.8.1989; they alone could take advantage of the scheme as soon as they completed the house job; and not persons who had completed their house job much earlier to that date.
Thereupon, these doctors filed writ petitions in the High Court.
A Division Bench of the High Court al lowed the petitions and held that clause 5 extended the privilege of admission to 896 the second year of the degree course to all persons who were working as house officers on or after 1st August, 1987.
The State as well as certain doctors who were in house jobs as on 22.8.1989 and who had been admitted to post graduate degree courses on the basis of the State 's inter pretation of the scheme but lost their seats as a result of the High Court 's decision, have preferred these appeals.
So far as the present appeals are concerned, all parties have proceeded on the footing that the residency scheme is a valid one and that it envisaged that a person who had com pleted house job for one year could get admission into the second year of the course (whether degree or diploma).
The only controversy is whether this admission was open only to those persons who were in a house job as on 22.8.1989 and had completed it before 30.10.1989.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: (1) There is no rule which prohibits a person (even though he may already be a student in a post graduate course) from seeking admission to the second year of junior residency, the eligibility clauses for admission to which he fulfills.
The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that they could not be excluded from consideration for admission to the second year of the degree course merely because they were already students in a diploma course.
[901H; 902A B] (2) To ask persons, who had already completed a one year house job, to undergo the three year degree/two year diploma course would be a severe handicap to them as, earlier, they could have got their postgraduate degree/diploma course after two years/one year.
In order to adjust them into the new scheme the State designated holders of house jobs as "junior residents (first year)" under the new scheme.
This enabled the holders of house jobs to get into the second year course under the residency scheme.
[902H; 903A] (3) The scheme, however, could not be stretched and converted into a limitless provision making it possible for all persons who had completed their house jobs at some distant past to compete for admission to the second year of the degree course.
That is why para 5 limited the scope of the redesignation and admission.
The first part of it limit ed the equation only to persons who were working on house jobs since 1.8.1987.
[903B C] 897 (4) The date material for the purpose of their admission was 30.9.1989, the last date by which the applications had to be sent in.
That being so, the words "ussamay" used in the second sub para of para 5 are the operative words.
They clearly embody a reference to an anterior point of time and this can only be a reference to the period since 1.8.1987 which finds specific mention in the first sub para and which is the period subsequent to the scheme coming into opera tion.
[905D E] (5) All persons doing house jobs after 1.8.1987 are covered by the second sub para of para 5.
The words "after completion of the tenure" had to be used here because the class of persons referred to also included those who were in house jobs as on 22.8.1989.
[905F] (6) It is clear that the words "House Officer", "Junior Residents" and "Senior Residents" used against serial Nos. 1, 2 and 3 in para 5 of the scheme redesignate all such officers working since 1.8.1987 as "junior residents 1st, 2nd and 3rd year" respectively.
That being so, both the writ petitioners as well as the appellants are all "junior resi dents (1st year)" and should be eligible for admission to the second year of the residency scheme course.
[903D E] (7) It is clear from the judgments of the High Court on the subject that the interpretation of the clauses on the scheme is by no means an easy task.
In this state of af fairs, it is upto the State to find out a practical solution to ensure that the student community is not prejudiced by the ambiguities in the scheme.
[909H; 910A] Mridula Avasthi and Others vs University of Delhi and Others, ; , referred to.
