The grant of permission to an in service teacher of the appellant University to undertake doctoral programme is subject to the statutory restrictions; (a), that the course of study is not available in other institutions and univer sities, (b) that the study leave would be admissible for pursuing approved courses outside the University only, (c) that the study leave would be granted after the teacher has completed five years of continuous service in the Universi ty, and (d) that the permission to do the same would be given according to seniority.
An Assistant Professor becomes entitled to the senior scale after completion of eight years of service.
However, the senior scale becomes applicable to a person getting Ph.D. degree after five years instead of eight years.
The respondent was a Ph.D. student under the Department of Agriculture of the appellant University for a course of study available in several other institutions, which he was required to complete in six semesters, with entitlement for extension by two semesters each on the recommendation of the Adviser and the Dean respectively.
Subsequently, he was appointed Assistant Professor in the said University.
He had by then completed seven semesters.
He was permitted by the Dean to register for the eighth semester without the knowl edge that he had become an employee of the University.
However, thereafter he was refused permission by the Vice Chancellor to register for the ninth semester on the ground that having become an employee of the University he was not entitled to that benefit.
In the writ petition challenging the said refusal the High Court by majority found that the respondent was not an in service candidate as he had already completed eight semesters and directed the Vice Chancellor to register him for the ninth and the tenth semesters.
773 Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: The respondent could not escape from the statutory restrictions which became applicable to him as soon as he became an in service candidate for the remaining part of the Ph.D. course on his taking up of the appointment in the University The benefit claimed if granted to him alone would result in his getting consequential benefits much before his several seniors and would seriously prejudice their claim and amount to an act of discrimination.
Such a course is impermissible.
[776D E]
