The two petitioners were apprehended while attempting to smuggle a huge amount of Indian and foreign currency and other contraband goods out of India and the Collector of Central Excise and Land Customs passed orders confiscating the seized goods and imposing heavy personal penalties on both of them under 275 section 167(8) of the Sea Customs Act.
On a subsequent complaint made by the Customs Authorities on the same facts, the petitioners were convicted and sentenced by the Additional District Magistrate to various terms of imprisonment under section 23, read with section 23B, of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, section i67(8I) of the Sea Customs Act and section 120B of the Indian Penal Code.
The Additional Sessions judge in appeal affirmed the said orders of conviction and sentences and the High Court refused to interfere in revision.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners, who had, at an earlier stage, made an unsuccessful attempt to move this Court under article 32 and have the prosecutions quashed, that the orders of conviction and sentences passed on them by the Courts below infringed the constitutional protection against double jeopardy afforded by article 20(2) Of the Constitution.
Held, (Per Das, C. J., Bhagwati, B. P. Sinha and Wanchoo, Jj., Subba Rao, J., dissenting) that the contention was without substance and must be negatived.
In order to sustain a plea of double jeopardy and to avail of the protection of article 20(2) of the Constitution it was incumbent to show that (1) there was a previous prosecution, (2) a punishment and (3) that for the same offence, and unless all the three conditions were fulfilled the Article did not come into operation.
The word 'prosecution ' as used in that Article contemplated a proceeding of a criminal nature either before a court or a judicial tribunal.
Maqbool Hussain vs The State of Bombay, ; , relied on.
The insertion of section 187A into the Sea Customs Act by the amending Act of 1955, left no scope for doubt that the hierarchy of Authorities under that Act functioned not as Courts or judicial tribunals but as administrative bodies, even though in recording evidence or hearing arguments they acted judicially.
The words " offences " and " penalties " used by the Act could not have the same meaning as in Criminal Law and a penalty or confiscation ordered under section 167(8) of the Act could not be a punishment such as is inflicted by a Criminal Court for a criminal offence.
Sewpujanrai Indrasanrai Ltd. vs The Collector of Customs and others; , , referred to.
Nor were the Customs Authorities invested with the powers of a Criminal Court under the Schedule to section 167 and the procedure laid down by Ch.
XVII of the Act, and any orders passed by them either in rem or in personal, by way of confiscation of the goods or imposition of penalties on the person, could only be in the nature of administrative ones made in the interest of revenue and could not bar a criminal prosecution.
Morgan vs Devine, ; and United States of America vs Anthony La Franca, ; , considered.
276 The proceedings against the petitioners before the Collector of Customs under section 167(8) of the Sea Customs Act could.
not therefore, be a prosecution within the meaning of article 20(2) Of the Constitution and the petitioners were not put to double jeopardy.
Per Subba Rao, J.
The prosecution of 'the petitioners before the Magistrate and the punishment inflicted on them directly infringed article 20(2) of the Constitution.
There can be no inconsistency in an authority under an Act functioning in an administrative capacity in respect of certain specified duties while it acts as a judicial tribunal in respect of others, and the question as to which of them it discharges in a judicial capacity has to be decided on the facts of each case and in the light of well settled characteristics of a judicial tribunal.
Cooper vs Wilson, and Venkataraman vs Union of India; , , relied on.
Although this Court has held that the Sea Customs Autho rities in adjudging confiscation do not function as judicial tribunals but as mere administrative authorities, the question as to whether imposing personal penalties they act as judicial tribunals still remains open.
Maqbool Hussain vs The State.
of Bombay, ; and Sewpujanrai Indrasanrai Ltd. vs The Collector of Customs, ; , explained.
An examination of the entire scheme of the Sea Customs Act leaves no manner of doubt that the Customs Authorities act as judicial tribunals so far as offences under section 167 Of the Act are concerned.
The word 'prosecuted ' used in article 20(2) of the Constitution is comprehensive enough to include a prosecution before an authority other than a Magistrate or a Criminal Court, and the offences described in section 167 Of the Sea Customs Act are offences within the meaning of the General Clauses Act and the Indian Penal Code and the penalties prescribed therefor are nothing but punishments inflicted for those offences either by the Customs Authorities or the Magistrate.
The question of the identity of an offence has to be deter mined on the facts of each particular case and the real test is whether the previous prosecution and punishment were based on the same facts on which rested the subsequent prosecution and punishments
