The respondents in each of these three cases was sub jected to assessment under the U.P. Sales Tax Act.
In each of these cases the assessee preferred an appeal to the first appellate authority and moved an application for the waiver of any deposit of the tax which was necessary before the appeal could be entertained.
The first appellate authority in two of the cases dismissed the application and in the third directed the assessee to deposit 10% of the disputed tax within ten days from the date of the order.
Dis satis fied with the orders of the first appellate authority each of the assessees preferred an appeal to the Tribunal.
The Tribunal in all the three cases directed the assessee to pay 10% of the assessed tax before the appeal could be enter tained.
Each of the assessees preferred a revision petition before the High Court.
The High Court held that the condition requiring deposit of tax was not applicable in the instant case of M/s Atma Ram Misra as no returns at all had been filed by the asses see for the relevant assessment year and no turnover stood admitted by the assessee at any stage of the assessment proceedings which was followed in the other two cases with the result that the first appellate authority was held bound to entertain the appeals of the assessee without calling upon it for deposit of any portion of tax.
The department has preferred these appeals by special leave against the decision of the single judge of the High Court in all the three cases.
This Court while dismissing the appeals made it clear that it did not agree with the High Court 's interpretation of the statutory provisions and, HELD: The provision in question makes two relaxations.
It does not make it obligatory on the assessee to deposit the entire amount of assessed tax.
It restricts the deposit to 20% of the assessed tax.
[1039C] 1032 It empowers the appellate authority to waive or relax the requirements of clause (b).
[1039C] The deposit contemplated under clause (b) also covers cases where no returns have been filed and no admission of any turnover has come from the assessee.
[1039E] This, however, does not in any way affect the power of the appellate authority to waive or reduce the amount to be deposited, depending on the circumstances of each case, under the proviso to the above subsection.
[1039G] Vishamber Nath vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P., [1979] U.P.T.C. 1276.
