The petitioner is a Judicial Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal.
In this writ petition he claims equality of the Members of the Administrative Tribunal with the Judges of the High Court, or even the Vice Chairman of the Tribunal, in the matter of pay, and age of superannua tion.
The Central Administrative Tribunal (Salaries and Allow ances and Conditions of Service of Chairman, Vice Chairman and Members) Rules, 1985 were framed in exercise of the powers conferred by section 35(2)(c) of the .
Rule 3 of the Rules specifies Rs.8,000 p.m. as the pay of the Vice Chairman and the pay scale of Rs.7300 100 7600 p.m. for a Member.
Rule 8 prescribes the age of superannuation for the Chairman and Vice Chairman at 65, and for any other Member 62 years.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that an arbitrary distinction had been made in the conditions of service, particularly in regard to pay and age of superannu ation, between the Vice Chairman and the Members; that the judicial functions discharged by the Vice Chairman and the Members of the Central Administrative Tribunal were the same and, therefore, the principle of "equal pay for equal work" applied, and on that basis Article 14 had been violated; and that the Administrative Tribunal being a substitute for the High Court for adjudicating disputes relating to service matters, the Members of the Tribunal should be equated with the High Court Judges for all purposes 947 including their pay and age of Superannuation.
S.P. Sampath Kumar vs Union of India, ; , relied upon.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that all the functions of the Vice Chairman and the Members were not the same in as much as the Vice Chairman, in addition to filling the casual vacancy in the office of the Chairman, also discharged certain administrative functions entrusted to him by the Chairman.
Dismissing the writ petition, this Court, HELD: (1) It is the law enacted by Parliament constitut ing the Administrative Tribunal which has to be first seen for the purpose of ascertaining the real nature and status of the Tribunal and the persons constituting it.
[1953 E] (2) It is not possible for the Administrative Tribunal to shed off or abandon its heritage and substitute its genes with those of its choice of a different heritage.
[956G] (3) There is no ambiguity in the provisions of the , and the exact status and service conditions of the Chairman, Vice Chairman and Mem bers of the Administrative Tribunal together with the quali fications for appointment to these offices have been clearly spelt out in the Act.
[953F] (4) From the scheme of the Act and the rules flamed thereunder it is quite clear that their enactment is in the manner laid down in Article 323 A of the Constitution.
From the scheme it is evident that the Chairman, Vice Chairman and Members are not treated as one class for this purpose by the very enactment which provides for the establishment of the Tribunals.
Such elaborate provisions were unnecessary if the Tribunal was to be equated with the High Courts and its members with High Court Judges.
1953D; 954C] (5) Article 323 A and 323 B themselves require the law constituting these Tribunals to provide for the pay and other conditions of service of its Members and, therefore, the same would he governed in the case of each Tribunal by the provisions of the statute giving birth to the Tribunal.
These statutes being different, the provisions therein in this behalf can also be different, which has been left to the legislative wisdom to decide.
[955G H] 948 (6) Equation of the Tribunal with the High Court was only as the forum for adjudication of disputes relating to service matters and not for all purposes such as the one arising for decision in the present case.
[956C] S.P. Sampath Kumar vs Union of India, ; , distinguished & explained.
(7) The foundation of initial equality on which the argument of discrimination is based, is non existent.
The parent statute itself shows that they were not born equals.
[956E]
