The appellant, a real estate company, was engaged in the business of letting out its property on lease, Besides it was also rendering various services to its tenants such as electricity and water supply, washing and cleaning, lift services, electrical and sanitary repairs on payment basis.
For rendering these services the appellant company employed a number of workmen.
A dispute arose between the employees and the appellant company with regard to wages, scales of pay, dearness allowance and gratuity.
The State Government re ferred the disputes to Industrial Tribunal for adjudication.
The appellant company contested the reference before the Tribunal by raising a preliminary objection that the alleged dispute was not an industrial dispute and that the reference was barred by Section 19 of the since there was an earlier binding award, based on settlement with the Union, which was not terminated by either parties.
934 By an order dated August 24, 1968 the Tribunal overruled the preliminary objection and gave the award dated March 3. 1969 enhancing the dearness allowance of the employees.
The Tribunal also framed a revised gratuity scheme but did not fix any grades and pay scales of workmen for want of con vincing evidence.
The appellant company filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the Tribunal 's order dated August 24, 1968 as well as the Award dated March 7, 1969 contending: (i) that the Award was without jurisdiction because the appel lant company was not carrying on 'industry ' and the alleged dispute was not an 'Industrial Dispute ' and that the previ ous Award was not terminated and was still subsisting; (ii) that no dispute was raised between the workmen and the appellant prior to the reference before the Tribunal; and (iii) that the Tribunal did not consider the appellant 's capacity to pay dearness allowance to the workmen.
A single judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition by rejecting all the contentions.
The appellant filed an appeal against the judgment of the single judge before a Division Bench of the High Court which was also dismissed.
Against the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court the appellant company filed an appeal to this Court, contending: (i) that the High Court was in error in holding that the appellant was an 'industry ' under Section 2(j) of the Act; (ii) that the Tribunal was not competent to make the Award since the earlier Award, which was in the nature of a settlement under Section 2(p), was not terminated in accordance with section 19(2) by giving a formal written notice; (iii) that there was non compliance with the provi sions of Section 19(7) of the Act; and (iv) that the Indus trial Tribunal was in error in making the Award in relation to Dearness Allowance without examining the capacity to pay the additional amount and that the High Court should have remanded the matter to the Tribunal for considering this issue in the light of the documents which were submitted by the appellant before the High Court.
Dismissing appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The activity carried on by the appellant compa ny falls within the ambit of the expression "industry" defined in Section 2(j) of the .
The Award of the Industrial Tribunal cannot, there fore, be assailed on the basis that the appellant is 935 not carrying on an 'industry ' under the Act.
[943E] Bangalore Water Supply & Swerage Board v .R. Rajappa and Ors., ; , applied.
Management of Safdar jung Hospital vs Kuldip Singh Sethi, ; ; State of Bombay vs Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, ; ; D.N. Banerjee vs P.R. Mukherjee, ; and Corporation of the City of Nagpur vs Its employees; , , referred to. 2.
It is not the requirement of Section 19(2) of the that there should be a formal notice terminating a settlement, and notice can be inferred from the correspondence between the parties.
[944B] Indian Link Chain Manufacturers Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1972] I SCR 790, applied.
2.1 In view of the finding of the Division bench that the letter of employees Union dated November 24, 1966 was a notice under section 19(6) as well as section 19(2) of the and that the said letter contained a clear intimation of the intention of the employ ees to terminate the Award, the High Court was justified in holding that the earlier award had been validly terminated before the passing of the order of reference.
[943H; 944A B ] 3.
The High Court was right in taking the view that while exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution the High Court should generally consider the materials which were made available to the Tribunal and fresh or further materials which were not before the Tribu nal should not normally be allowed to be placed before the Court.
[944F G] 3.1 In the instant case the appellant has not been able to show why the documents relied on by it were not produced before the Tribunal.
Therefore there is no justification for accepting the plea of the appellant for reconsideration of the Award of the Tribunal in the light of the documents submitted by the appellant during the pendency of the appeal before High Court.
[944G H] 4.
A question raised for the first time in the Supreme Court involving an inquiry into questions of fact cannot be allowed to be agitated.
[944E] 936
