The appellants filed writ petitions in the Madras High Court challenging the fixation in 1969 of a uniform reten tion price of Rs. 100 per tonne of cement instead of the existing three different retention prices for different categories of producers fixed earlier on the basis of the recommendations made by the Second Tariff Commission in 1961.
The grievance of the appellants was that the fixation of a uniform retention price to be paid to all producers for the cement produced by them and acquired by the State Trad ing Corporation amounted to discrimination contravening Article 14 of the Constitution.
The challenge was rejected by a Single Judge and, thereafter, a Division Bench of the High Court.
Cement has been a controlled commodity for a long time and its production, distribution and price were regulated by Cement Control Orders issued by the Central Government from time to time in exercise of the powers conferred under sections 18G and 25 of the Industrial (Development & Regula tion) Act, 1951.
On behalf of the appellants it was contended that the impugned Order made in 1969 fixing a uniform retention price for all three categories of cement producers treated un equals as equals; that the increase of Rs.7 per tonne was to be made to the existing three tier retention prices, but an irrational basis was adopted in fixing the uniform price of Rs. 100 per tonne which resulted in an unequal increase to the three different retention prices then existing; that clause 12 of the Cement Control Order, 1967 did not permit one uniform retention price; and that atleast in the case of Chettinad Cement Corporation Ltd. discrimination was proved on the basis of the distinction made by the High Court in the case of M/s Travancore Cement Ltd. The appellants howev er did not dispute before this court that no grievance would survive if the uniform retention price was fixed at Rs. 104 per tonne instead of Rs. 100.
851 On behalf of the respondents it was asserted that the industry itself had sought a revision of the prices and had accepted in principle that there should be one uniform retention price.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: {1) The fixation of Rs. 100 per tonne as the uniform retention price for the entire industry with the solitary exception of M/S Travancore Cement Ltd. for which justification had been shown, was on a rational basis taking into account all relevant data and factors including the cement industry 's acceptance of the principle of a uniform retention price for the entire industry, the only difference being in the price actually fixed at Rs. 100 per tonne instead of Rs. 104 per tonne claimed by the cement industry.
It is obvious, therefore, that the principle of a uniform retention price for the entire industry had not been fault ed.
[857H; 858A B] (2) The principle of fixation of a uniform price for the industry was an accepted principle and this had to be done by fixing the uniform price on the basis of the cost of a reasonably efficient and economic representative cross section of manufacturing units and not with reference to the cost in relation to each unit.
[859A B] M/s. Shri Sitaram Sugar Company Limited & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
and U.P. State Sugar Corporation Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors., J.T. , referred to.
(3) Fixation of a uniform retention price being clearly permissible and the same having been determined at Rs. 100 per tonne on the basis of expert opinion, rounded on rele vant factors, there was no scope for interference within the limits of permissible judicial review in the present case.
[859E] Anakapalle Co operative Agricultural & Industrial Socie ty Ltd. vs Union of India, and The Panipat Cooperative Sugar Mills vs Union of India, [1973] 2 SCR 860, referred to.
(4) The Central Government 's power under Clause 12 of the Cement Control Order, 1967 to refix the price can be exercised 'having regard to any change in any of the factors relevant for determination of price of cement '.
The meaning of the expression 'having regard to ' is well settled.
It indicates that in exercising the power, regard must be had also to the factors enumerated together with all factors relevant for 852 exercise of that power.
One such factor specified in Clause 12 is "such (5) No material has been produced by the appellant to show that M/s Chettinad Cement Corporation is a similar substandard unit without any capacity for expansion, so that it too must continue to be an uneconomic unit like M/s Travancore Cement Ltd. deserving a similar treatment.
[860F G]
