In respect of the assessment for the assessment year 1974 75, the appellant assessee preferred an appeal before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
During the hearing of the appeal, the assessee raised an additional ground as regards its liability to Purchase Tax and claimed a deduc tion of Rs.11,54,995.
After giving an opportunity of hearing to the Income Tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commis sioner allowed the said claim.
The Revenue preferred an appeal before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that the Appellate Assistant Commissioner had no jurisdiction to entertain any additional ground not raised before the Income Tax Officer and set aside the order of the Appellate Assistant Commis sioner.
The assessee 's application for making reference to the High Court was refused by the Tribunal.
The High Court also rejected the assessee 's application for calling the state ment of the case and reference from the Tribunal.
Hence, this appeal by special leave.
Disposing of the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The declaration of law is clear that the power of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner is co terminus with that of the Income Tax Officer.
If that be so, there appears to be no reason as to why the appellate authority cannot modify the assessment order on an additional ground even if not raised before the Income Tax Officer.
No exception could be taken to this view as the Act does not place any restric tion or limitation on the exercise of appellate power.
Even otherwise an Appellate Authority while hearing appeal against the order of a subordinate authority has all the powers which the original 341 authority may have in deciding the question before it sub ject to the restrictions or limitation if any prescribed by the statutory provisions.
In the absence of any statutory provisions to the contrary the Appellate Authority is vested with all the plenary powers which the subordinate authority may have in the matter.
[155G H; 156A B] 1.2 If the Appellate Assistant Commissioner is satisfied he would be acting within his jurisdiction in considering the question so raised in all its aspects.
Of course, while permitting the assessee to raise an additional ground, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner should exercise his discre tion in accordance with law and reason.
He must be satisfied that the ground raised was bona fide and that the same could not have been raised earlier for good reasons.
The satisfac tion of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case and no rigid prin ciples or any hard and fast rules can be laid down for this purpose.
[157D F] Commissioner of Income Tax vs Mc Millan & Co., ; ; Commissioner of Income Tax, U.P. vs Kanpur Coal Syndicate,, ; Kedarnath Jute Mfg. Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax (Central), Calcutta, ; relied on.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay vs Shapporji Patton Ji Mistry, ; Addl.
Commissioner of Income Tax Gujarat vs Gurjargravures ?.
Ltd., ; distinguished.
Rai Kumar Srimal vs Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal 111, , approved.
Narrondas Manordass vs Commissioner of Income Tax, [1957] 31 referred to. 2.
In the instant case, the assessee was assessed to Purchase Tax.
The appellant disputed the demand and filed an appeal before the Appellate Authority and obtained stay order.
The assessee thereafter claimed deduction for the amount of Rs.11,54,995 towards his liability to pay Purchase Tax as deduction for the assessment year 1974 75.
The asses see had not actually paid the Purchase Tax as it had ob tained stay from the Appellate Authority; nonetheless its liability to pay tax existed, and it was entitled to deduc tion of Rs. 11,54,995.
[158B C] 3.
Since the view taken by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is 342 not sustainable in law, the order of the Tribunal is set aside and the matter is remitted to the Tribunal to consider the merit of the deduction permitted by the Appellate As sistant Commissioner.
If the Tribunal thinks it necessary, it may remand the matter to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner (Deputy Commissioner of Appeals) for hearing [158F H]
