Notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was issued in respect of the appellant 's lands in 1959 and the lands were acquired.
The Land Acquisition Collector awarded compensation at the rate of Rs.2,000 per bigha, as also solatium and interest.
The appellants approached the District Court which enhanced the compensation from Rs.2,000 per bigha to Rs.4,000/5,000 per bigha.
The appellants preferred appeals before the High Court.
Taking into account a comparable sale in the area few months before the Notification, the High Court enhanced the compensation to Rs.7,000 per bigha and also awarded solatium and interest.
The plea for higher compensation on the ground that some developed plots were sold by a real estate company at a higher rate was negatived since according to the High Court that company was in a better position to develop the land and that the potentiali ty of the land in its hands was greater.
These appeals, by special leave, are against the said orders of the High Court.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.
In land acquisition proceedings compensation has to be fixed on the basis of a hypothetical sale at or about the time of the notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act of similar land by a willing seller to a willing buyer, there being no other factors like urgent need of money or urgent need of the land for a special purpose and so on which might depress or augment the price.
In determining this compensation the ability of a particular party or his lack of ability to develop the land and to realise its potential, cannot be regarded as a relevant circumstance.
The High Court, therefore, was in error in 127 placing great reliance of the aforesaid circumstance in determining the value of the land for fixing the compensa tion.
[128F H] 2.
The appellants have failed to furnish any material on record of this Court on which this Court could fix the proper compensation nor have any arguments been advanced in that regard.
In these circumstances, the impugned judgments and orders are set aside and the appeals remanded to the High Court for determination of the proper compensation for the lands acquired in accordance with law.
and in the light of our judgment.
[129A B]
