The appellant and respondent No. 5 along with others were candidates for admission to the post graduate course in Obstetrics and Gynecology in the G.M. Medical College, Gwalior.
Respondent No. 5 was selected as the last candidate in the list of the successful applicants.
The appellant was placed on the top of the waiting list.
The appellant challenged the admission Of respondent No. 5 on the ground that the latter was a foreign national and was not entitled to be considered for admission in absence of prior clearance certificate by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Central Government, which she could not file along with her application nor could she produce it before she was finally selected.
The respondent had however produced a no objection letter from the Ministry of External Affairs.
Later, she was also able to obtain the necessary certificate from the Ministry of Health and Family welfare.
The writ application under Article 226 of the Constitu tion filed by the appellant was dismissed by a Full Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (i) the selection of respondent No. 5 was vitiated on account of participation of the respondent 's mother in law (a former Professor and Head of Department) as a member of the College and Hospital Council; and (ii) under the Government of India Instructions it was necessary for respondent No. 5 to have produced before the College and Hospital 356 Council the necessary certificate from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare before her final selection, and the certificate issued by the Ministry of External Affairs could not be a substitute.
Dismissing the appeal on merits, this Court, HELD: (1) The mother in law of respondent No. 5 was, without any doubt, vitally interested in the admission of her daughter in law and her presence in the meeting of the Council must be held to have vitiated the selection of respondent No. 5 for admission.
A.K. Kraipak vs Union of India, ; Ashok Kumar Yadav vs State of Haryana, ; , referred to.
(2) It is regrettable that in spite of repeated remind ers by the Courts of law, the College and Hospital Council constituted by a number of highly educated persons and headed by the Dean himself did not pay any heed to the principles of natural justice.
(3) The State has to spend a large sum of money in running institutions of higher technical education and the seats are limited.
In such a situation a seat can be allot ted to a foreign national only at the cost of a citizen of this Country.
The College and Hospital Council was, there fore, not right in deciding to admit the respondent No. 5 on the strength of no objection certificate by the Ministry of External Affairs.
(4) A certificate of no objection by one Department cannot be a substitute for the clearance by the other.
(5) The purpose of the Instructions is to ensure that no foreign national is allowed to occupy a seat ordinarily meant for the citizen of the country without the permission of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, and once that hurdle is cleared, the purpose is fully satisfied.
After the production of the necessary clearance, there does not remain any reason for rejecting the claim of respondent No. 5 who was a more meritorious candidate, who had secured higher percentage of marks than the appellant in the M.B.B.S. examination.
