The appellant tenant was in occupation of a double storeyed building on a monthly rent of Rs. 170.
The respond ent landlady filed an application under Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 for fixation of fair rent.
The Rent Controller took note of the fact that 1/3rd portion of the building was being used for residential purpose and the rest of the building for non residential purpose, namely, for running a school.
He also appointed an Engineer as Commissioner to evaluate the total cost of the building.
The Commissioner adopted the rates prevalent in the Public Works Department and submitted his report.
On the basis of the Commissioner 's report, the Rent Controller worked out the cost at Rs.1,51,820.
Accordingly, the fair rent for the said premises was arrived at Rs.1518 per month at 12 per cent gross return.
Since the respondent landlady had confined her claim for the enhance ment of fair rent to Rs.1,O00 only, the Rent Controller fixed the fair rent at Rs.1,O00.
On appeal, the order of Rent Controller was affirmed by the Court of Small Causes.
On a revision being preferred, the High Court agreed with the valuation adopted and determined the fair rent on the basis that 1/3rd of the premises was used for residen tial purpose and 2/3rd for nonresidential purpose, and, as per sub sections (2) and (3) of Section 4 of the Act, worked out the rent at 9 per cent and 12 per cent respectively on the cost of construction arrived at.
The High Court fixed the fair rent at Rs. 1391.67 per month.
It confirmed the fair rent of Rs. 1,000 as was fixed by the Rent Controller and as confined to by the Respondent landlady.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the High Court 's order.
It 395 was contended that the cost of the building and its market value as worked out was illegal, fallacious and untenable.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 prescribes the principles on the basis of which the fair rent is to be fixed.
In the light of those principles, the evidence adduced by the parties was considered by the Rent Controller, the appellate court and the High Court and they found that the fixation of the fair rent was much in excess of the claim made by the Respondent landlady.
Since she confined her claim to Rs.1,O00 per month, the courts below have fixed the fair rent at Rs.1,O00.
Therefore, on the findings of facts based on consideration of the evidence, this court cannot interfere and come to its own conclusion.
The finding is neither vitiated nor illegal warranting interference.
[210B C] 2.1 Sub section 4 of Section 4 of the Act, clearly indicates that the total cost of construction referred to in sub sections (2) and (3) shall consist of the market value as on the date of application for fixation of the fair rent.
[209C] 2.2 It is obvious that at the time when this Court rendered its decision in Nambiar 's case there was no provi sion in Section 4 as to the date on which the cost of con struction was to be determined, and Rule 12 provided the manner in which the fixation of the fair rent has to be made.
The subsequent amendment brought on the statute in 1973, by the Amending Act 23 of 1973, has incorporated sub section (4) in Section 4 which amplified the date of appli cation as the starting point to fix market value.
As such the fair rent has been rightly determined by the courts below.
[209D E; HI K.C. Nambiar vs The IV Judge of the Court of Small Causes, Madras & Ors., , referred to.
