Vijayawada Municipality of Andhra Pradesh earlier levied property tax under the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Areas) Dis trict Municipalities Act, 1920.
That Act 'was repealed and the new Act known as the Andhra Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1965 came into force on 2.4.1965.
Under the old act property tax was levied on the basis of gross annual rental value, whereas under section 87 of the new Act the basis of assess ment in owner occupied building was the capital value there of to be determined in the prescribed manner.
Section 389 of the new Act provided that that Act was to be read subject to Schedule IX which contained transitional provisions in the rules.
Rule 12 thereof dealt with levy of taxes etc.
The Government under Rule 12 issued a G.O. Ms. No. 749 M.A. directing that all Municipal Councils shall with effect from 1.4.70 levy the property tax as per the provisions of the new Act, which date by a subsequent G.O. was changed to 1.10.1970.
By another G.O.Ms.
No. 81 M.A. dated 30.1.71, the Government directed the Vijayawada Municipal Council to continue to levy the property tax under the provisions of the old Act as rate payers had filed writ petitions in the High Court and obtained stay.
However, by G.O.Ms.
675 M.A., the G.O.No. 81 was rescinded and the Vijayawada Municipal Council was directed to collect revised taxes under the provisions of the new Act with effect from 1.10.70.
This G.O. was rescinded and by G.O. Ms. No. 255 M.A. dated 15.6.73 the Government directed the Vijayawada Council to levy the property tax under the old Act.
As a consequence, the Vijayawada Municipal continued to levy and enhance the property tax under the old Act.
The validity of G.O.Ms.
No. 255 dated 15.6.73 was chal lenged by house property owners in the High Court in two writ petitions seeking an order restraining the Vijayawada Municipal Council from enforcing it.
and declaring the same illegal and void.
The petitioners ' contention 382 amongst others was that the Government having directed that the taxes be levied under the new Act, the transitional power under rule 12 stood exercised, and the power to levy tax under the old Act had ceased and it was no longer open to the government to rescind the previous orders.
The High Court accepted the said contention, but held that in view of the provisions of section 4(1) of the Andhra Pradesh Munici palities (Fourth Amendment) Act (23 of 1975), which validat ed the actions taken, those could not be challenged as invalid.
The writ petitions were therefore dismissed.
Ap peals to 'the Division Bench, having failed, this appeal has been filed after obtaining special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The State 's power to tax is derived from the Constitution, and the municipality 's power to tax is derived from the State Legislature, which could delegate that power in the manner the Constitution permits to the municipal council, an agent of the State Government and the municipal ity cannot refuse to raise taxes as directed.
The proper authority to determine what should and what should not constitute a public burden is the Legislature of the State.
This is not only true for the State itself, but it is also true in respect of each municipality of the State; these inferior corporate bodies having only such authority in this regard as the legislature shall confer upon them.
[202E F] A statute will not be declared unconstitutional unless it is specifically challenged and the principle is equally applicable to an enactment authorising levy of a tax for a public purpose.
The power to tax is a sovereign power and is legislative in character and it has to be exercised within the constitutional limitations.
The statutes relating to municipal taxes may be changed according to the existing legislative rules of State policy unless forbidden by the Constitution from doing so.
[202G H] Irregular assessment may also be regularised with retro spective effect within the Constitutional limitations.
Where the Court has not already declared invalid a taxing measure which was of doubtful validity, it is permissible for appro priate legislature to validate it by retrospective legisla tion.
No legal fiction is involved in such a case.
[203A C] The G.O. itself covered the period after the repeal of the old Act and till the date of commencement of the fourth amendment so that no interregnum was really there.
The assessment made according to the provisions of the old Act were validated as actions taken by the Council 383 pursuant to the impugned G.O. and not under the provisions of the old Act which was already repealed.
While referring to the old Act, the G.O. did not revive the Act but only prescribed the same procedure as was found in the repealed Act as a transitory measure.
[203B C] Janapada Sabha Chhindwara vs The Central Provim 'es Syndicate Ltd. and Anr., ; , referred to.
