The appellant was convicted under section 302 IPC for murder ing his wife.
The prosecution case was that on the fateful day the deceased had taken meals to the appellant while he was working in the field near his tubewell.
Her dead body was recovered two days later in a nearby drain.
He made an extra judicial confession the same day at the panchayat in the presence of PWs 3, 4 and 5 to the effect that he had killed his wife in the wheat field and threw the dead body in the drain at night after removing her ornaments.
The FIR was lodged thereafter in the presence of the appellant and the fact of his statement was recorded therein.
The weapon of offence, the kassi, and the ornaments were recovered from the hut near the tubewell at his instance.
PW 3 narrated the events that preceded the occurrence.
PWs 4 and 5 fully corroborated the evidence of PW 3 in that the appellant had confessed his guilt in their presence.
The evidence was accepted by the trial court.
The High Court sustained the conviction on the view that various circumstances conclusively proved the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt.
In the appeal it was contended for the appellant that the extrajudicial confession even if true, was not voluntary but induced on the promise that he would he pardoned and the same having been retracted could not form the basis for a conviction in the absence of any material corroboration.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in its conclusion and there was no ground for interference.
2.1 An extra judicial confession, if voluntary can be relied upon by the court alongwith other evidence in con victing the accused.
The 493 value of the evidence as to the confession depends upon the veracity of the witnesses to whom it is made.
Though the court requires the witness to give the actual words used by the accused as nearly as possible but it is not an invaria ble rule that the court should not accept the evidence, if not the actual words but the substance were given.
It is for the court having regard to the credibility of the witness to accept the evidence or not.
When the court believes the witness before whom the confession is made and it is satis fied that the confession was voluntary, conviction can be rounded on such evidence.
2.2 In the instant case, the fact that the appellant made the confession is proved by cogent evidence.
He and his father were brought before the panchayat held in the presence of PWs 3, 4 and 5.
He was questioned and was asked to speak the truth.
This prompting by the panchayat does not amount to inducement or threat.
The testimony of PW 4, a lambardar, and PW 5, the Sarpanch being responsible persons could not be doubted in the absence of any material to show that they had been motivated to falsely implicate the appel lant.
The circumstances under which the statement was made leaves no room for doubt that the confession was voluntary.
2.3 The discovery of the dead body from the drain through the wheat field, presence of blood in the field, recovery of gold ornaments from the roof of the hut and blood stained kassi from the hut near the tubewell were material circumstances providing connecting links in the chain of circumstantial evidence.
The appellant when exam ined did not offer any explanation except to deny his in volvement.
PW 3 had testified to the fact that the deceased had complained about the illtreatment by her husband.
In the light of such evidence, it is preposterous to maintain that she may have been assaulted by some unidentified assailant somewhere in the fields and the appellant had been falsely implicated in the offence.
The circumstances thus proved were conclusive of the guilt of the appellant and incapable of being explained on any other reasonable hypothesis.
Conviction has, therefore, to be maintained.
