The petitioners are the wives of three detenus who had been detained under an order dated 10th November, 1989 passed under subsection (1) of section 3 of the against each of them with a view to preventing them from smuggling goods '.
The order of detention as well as the grounds of detention dated November 10, 1989 were served on the three detenus on 21st November, 1989 while they were already in jail custody on remand following their arrest at the Sahar International Airport on October 5, 1989 when on suspicion they were searched which resulted in the recovery of diamonds, precious stones and foreign currency which they had planned to smuggle out.
Thereafter on Decem ber 20, 1989 a declaration under section 9(1) of the Act was passed in respect of each detenu which was served on them within the time allowed by law.
Thereupon the wives of all the three detenus filed separate habeas corpus writ peti tions in the High Court of Bombay.
Four contentions were raised before the High Court namely, (1) since the detenus were in custody their detention was unwarranted; (2) the detaining authority had betrayed non application of mind by describing 458 the offence as 'bailable '; (3) the representation of the detenus dated 18th December, 1989 had not been disposed of promptly and there was inordinate delay; and (4) the author ities had failed to supply certain crucial documents called for by the detenus thereby depriving them of the opportunity of making an effective representation.
The High Court nega tived all the contentions and dismissed the writ petitions.
Against that the wives of the detenus have filed Special Leave Petitions and also separate writ petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution raising several contentions including those negatived by the High Court.
Dismissing all the Special Leave Petitions and Writ Petitions and upholding the view taken by the High Court this, Court, HELD: Even in the case of a person in custody a deten tion order can validly be passed (1) if the authority pass ing the order is aware of the fact that he is actually in custody; (2) if he has reason to believe on the basis of reliable material placed before him (a) that there is a real possibility of his being released on bail, and (b) that on being so released he would in all probability indulge in prejudicial activity; and (3) if it is felt essential to detain him to prevent him from so doing.
[278F G] It is not sufficient to say that the detenu was not supplied the copies of the documents in time on demand but it must further be shown that non supply has impaired the detenu 's right to make an effective and purposeful represen tation.
[281B] Demand of any and every document, however irrelevant it may be, merely on the ground that there is a reference thereto in the grounds of detention, cannot vitiate an otherwise legal detention order.
No hard and fast rule can be laid down in this behalf but what is essential is that the detenu must show that failure to supply the documents before the meeting of the Advisory Board had impaired or prejudiced his right, however slight or insignificant it may be.
[281B C] Vijay Narain Singh vs State of Bihar, [1984] 3 S.C.C. 14; Dharmendra Suganchand Chelawat vs Union of India, ; ; Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate E.T., ; Suraj Pal Sahu vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Binod Singh vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad, ; ; Abdul Wahab Sheikh vs
S.N. Sinha; , ; Meera Rani vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; ; Shashi Aggarwal vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Anand Prakash vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Sanjay Kumar Aggarwal vs Union of 459 India; , ; Gurdip Singh vs Union of India & Ors., [1989] Crl.
L.J. NOC 41 Delhi and Nand Kishore Purohit vs Home Secretary, Maharashtra, [1986] 2 Bombay C.R. 25 referred to.
