The appellant joined the Agricultural Department in 1963 with B.Sc.
(Geology).
Later, in 1979 he was promoted as Senior Geologist.
In 1982 he passed his M.Sc.
(Geology) and stood first in the University.
Sometime in 1982 he was also holding additional charge as Deputy Director.
In 1983, the State Public Service Commission called for applications for direct recruitment of Deputy Director in the Ground Water Survey and Development Agency.
The appel lant applied in response to the said advertisement, but was not called for interview, on the ground that he did not possess the necessary qualification of 10 years practical experience after acquiring the post graduate degree.
Ag grieved, the appellant filed a Writ Petition before the High Court contending that educational qualification and experi ence are two independent requirements and have to be read disjunctively and the experience required need not be after possessing basic educational qualification.
However, the High Court did not agree with the contention and dismissed the Writ Petition.
Against the said dismissal, the appellant preferred an appeal by special leave which was granted, by this Court in 1984, with an observation that the petitioner should not be reverted.
However, he was reverted to the post of Senior Geologist but subsequently promoted as Deputy Director in a new post created.
The appellant 's promotion was challenged by one of his colleagues by way of a Writ Petition contend ing that even for promotion, 10 years experience posterior to acquisition of post graduate degree was essential.
The High Court quashed the promotion of the appellant.
The appellant appealed against the said order after obtaining special leave of this Court in 1987.
522 During the pendency of these two appeals the State Government amended Rule 3(1)(a) whereby the requirement of 10 years experience mentioned in sub clause (iii) was delet ed in respect of appointment by promotion.
According to the State Government since the said requirement was redundant, it was deleted.
Allowing the 1987 appeal, and dismissing the 1984 ap peal, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
On the interpretation of Rule 3 of Maharash tra Ground Water Service, Class I (Recruitment) Rules, 1976 prior to its amendment, the view taken by the High Court on the Writ Petition filed by the appellant, does not call for any interference.
Normally when one talks of experience, unless the context otherwise demands, it should be taken as experience after acquiring the minimum qualifications re quired and, therefore, necessarily will have to posterior to the acquisition of the qualification.
However, in the case of promotion the same interpretation may not be just or warranted.
It would depend on the relevant provisions as also the particular type of experience which is required.
[336C D] 1.2.
The requirement of experience has been omitted by an amendment made on 16th February, 1988 and published in the Gazette on 24.3.1988.
Though the Rule does not say anything about its retrospective operation there could be no doubt that it is retroactive.
This amendment shall be deemed to apply to the present case as well especially when the matter is pending in this Court and the appointment in question is by promotion.
It is true that at the time when the appellant was promoted, the Rule had not been amended.
However, the appellant is the senior most among the Senior Geologists and even if he is to be considered again under the amended rules he shall have to be appointed and nothing is stated in these proceedings which would disqualify him even now.
[336E F]
