Appellant on behalf of minor landlord, who got title by will, initiated eviction proceeding against the respondent tenants under Section 29 read with section 31 A(d) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act.
1948 before the Mamlatdar on the ground of bona fide requirement of the land for his personal cultivation.
Respondent tenants raised preliminary objection on the question of maintainability of the suit on the ground that as the appellant, being a trans feree of the land and having not inherited the same was not the 'landlord ' under Section 31 A. Upholding the objection of the Respondents the Mamlatdar dismissed the application.
Appellant 's appeal before District Deputy Collector and his revision before the Revenue Tribunal were dismissed.
Chal lenging the orders of the Revenue Courts, writ application was filed in the High Court, which was also dismissed and against which the present appeal was filed.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Section 31(d) requires that the name of the person applying for the eviction of the tenant or of his ancestors should be recorded as landlord in the record of rights on 1.1.1952 and he should further be recorded as landlord on the appointed day, namely.
15.6.1955.
Both these conditions are required to be fulfilled before a suit or an application is maintainable by a landlord for the eviction of the tenant.
If either of the two conditions are not satisfied, the application for eviction the tenant is not maintainable.
The provisions of clause (d) further provides that even if the landlord 's name is not recorded, but if the name of his ancestor is recorded similarly if the landlord is a member of joint family, the name of any member is recorded the application would be maintainable.
This provi sion indicates the legislative intent that a person succeed ing to the property from his ancestor is 515 entitled to maintain the application for eviction of a tenant provided he fulfils other conditions.
But a person who may have obtained right to the agricultural land by assignment, transfer, or by auction sale or in any similar mode, is not included within the expression of 'landlord ' entitling him to evict the tenant.
After the amendment of Section 31A(d) the Legislature made it clear that transferees and assignees from persons whose name may be appearing in the record of rights during the relevant period are not to be treated as landlords for the purposes of the Section.
The expression 'or otherwise ' occurring in clause (d) indicates that a person claiming title by transfer, assignment, court sale or in any other mode like gift, or will even from ancestor will not be a landlord for the purposes of the Section.
A person inherit ing property from his ancestor would be landlord provided his ancestor 's name appears in the record of rights during the required period.
But a person claiming title on the basis of transfer, assignment.
auction sale or otherwise including gift or will from the predecessors in title even though he may be his ancestor, and his name may be recorded in the record of rights during the required period, will not be entitled to maintain a suit for eviction of a tenant.
The Legislature placed this restriction in order to protect the interest of the tenants and to prevent avoidance of the restrictions placed by the ceiling laws.
In the absence of any such provision a landlord could transfer land to his descendents by gift or will to evade the ceiling law and to evict tenants.
Under Section 31 A(d) such a beneficiary is not entitled to maintain a suit for the eviction of a tenant from the agricultural holding as he would not be a landlord within the meaning of the Section.
Waman Ganesh Joshi vs Ganu Guna Khapre, 61 Bombay L.R. 1267; Khalliulla Hasmiya vs Yesu, 50 Bombay L.R. 201;over ruled.
Bhanushanker Ambalal vs Laxman Kala & Ors., [1960], Gujarat Law Reporter 169, approved.
Umraomiya Akbartniya Malek vs Bhulabhai Mathurbhai Patel Appeal No. 112/63 decided on 3.3.
1972 (High Court of Guja rat) referred.
