With a view to nationalise the road transport services under Ch.
IV A of the (IV Of 1939), inserted into it by the amending Act 100 of 1956, the General Manager of Andhra State Transport Undertaking published a scheme under section 68C of the Act in the Official Gazette and invited objections thereto.
By an order of the Chief Minister the objections were received and heard by the Secretary to the Home Department, who was in charge of Transport, but were decided by the Chief Minister.
The State Government approved of the scheme and published it in the Official Gazette.
The petitioners, who were plying their buses on various routes in the Krishna District as permit holders under the Act, apprehending that their routes would be taken over by the newly established State Corporation in implementation of the scheme, applied to this Court for the protection of their fundamental rights to carry on their business.
It was contended, inter alia, on their behalf, (i) that Ch.
IVA of the Act was a piece of colourable legislation whose real object was to take over their business, under cover of cancellation of permits, in contravention of article 31 of the Constitution, (2) that the scheme itself was ultra vires the Act, for the reason, amongst others, that the State Government whose duty it was to act judicially in approving the scheme, had transgressed certain fundamental principles of natural justice.
Held (Per curiam), that the question of colourable legislation was, in substance, really one of legislative competence of the legislature that enacted it.
The legislature could only make laws within its legislative competence.
Its legislative field might be circumscribed by specific legislative entries or limited by fundamental rights created by the Constitution.
The legislature could not over step the field of its competency, directly or indirectly.
It would be for the Court to scrutinize if the legislature in purporting to make a law within its sphere, in effect and substance, 320 reached beyond it, it had infact the power to the law, its motive in making it would be irrelevant.
K. C. Gajapaji Narayan Deo vs The ' State of Orissa, [1954] S.C.R. i, followed.
The State of Bihar vs Maharajadhiraja sir Kameshwar singh of darbhangha considered So judged; it could not said that CH.
IVA of the Act was a colourable piece of legislation.
The power vested in the Regional ' Transport Authority by section 68F of the Act involved no transfer of business of the ,existing permit holders to the State Transport Undertaking nor could the latter be said thereunder to take over any assets of the former.
Section 68G of the Act in providing for compensation for un expired period of the permit did not imply that CH.
IVA of the Act involved any transfer of property or possession so as to entitle the permit holder to any compensation under article 31(2) Of the Constitution.
Chapter 1VA of the Act did not, therefore infringe the fundamental right of the petitioners under ' article 31 Of the Constitution.
Per Das, C. J., Bhagwati, and Subba Rao, jj.
While the purpose of section 68C of the Act was no doubt to provide a scheme of road transport service on the lines prescribed by it, the scheme proposed might affect the rights of individual permit holders by excluding them, partially or completely, from the business in any particular route or routes, and the procedure prescribed by section 68D and Rules 8 and 10 framed under the Act, required that the Government should hear both the objectors and the State Transport Undertaking before approving or modifying the scheme.
There was no doubt, therefore, that the State was deciding a lis and it was to do so judicially.
Province of Bombay vs Kusaldas section Advani, ; , Nagendra Nath Bora vs Commissioner, Hills Division, and Express Newspapers Ltd. vs The Union of India, , relied on.
Franklin vs Minister of Town and Country Planning, [19481 A. C. 87, held inapplicable.
It was a fundamental principle of natural justice that the authority empowered to decide a matter must have no bias in it and another, no less fundamental, was that where the Act provided for a personal hearing the authority that heard the matter must also decide it.
The procedure followed in the instant case whereby the Home Secretary, in charge of Transport, himself a party to the dispute, heard the objections and the Chief Minister decided them, violated those principles, and the order of the State Government approving the scheme, therefore,must be quashed.
Per Sinha and Wanchoo, jj.
The sole object of Ch.
IVA, of the Act was to nationalise the road, transport services and the inquiry envisaged by it was of a limited character.
That inquiry 321 was meant to find out whether the scheme propounded was in public interest as required by section 68C of the Act, and not to adjudicate rival claim of permit holder on the one hand and the State Transport Undertaking on the other ; for, on approval of the scheme, exclusion of private transport as proposed by the scheme was bound to follow as a matter of course.
There could, therefore, be no lis, and the Government in approving or modifying the scheme under Ch.
IVA and the Rules framed thereunder must be held to act in its normal administrative capacity.
No objections could be taken, in the instant case, to the procedure adopted by the Government in empowering the Secretary to hear objections while the Chief Minister decided them, and the Secretary could in no sense be a party to any dispute.
Province of Bombay vs Kusaldas section Advani, ; , Nagendra Nath Bora vs Commissioner, Hills Division, ; and Express Newspapers Ltd. vs The Union of India, , referred to.
Franklin vs Minister of Town and Country Planning, [19481 A.C. 87, applied.
Robinson vs Minister of Town and Country Planning, [1947] I All E. R. 851, referred to.
