Respondents No. 2 to 4, regular employees of the appel lant Delhi Transport Corporation, were served with termina tion notices under Regulation 9(b) of the Delhi Road Trans port Authority (Conditions of Appointment & Service) Regula tions, 1952 by the appellant Corporation on the ground that they became inefficient in their work and started inciting other members not to perform their duties.
The three respondents and their Union, respondent No. 1 filed writ petition in High Court, challenging the constitu tional validity of Regulation 9(b), which gave the manage ment right to terminate the services of an employee by giving one month 's notice or pay in lieu thereof.
The Divi sion Bench of the High Court struck down the Regulation, holding that the Regulation gave absolute, unbridled and arbitrary powers to the management to terminate the services of any permanent or temporary employee, and such power was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Hence, the Corporation filed the appeal before this Court, by special leave.
The validity of similar provisions in Para 522 of the Shastri Award, rule 1(i) of the District Board Rules 1926, Part V, Regulation 13 of Indian Airlines Employees ' Service Regulations, Regulation 48 of Air India Employees ' Service Regulations and also the clause in the contract of appoint ment in respect of employees of Zilla Parishad and the New India Assurance Company, also came up for consideration in the connected appeals and applications filed before this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the Delhi Transport Corpo ration that there was sufficient guideline in Regulation 9(b) and the power of termination, properly read, would not be arbitrary or violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, that the Court would be entitled to obtain guidance from the preamble, the policy and the purpose of the Act and the power conferred under it and to see that the power was exercised only for that purpose, that even a term like 'public interest ' could be sufficient guidance in the matter of retirement of a government employee, and such a provision could be read into a statute even when it was not otherwise expressly there, that it was well settled that the Court would sustain the presumption of constitutionality by con sidering matters of common knowledge and to assume every state of facts which could be conceived and could even read down the section, if it became necessary to uphold the validity of the provision, that the underlying 144 rationale of this rule of interpretation, or the doctrine of reading down of a statute being that when a legislature, whose powers were not unlimited, enacted a statute, it was aware of its limitations, and in the absence of express intention or clear language to the contrary, it must be presumed to have implied into the statute the requisite limitations and conditions to immunise it from the virus of unconstitutionality, that since every legislature intended to act within its powers, in a limited Government, the legislature would attempt to function within its limited powers and it would not be expected to have intended to transgress its limits, that the guidelines for the exercise of the power of termination simpliciter under Regulation 9(b) could be found in the statutory provisions of the 1950 Act under which the regulations had been framed, the pream ble; Sections 19, 20 and 53, the context of Regulation 9(b) read with Regulations 9(a) and 15, that even for the exer cise of this power, reasons could be recorded although they need not be communicated which would ensure a check on the arbitrary exercise of power and effective judicial review in a given case, ensuring efficient running of services and in public interest and the regulations in question were paral lel to, but not identical with, the exceptions carved out under proviso to Article 311(2), that even the power of termination simipliciter under Regulation 9(b) could only be exercised in circumstances other than those in Regulation 9(a), i.e. not where the foundation of the order was 'mis conduct ', the exercise of such power could only be for purposes germane and relevant to the statute, that the principles of natural justice or holding of an enquiry is neither a universal principle of justice nor inflexible dogma and the principles of natural justice were not incapa ble of exclusion in a given situation, if importing the right to be heard has the effect of paralysing the adminis trative process or the need for promptitude or the urgency of the situation so demands, natural justice could be avoided; that the words "where it is not reasonably prac ticable to hold an enquiry" may be imported into the regula tion, that where termination took place by the exclusion of audi alteram partem rule in circumstances which were circum scribed and coupled with the safeguard of recording of reasons which were germane and relevant, then the termina tion would not render the regulation unreasonable or arbi trary, and if the regulation was read in this manner it could not be said that the power was uncanalised or unguid ed, that under ordinary law of "master and servant" the Corporation was empowered by the Contract of Service to terminate the services of its employees in terms thereof; the Declaration in Brojo Nath 's case that such a contract was void under section 23 of the Indian Contract Act or opposed to public policy offending the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles was not sound in law; as a master, the Corporation had unbridled right 145 to terminate the contract in the interests of efficient functioning of the Corporation or to maintain discipline among its employees, and if the termination, was found to be wrongful, the only remedy available to the employees was to claim damages for wrongful termination but not a declaration as was granted in Brojo Nath 's case.
On behalf of the workmen/intervenors, it was submitted that provision of any rule that service would be liable to termination on notice for the period prescribed therein contravened Article 14 of the Constitution, as arbitrary and uncontrolled power was left in the authority to select at its will any person against whom action would be taken; that Articles 14, 19 and 21 were inter related and Article 21 did not exclude Article 19 and even if there was a law providing a procedure for depriving a person of personal liberty and there was, consequently no infringement of fundamental right conferred by Article 21, such law in so far as it abridged or took away any fundamental right under Article 19 would have to meet the challenge of that Article, that violation of principle of natural justice by State action was viola tion of Article 14 which could be excluded only in excep tional circumstances, and, therefore, a clause which autho rised the employer to terminate the services of an employee, whose contract of service was for indefinite period or till the age of retirement, by serving notice, and which did not contain any guidance for the exercise of the power and without recording reasons for such termination, violated the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 and principles of natural justice and was void under Section 2(g) of the , and unforce able under Section 2(hi; that since audi alteram partem was a requirement of Article 14.
and conferment of arbitrary power itself was contrary to Article 14, the rule in ques tion could not be sustained as valid; that the Constitution al guarantees under Articles 14 and 21 were for all persons and there could be no basis for making a distinction between 'workmen ' to whom the Industrial Disputes Act and other industrial laws applied and those who were outside their purview, and the law applicable to the former could only add to and not detract from the rights guaranteed by Part 111 of the Constitution; that the power to terminate the services of a person employed to serve indefinitely or till the age of retirement could be exercised only in cases of proved misconduct or exceptional circumstances having regard to the Constitutional guarantee available under Article 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 and unless the exceptional circumstances were spelt out, the power to terminate the services would cover both permissible and impermissible grounds rendering it wholly invalid, particularly because, the requirement of audi alteram partem which was a part of the guarantee of 146 Article 14 was sought to be excluded, and there could be no guidance available in the body of the law itself, since the purpose for which an undertaking was established and the provisions dealing with the same in the law could provide no guidance regarding exceptional circumstances under which alone the power could be exercised, that the question in volved, in the instant cases was not the exercise of power which an employer possessed to terminate the services of his employee, but the extent of that power; that provisions of Regulation 9(b) of the Delhi Road Transport Authority (Conditions of Appointment and Service) Regulations, 1952, could not be rendered constitutional by reading the require ment of recording reasons and confining it to cases where it was not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry and read ing it down further as being applicable to only exceptional cases would not be permissible construction and proper; that the Regulation conferred arbitrary power of leaving it to the DTC Management to pick and choose, either to hold an enquiry or terminate the services for the same misconduct and there was nothing in the provisions of the Act or the regulations from which the Management could find any guid ance and, therefore, in order to conform to the constitu tional guarantees contained in Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21, the regulation would have to make a distinction between cases where services were sought to be terminated for mis conduct and cases of termination on grounds other than what would constitute misconduct; that regulation 9(b) deliber ately conferred wide power of termination of service without giving reasonable opportunity to an employee even if he was regular or permanent employee, in addition to regulation 15 which provided for dismissal or removal after a disciplinary enquiry, thus, the intention of the regulation making au thority was clear and unambiguous; the provision was not capable of two interpretations, and consequently, the ques tion of reading down did not arise, and reading down in the instant cases involved not interpretation of any single word in regulation 9(b) but adding a whole clause to it, which amounted to rewriting the provisions, which courts had refused to make up for the omission of the legislature, and would inevitably drain out Article 14 of its vitality, and the right to equality which was regarded as a basic feature of the Constitution, and subject permanent employees of the DTC to a tremendous sense of insecurity which is against the philosophy and scheme of the Constitution, that unless the provision of the Constitution itself excluded the principles of natural justice, they continued to be applicable as an integral part of the right to equality guaranteed by the Constitution, that as the employees of the DTC were not Government employees, Article 311(2) was not applicable, and Article 14 fully applied to them, including the principles of natural justice.
147 On behalf of the Indian Airlines Corporation and the Air India, which filed intervention applications, it was submit ted that there had been distinction between the discharge simpliciter and dismissal from service by way of punishment, that the effect of the judgments of this Court in the Cen tral Inland Water 's case and West Bengal 's case was to take away the right of the employer to terminate the services of an employee by way of discharge simpliciter, that this Court had recognised the existence of the inherent right of an employer to terminate the services of an employee in terms of the contract of employment and also under the various labour enactments, that a plain reading of the amended Regulation 13 of the Indian Airlines Employees ' Regulations and a cumulative reading of the amended regulations 48 and 44 of the Air India Employees Service Regulations clearly established that the vice, if any, of arbitrariness had been completely removed and that the power to terminate had been vested with the Board of Directors, and not with any indi vidual, and sufficient guidelines made available to the Board to exercise the restricted and limited power available to the employer under these regulations.
On behalf of another intervenor, New India Assurance Co., it was submitted that the Central Inland Water 's case was erroneous, insofar as it made complete negation of power of the employer to terminate and rendered the termination illegal even where the employer had made all the necessary investigation and had given hearing to the employee con cerned before making the order, and took in even private employment; therefore, the judgment of this Court should be read down and made applicable prospectively.
In Civil Appeal No. 4073 of 1986 it was contended on behalf of the Bank employee whose services were terminated under para 522 of the Shastri Award, that mere failure of the employee to mention the loan taken by him from another branch of the Bank, which was repaid subsequently, had deprived him of his livelihood, and his services were termi nated without charge of 'misconduct ' and without an enquiry, and paragraph 522 of the Shastri Award gave no indication as to on what conditions this arbitrary uncontrolled power could be used to get rid of one or more permanent employees for "efficient management of Banks" on subjective opinions or suspicion not tested in enquiry into facts, and that this provision provided for "insecurity of tenure" for lakhs of permanent employees; Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 and the integrated protection of these Fundamental Rights excluded the "doctrine of pleasure" and insisted on security of tenure "during good behaviour", and the right to livelihood could not be rendered precari 148 ous or reduced to a "glorious 'uncertainty", that no princi ple of interpretation permitted reading down a provision so as to make it into a different provision altogether differ ent from what was intended by the legislature or its dele gate, and there could not be any reading down which was contrary to the principles of interpretation; that if two provisions existed, firstly to remove from service after holding an enquiry on a charge of 'misconduct ' and secondly, without serving a charge sheet or holding an enquiry, all provisions for holding enquiry would be rendered otiose and would be reduced to a mere redundancy, that the Court had a duty to correct wrongs even if orders had been made which were later found to be violative of any fundamental right and to recall its orders to avoid injustice; that substan tive provision of para 522 could not be controlled or cur tailed effectively so as to confine its operation within narrow constitutional limits; that it was not the duty of the court to condone the constitutional delinquencies of those limited by the Constitution if they arrogated uncon trolled unconstitutional powers, which were neither neces sary nor germane for supposed efficiency of services in the Banks as a business enterprise, and that in a system gov erned by rule of law, discretion when conferred upon execu tive authorities must be confined within clearly defined limits.
In Civil Appeal No. I 115 of 1976, the appellant employ ee of the Zila Parishad contended that his services were terminated on account of the vindictiveness of some of the employees of the respondent, and without enquiry.
The em ployer submitted that the termination order was passed on the basis of the condition in the mutually agreed terms of contract of appointment, and resolution passed by the Board, and that Rule 1(i) of District Board Rules, 1926, Part V gave right to both the parties to terminate the employment on one month 's notice.
On the questions (i) whether Regulation 9(b) of the Delhi Road Transport Authority (Conditions of Appointment and Service) Regulations, 1952, was arbitrary, illegal, discriminatory and violative of audi alteram partem and so constitutionally invalid and void; and (ii) whether the Regulation could be interpreted and read down in such a manner as to hold that it was not discriminatory, or arbi trary and did not confer unbriddled and uncanalised power on the authority to terminate the service of an employee, including a permanent employee, without any reason whatsoev er.
Dismissing Civil Appeal No. 2876 of 1986 (appeal by the Delhi Transport Corporation), allowing Civil Appeal No. 1115 of 1976, and directing other matters to be placed before a Division Bench, in ac 149 cordance with the majority decision (per Ray, Sharma, Sawant and K. Ramaswamy, JJ.) this Court, HELD: Per Ray, J.: 1.
I Regulation 9(b) of the Delhi Road Transport Author ity (Conditions of Appointment and Service) Regulations, 1952 which confers powers on the authority to terminate the services of a permanent and confirmed employee by issuing a notice terminating the services or by making payment in lieu of notice without assigning any reasons in the order and without giving any opportunity of hearing to the employee before passing the orders is wholly arbitrary, uncanalised and unrestricted violating principles of natural justice as well as Article 14 of the Constitution.
There is no guide line in the Regulations or in the Delhi Road Transport Authority Act, 1950 as to when or in which cases and circum stances this power of termination by giving notice or pay in lieu thereof can be exercised.
[264G, 285C] 1.2 Government Companies or Public Corporations which carry on trade and business activity of State being State instrumentalities, are State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and as such they are subject to the observance of fundamental rights embodied in Part 111 as well as to conform to the directive principles in Part IV of the Constitution.
In other words, the Service Regulations or Rules framed by them are to be tested by the touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Furthermore, the procedure prescribed by their Rules or Regulations must be reasonable, fair and just and not arbitrary, fanciful and unjust.
[264H, 265A B] 1.3 The 'audi alteram partem ' rule which, in essence, enforces the equality clause in Article 14 of the Constitu tion is applicable not only to quasi judicial orders but to administrative orders affecting prejudicially the party in question unless the application of the rule has been ex pressly excluded by the Act or Regulation or Rule which is not the case here.
Rules of natural justice do no supplant but supplement the Rules and Regulations.
Moreover, the Rule of Law, which permeates the Constitution of India, demands that it has to be observed both substantially and procedurally.
Rule of law posits that the power to be exercised in a manner which is just, fair and reasonable and not in an unreasonable, capricious or arbitrary manner leaving room for discrimination.
[265D E] Regulation 9(b) does not expressly exclude the application of the 150 'audi alteram parterm ' rule and as such the order of termi nation of service of a permanent employee cannot be passed by simply issuing a month 's notice or pay in lieu thereof without recording any reason in the order and without giving any hearing to the employee to controvert the allegation on the basis of which the purported order is made.
[265F] 1.4 Considering from all these aspects Regulation 9(b) is illegal and void, as it is arbitrary, discriminatory and without any guidelines for exercise of the power.
It confers unbridled, uncanalised and arbitrary power on the authority to terminate the services of a permanent employee without recording any reasons and without conforming to the princi ples of natural justice.
It is also void under Section 23 of the Contract Act, as being opposed to public policy and also ultra vires of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[265E, 265B C, 266G] Moti Ram Deka Etc.
vs General Manager, NEF Railways, Maligaon.
Pandu, Etc., ; ; Parshotam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, ; ; Shyam Lal vs The State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr., ; ; Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar & Ors., ; ; Jyoti Pershad vs The Administrator for the Union Territory of Delhi, ; ; State of Orissa vs Dr. (Miss) Binapani Devi & Ors., ; ; A.K. Kraipak of India vs Col. J.N. Sinha and Anr., [1971] 1 SCR 791; Air India Corporation vs V.A. Rebello & Ant., AIR 1972 S.C. 1343; The Workmen of Sudder Office Cinnamara vs The Manage ment, ; Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. vs Work men & Anr.; , ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; E.P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu and Anr. ; ; Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay vs Malvenkar & Ors., ; ; Manohar P. Kharkher and Anr.
vs Raghuraj & Anr., ; 1.
Michael & Anr.
vs Johnaton Pumps India Ltd., ; ; Sukhdev Singh & Ors.
vs Bhagat Ram Sardar Singh Raghu vanshi & Anr.; , ; S.S. Muley vs J.R.D. Tata & Ors., ; West Bengal State Electricity Board & Ors.
vs Desh Bandhu Ghosh and Ors., [1985] 3 SCC 116; Workmen Of Hindustan Steel Ltd. and Anr.
vs Hindustan Steel Ltd. and Ors., ; ; O.P. Bhandari vs Indian Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. & Ors.
, ; ; Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. & Anr.
vs Brojo Nath Ganguly & Anr., and Delhi Transport Undertaking vs Balbir Saran Goel, ; , referred to.
2.1 An Act can be declared to be valid wherein any term has been 151 used which per se seems to be without jurisdiction, but can be read ' down in order to make it constitutionally valid by separating and excluding the part which is invalid or by interpreting the word in such a fashion as to make it con stitutionally valid and within jurisdiction of the legisla ture which passed the said enactment, by reading down the provisions of the Act.
This however, does not under any circumstances, mean that where the plain and literal meaning that follows from a bare reading of the provisions of the Act, Rule or Regulations that it confers arbitrary uncana lised, unbridled unrestricted power to terminate the serv ices of a permanent employee without recording any reasons for the same and without adhering to the principles of natural justice and equality before the law as envisaged in Article 14 of the Constitution, it can be read down to save the said provision from constitutional invalidity, by bring ing or adding words in the said legislation, such as saying that it implies that reasons for the order of termination have to be recorded.
[271C F] 2.2 In interpreting the provisions of an Act, it is not permissible where the plain language of the provision gives a clear and unambiguous meaning that it can be interpreted by reading down and presuming certain expressions in order to save it from constitutional invalidity.
Therefore, it is impossible to hold by reading down the provisions of Regula tion 9(b) framed under section 53 of the Delhi Road Trans port Act, 1950 read with Delhi Road Transport (Amendment) Act, 1971 that the said provision does not confer arbitrary, unguided, unrestricted and uncanalised power without any guidelines on the authority to terminate the services of an employee without conforming to the principles of natural justice and equality as envisaged in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
[271F H, 272A] Union of India & Anr.
vs Tulsiram Patel & Ors., [1985] Supp. 2 SCR 131; Roshan Lal Tandon vs Union of India, ; ; Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh, Indore & Ors.
vs Radhakrishan & Ors.
, ; ; In Re The Hindu Women 's Rights to Property Act, 1937, and the Hindu Women 's Rights to Property (Amendment) Act, 1938 and in Re a Special Reference under Section 213 of the Government of India Act, 1935, ; R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs The Union of India; , ; R.L. Arora vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
, ; and The Mysore State Electricity Board vs Bangalore Woollen, Cotton and Silk Mills Ltd. & Ors., [1963] Supp.
2 SCR 127, Jagaish Pandey vs The Chancellor of Bihar & Anr.
, ; , referred to.
H.N. Seervai: Constitutional Law of India, Third Edi tion, p. 119, referred to.
152 Per Sharma, J. 1.1 The rights of the parties in the present cases cannot be governed by the general principle of master and servant, and the management cannot have unrestricted and unqualified power of terminating the services of the employ ees.
In the interest of efficiency of the public bodies, however, they should have the authority to terminate the employment of undesirable, inefficient, corrupt, indolent and disobedient employees, but it must be exercised fairly, objectively and independently; and the occasion for the exercise must be delimited with precision and clarity.
Further, there should be adequate reason for the use of such a power, and a decision in this regard has to be taken in a manner which should show fairness, avoid arbitrariness and evoke credibility.
And this is possible only when the law lays down detailed guidelines in unambiguous and precise terms so as to avoid the danger of misinterpretation of the situation.
An element of uncertainty is likely to lead to grave and undesirable consequences.
Clarity and precision are.
therefore, essential for the guidelines.
[272D F] 1.2 Regulation 9(b) of the Delhi Road Transport Authori ty (Condition of Appointment and Service) Regulation, 1952 cannot, therefore.
be upheld for lack of adequate and appro priate guidelines.
[272G] Per Saw,ant, J. 1.1.
There is need to minimise the scope of the arbi trary use of power in all walks of life.
It is inadvisable to depend on the good sense of the individuals.
however high placed they may be.
It is all the more improper and undesirable to expose the precious rights like the rights of life.
liberty and property to the vagaries of the individual whims and fancies.
It is trite to say that individuals are not and do not become wise because they occupy high seats of power, and good sense, circumspection and fairness do not go with the posts, however high they may be.
There is only a complaisant presumption that those who occupy high posts have a high sense of responsibility.
The presumption is neither legal nor rational.
History does not support it and reality does not warrant it.
In particular, in a society pledged to uphold the rule of law, it would be both unwise and impolitic to leave any aspect of its life to be governed by discretion when it can conveniently and easily be covered by the rule of law.
[276E F] 1.2 Beyond the self deluding and self asserting right eous presumption, there is nothing to support the 'high authority ' theory.
This 153 theory undoubtedly weighed with some authorities for some time in the past.
But its unrealistic pretensions were soon noticed and it was buried without even so much as an ode to it.
[278A B] 1.3 The employment under the public undertakings is a public employment and a public property.
It is not only the undertakings but also the society which has a stake in their proper and efficient working.
Both discipline and devotion are necessary for efficiency.
To ensure both, the service conditions of those who work for them must be encouraging, certain and secured, and not vague and whimiscal.
With capricious service conditions, both discipline and devotion are endangered, and efficiency is impaired.
[276G H, 277A] 1.4 The right to life includes right to livelihood.
The right to livelihood, therefore, cannot hang on to the fan cies of individuals in authority.
The employment is not a bounty from them nor can its survival be at their mercy.
Income is the foundation of many fundamental rights and when work is the sole source of income, the right to work becomes as much fundamental.
Fundamental rights can ill afford to be consigned to the limb of undefined premises and uncertain applications.
That will be a mockery of them.
[277B] 1.5 Both the society and the individual employed, there fore, have an anxious interest in service conditions being well defined and explicit to the extent possible.
The arbi trary rules which are also sometimes described as Henry VIII Rules, can have no place in any service conditions.
[277C] Sukhdev Singh & Ors.
vs Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghu vanshi & Anr.
; , ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, ; The Manager, Government Branch Press & Ant.
vs D.R. Belliappa, ; ; The Manag ing Director, Uttar Pradesh Warehousing Corporation & Anr.
vs Vinay Narayan Vajpayee; , ; A.L. Kalra vs The Project & Equipment Corporation of India Ltd., ; ; Workmen of Hindustan Steel Ltd. & Anr.
vs Hindustan Steel Ltd. & Ors.
, ; ; West Bengal State Electricity Board & Ors.
vs Desh Bandhu Ghosh & Ors., [1985] 2 SCR 1014; Olga Tellis & Ors.
vs Bombay Municipal Corpora tion & Ors.
, [1985] Supp. 2 SCR 51; Union of India & Anr.
vs Tulsiram Patel& Ors., [1985] Supp. 2 SCR 131; Cen tral Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. & Anr.
vs Brojo Nath Ganguly & Anr.
, ; O.P. Bhandari vs Indian Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. & Ors. ; ; N.C. Dalwadi vs State of Gujarat, [1987] 3 154 SCC 611; M.K. Agarwal vs Gurgaon Gramin Bank & Ors., [1987] Supp.
SCC 643 and Daily Rated Casual Labour employed under P & T Department through Bhartiya Dak Tar Mazdoor Manch etc.
vs Union of India & Ors., , referred to.
2.1 The doctrine of reading down or of recasting the statute can be applied in limited situations.
It is essen tially used, firstly, for saving a statute from being struck down on account of its unconstitutionality.
It is an exten sion of the principle that when two interpretations are possible one rendering it constitutional and the other making it constitutional the former should be preferred.
The unconstitutionality may spring from either the incompetence of the legislature to enact the statute or from its viola tion of any of the provisions of the Constitution.
The second situation which summons its aid is where the provi sions of the statute are vague and ambiguous and it is possible to gather the intention of the legislature from the object of the statute, the context in which the provision occurs and the purpose for which it is made.
However, when the provision is cast in a definite and unambiguous language and its intention is clear, it is not permissible either to mend or bend it even if such recasting is in accord with good reason and conscience.
In such circumstances, it is not possible for the Court to remake the statute.
Its only duty is to strike it down and leave it to the legislature if it so desires, to amend it.
If the remaking of the statute by the courts is to lead to its distortion that course is to be scrupulously avoided.
The doctrine can never be called into play where the statute requires extensive additions and deletions.
Not only it is no part of the court 's duty to undertake such exercise, but it is beyond its jurisdiction to do so.
[288F H, 289A B] Re Hindu Women 's Rights to Property Act, 1937, and the Hindu Women 's Rights to Property (Amendment) Act, 1938 etc., ; Nalinakhya Bysack vs Shyam Sunder Halder & Ors.
, ; ; R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs The Union of India, ; ; Kedar Nath Singh vs State of Bihar, [1962] Supp.
2 SCR 769; R.L Arora vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., ; ; Jagdish Pandey vs The Chancellor, University of Bihar & Anr., [1968] I SCR 231; Shri Umed vs Raj Singh & Ors., [1975] I SCR 918; Mohd. Yunus Salim 's case; , ; Sunil Batra etc.
vs Delhi Adminis tration & Ors.; , ; Excel Wear etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Minerva Mills Ltd. & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Union of India & Anr. etc.
vs Tulsiram Patel etc.
; , and Elliott Ashton Welsh, 11 vs United States; , ; 308, referred to.
155 2.2 Therefore, the doctrine of reading down cannot be availed of for saving the regulation in the instant case.
In the first instance, the regulation is a part of the service regulations of the employees made by the Delhi Road Trans port Authority in exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (1) read with clause (c) of sub section (2) of Section 53 of the Delhi Road Transport Act, 1950, whose object is to provide for the establishment and the regula tion of Road Transport Authority for the promotion of a co ordinated system of road transport in the State of Delhi.
There is nothing either in the object of the service regula tions or in the object of the Act which has a bearing on Regulation 9(b).
If anything the object of the Act would require framing of such service regulations as would ensure dedicated and diligent employees to run the undertaking.
The dedication of the employees would pre suppose security of employment and not a constant hanging of the Democle 's sword over their head, and hence would in any case not bear the existence of such regulation.
Secondly, the language of regulation is so crystal clear that no two interpretations are possible to be placed on it and hence it is not permis sible to read in it any meaning other than what is clearly sought to be conveyed by it.
Thirdly, the context of the regulation makes it abundantly clear that it is meant to be a naked hire and fire rule and the authority has been vested with unguided and arbitrary power to dispense with the services of any category of the employees.
Sub clause (a) of the Regulation mentions elaborately the circumstances in which the services of an employee can be terminated without any notice or pay in lieu of such notice.
Sub clause (b) follows closely on its heel and states in clear language that when the termination is made due to reduction of estab lishment or in circumstances other than those mentioned in sub clause (a), one month 's notice or pay in lieu thereof is all that is necessary to be given for terminating an employ ee 's services.
The intention of the rule making authority, therefore, is more than clear.
It was to give an absolute free hand without any limitations whatsoever to terminate the services of any employee.
Both the language of the regulation as well as the context in which it is cast leave no scope for reading into it any further provision.
[289C H, 290A] 2.3 Moreover, reading in the rule circumstances under which alone the rule can be used, and reading it down to read in it words or expressions or provisions in order to save the legislation would not only distort the intention of the rule making authority but would also require extensive amendment of a very vague nature to it.
The reading in the regulation of a provision that the concerned employees should be given a hearing with regard to his mis conduct will require that be should first be intimated of the mis conduct of which he is guilty.
But 156 that kind of a situation is taken care of by sub clause (a) of the said regulation.
There is.
therefore.
no need of a separate prevision for the same.
on the other hand.
the services of an employee are to be terminated on grounds other than those mentioned in sub clause (a), then those grounds being unknown to the employee, cannot be met by him even if he is given a hearing.
The Court cannot read in the rule all circumstances where it is not possible or necessary to hold an enquiry.
Such situations are capable of being formulated easily and conveniently at least in general terms as is done by the Constitution makers in the second proviso to Article 311( 2).
The reading of such circumstances in the existing regulation would require its extensive recasting which is impermissible for the Court to do.
There is no authority which supports such wide reading down of any provision of the statute or rule/regulation.
Therefore the doctrine of reading down is singularly inapplicable to the present case.
[281B, 290B, 291A F] 3.
Clause (b) of Regulation 9 contains the much hated and abused rule of hire and fire reminiscent of the days of laissez faire and unrestrained freedom of contract.
[274E] Per Ramaswamy.
J 1. 1.1 The question of security of work is of most impor tance.
If a person does not have the feeling that he belongs to an organisation engaged in promotion.
he will not put forward his best effort to produce more.
That sense of belonging arises only when he feels that he will not be turned out of employment the next day at the whim of the management.
Therefore, as far as possible security of work should be assured the employees so that they may contribute to the maximisation of production.
[300D E] Daily Rated Casual Labour vs Union of India, at 130 131, referred to.
1.2 A permanent employee of a statutory authority, corporation or instrumentality under Article 12 has a lien on the post till he attained superannuation or compulsorily retired or service is duly terminated in accordance with the procedure established by law.
Security of tenure enures the benefit of pension on retirement.
Dismissal, removal or termination of his/her service for inefficiency, corruption or other misconduct is by way of penalty.
He/She has a right to security of tenure which is essential to inculcate a sense of belonging to the service or organisation and in volvement for maximum production or efficient 157 service.
It is also a valuable right which is to be duly put an end to only as per valid law.
[300A G] Roshan Lal Tandon vs Union of India, ; at 195 196; Calcutta Dock Labour Board vs Jarfar Imam, and Sirsi Municipality vs Cecelia Kom Francis Tal lis; , , referred to.
1.3 The right to life, a basic human right, assured by Article 21 of the Constitution comprehends some thing more than mere animal existence; it does not only mean physical existence, but includes basic human dignity.
The right to public employment and its concomitant right to livelihood receive their succour and nourishment under the canopy of the protective umbrella of Articles 14, 16(1), 19(1)(g) and 21.
[296A, 297B] Munn vs Illinois, ; and 154, referred to.
Kharak Singh vs State of U.P., [1964] 1 SCR 332; Olga Tellis vs Bombay Municipal Corporation, [1985] 2 Suppl.
SCR page 51 at 79; Menaka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; State of Maharashtra vs Chander Bhan, and Board of Trustees, Port of Bombay vs Dilip Kumar; , , referred to.
1.4 The arbitrary, unbridled and naked power of wide discretion to dismiss a permanent employee without any guidelines or procedure would tend to defeat the constitu tional purpose of equality and allied purposes.
Therefore, when the Constitution assures dignity of the individual and the right to livelihood, the exercise of power by the execu tive should be combined with adequate safeguards for the rights of the employees against any arbitrary and capricious use of those powers.
Workmen of Hindustan Steels Ltd. vs Hindustan Steel Ltd. & Ors.; , and Francis Corallie vs
U.T. of Delhi; , = ; , referred to.
1.5 It is well settled constitutional law that different Articles the Chapter on Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles in Part IV of the Constitution must be read as an integral and incorporeal whole with possible overlapping with the subject matter of what is to be protected by its various provisions, particularly the Fundamental Rights.
The fundamental rights, protected by Part III of the constitu tion, out of which Articles 14.
19 and 21 are the most frequently 158 invoked to test the validity of executive as well as legis lative actions when these actions are subjected to judicial scrutiny, are necessary means to develop one 's own person ality and to carve out one 's own life in the manner one likes best subject to reasonable restrictions imposed in the paramount interest of the society and to a just.
fair and reasonable procedure.
The effect of restriction or deprivation and not of the form adopted to deprive the right is the conclusive test.
Thus, the right to a public employ ment is a constitutional right under Article 16(1).
All matters relating to employment include the right to continue in service till the employee reaches superannuation or his service is duly terminated in accordance with just, fair and reasonable procedure prescribed under the provisions of the Constitution or the Rules made under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution or the statutory provision or the Rules.
regulations or instructions having statutory flavour made thereunder.
But the relevant provisions must be conformable to the rights guaranteed in Parts III & IV of the Constitu tion.
Article 21 guarantees the right to live which includes right to livelihood.
to many.
assured tenure of service is the source.
[311G; 312G H, 313A B] R.C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; ; Minerva Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, and Union of India & Ant.
vs Tulsiram Patel & 0rs. [1985] Suppl.
2 SCR 131 at 233 referred to.
1.6 Article 14 is the general principle while article 311(2) is a special provision applicable to all civil serv ices under the State.
Article 311(2) embodies the principles of natural justice but proviso to clause (2) of article 311 excludes the operation of principles of natural justice engrafted in article 311(2) as an exception in the given cir cumstances enumerated in these clauses of the proviso to article 311(2) of the Constitution.
Article 14 read with Arti cles 16(1) and 311 are to be harmoniously interpreted that the proviso to article 311(2) excludes the application of the principles of natural justice as an exception; and the applicability of Article 311(2) must, therefore, be circum scribed to the civil services and to be construed according ly.
In respect of all other employees covered by Article 12 of the Constitution the dynamic role of Article 14 and other relevant Articles like 21 must be allowed to have full play without any inhibition.
unless the statutory rules them selves, consistent with the mandate of Articles 14.16.19 and 21 provide, expressly, such an exception.
[317F H, 315A] Union of India & Ant.
vs Tulsiram Patel & Ors., [1985] Suppl.
2 SCR 131 at 233; A.K. Kraipak & Ors. etc.
vs Union of India & Ors., and Union of India vs Col J.N. Sinha & Ors., [1971] 1 SCR 791, referred to.
159 1.7 Article 19(1)(g) empowers every citizen right to avocation or profession etc., which includes right to be continued in employment under the State unless the tenure is validly terminated and consistent with the scheme enshrined in the fundamental rights of the Constitution.
Whenever there is arbitrariness in State action whether it be of the Legislature or of the Executive or of an authority under Article 12.
Articles 14 and 21 spring into action and strike down such an action.
The concept of reasonableness and non arbitrariness pervades the entire constitutional spectrum and is a golden thread which runs through the whole fabric of the Constitution.
[315B D] 1.8 Thus, Article 14 read with 16(1) accords right to an equality or an equal treatment consistent with principles of natural justice.
Any law made or action taken by the employ er, corporate statutory or instrumentality under Article 12 must act fairly and reasonably.
Right.
to fair treatment is an essential inbuilt of natural justice.
Exercise of unbri dled and uncanalised discretionary power impinges upon the right of the citizen; vesting of discretion is no wrong provided it is exercised purposively, judiciously and with out prejudice.
Wider the discretion, the greater the chances of abuse.
Absolute discretion is destructive of freedom than of man 's inventions.
Absolute discretion marks the beginning of the end of the liberty.
The conferment of absolute power to dismiss a permanent employee is antithesis to justness or fair treatment.
The exercise of discretionary power wide of mark would bread arbitrary, unreasonable or unfair actions and would not be consistent with reason and justice.
[320B D] 1.9 The right to public employment which includes right to continued public employment till the employee is superan nuated as per rules or compulsorily retired or duly termi nated in accordance with the procedure established by law is an integral part of right to livelihood which in turn is an integral part of right to life assured by article 21 of the Constitution.
Any procedure prescribed to deprive such a right to livelihood or continued employment must be just, fair and reasonable procedure and conformable to the mandate of Articles 14 and 21.
In other words, an employee in a public employment also must not be arbitrarily, unjustly or unreasonably deprived of his/her livelihood which is ensured in continued employment till it is terminated in accordance with just, fair and reasonable procedure.
Otherwise any law or rule in violation thereof is void.
[320E F] A.K. Kraipak & Ors. etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; Union of India vs Col. J.N. Sinha and Anr., [1971] 1 SCR 791; 160 Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union (Regd.), Sindri & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; at 60 61; S.S. Muley vs J.R.D. Tata, ; Superin tendent of Post Office vs K. Vasayya, [1984] 3 Andhra Pra desh law Journal 9; West Bengal Electricity Board & Ors. vs D.B. Ghosh & Orb '., [1985] 2 SCR 1014; Workmen of Hindustan Steel Ltd. & Anr.
vs Hindustan Steel Ltd. & Ors.
, ; ; O.P. Bhandari vs Indian Tourism Development Corp. Ltd. & Ors.
, ; ; A.P.S.R.T. Corp. vs Labour Court, AIR 1980 A.P. 132; R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs State of Punjab, ; ; Kanhialal vs District Judge & Ors., ; M.K. Agarwal vs Gurgaon Gramin Bank & Ors., ; All Saints High School vs Government of A.P., ; & 938 e to f; Frank Anthoney Public School vs Union of India, ; & 269 b to e; Christian Medical College Hospital Employees ' Union & Anr.
vs Christian Medical College Veilore Association & Ors., ; & 562; Kameshwar Prasad vs State of Bihar, [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 369 and O.K. Ghosh vs EZX Joseph, [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 789, referred to.
United States vs Samuel D. singleton; , , referred 1.10 Undoubtedly, efficiency of the administration and the discipline among the employees is very vital to the successful functioning of an institution or maximum produc tion of goods or proper maintenance of the services.
Disci pline in that regard amongst the employees is its essential facet and bas to be maintained.
The society is vitally interested in the due discharge of the duties by the govern ment employees or employees of corporate bodies or statutory authorities or instrumentalities under article 12 of the Con stitution.
The government or corporate employees are, after all, paid from the public exchequer to which everyone contributes either by way of direct or indirect taxes.
The employees are charged with public duty and they should perform their public duties with deep sense of responsibili ty.
The collective responsibility of all the officers from top most to the lowest maximises the efficient public admin istration.
They must, therefore, be held to have individual as well as collective responsibility in discharge of their duties faithfully honestly with full dedication and utmost devotion to duty.
Equally the employees must also have a feeling that they have security of tenure.
They should also have an involvement on their part in the organisation or institution, corporation, etc.
They need assurance of serv ice and protection.
The public interest and the public good demands that those who discharge their duties honestly, efficiently and 161 with a sense of devotion and dedication to duty should receive adequate protection and security of tenure.
There fore, before depriving an employee of the means of liveli hood to himself and his dependents, i.e. job, the procedure prescribed for such deprivation must be just, fair and reasonable under articles 21 and 14 and when infringes article 19(1)(g) must be subject to imposing reasonable restrictions under article 19(5).
[320G H, 321A D, 322D] 1.11 Conferment of power on a high rank officer is not always an assurance, in particular, when the moral standards are generally degenerated, that the power would be exercised objectively, reasonably, conscientiously, fairly and justly without inbuilt protection to an employee.
Even officers who do their duty honestly and conscientiously are subject to great pressures and pulls.
Therefore, the competing claims of the "public interest" as against "individual interest" of the employees are to be harmoniously blended so as to serve the societal need consistent with the constitutional scheme.
[322D E] 1.12 Regulation 9(b) of the Delhi Road Transport (Condi tions of Appointment and Service) Regulations, 1952, is arbitrary, unjust, unfair and unreasonable offending Arti cles 14, 16(1), 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution.
It is also opposite to the public policy and thereby is void under Section 23 of the .
[330G] 1.13 Under ordinary law of master and servant, whether the contract of service is for a fixed period or not, if it contains a provision for termination of service by notice, in terms thereof, it can be so determined and if the con tract finds no provision to give notice and the contract of service is not for a fixed period, law implies giving of a reasonable notice.
Where no notice or a reasonable notice was issued.
before terminating the contract.
the termination of the contract of service is wrongful and the aggrieved employee is entitled at law to sue for damages.
It is not disputed that the Delhi Road Transport Corporation is a statutory Corporation under the Delhi Road Transport Act and the Regulations are statutory and its employees are entitled to the fundamental rights enshrined in Part 111 of the Constitution.
The Corporation or an instrumentality or other authority under Article 12 is not free, like an ordinary master (a private employer) to terminate the services of its employees at its whim or caprices or vagary.
It is bound by the Act and the Regulation and paramount law of the land, the Constitution.
[292G H; 293A B] 1.14 Any law, much less the provisions of Contract Act, which are inconsistent with the fundamental rights guaran teed in Part III of 162 the Constitution, are void by operation of Article 13 of the Constitution.
The law of contract, like the legal system itself, involves a balance between competing sets of values.
Freedom of contract emphasises the need for stability.
certainty and predictability.
But, important as values are.
they are not absolute, and there comes a point when they face a serious challenge. 'This Court, as a court of consti tutional conscience enjoined and is jealously to project and uphold new values in establishing the egalitarian social order.
As a court of constitutional functionary exercising equity jurisdiction, this Court would relieve the weaker parties from unconstitutional contractual obligations, unjust, unfair, oppressive and unconscionable rules or conditions when the citizen is really unable to meet on equal terms with the State.
It is to find whether the citi zen, when entered into contracts of service, was in distress need or compelling circumstances to enter into contract on dotted lines or whether the citizen was in a position of either to "take it or leave it" and if it finds to be so, this Court would not shirk to avoid the contract by appro priate declaration.
[302G, 303B, 304H, 305A B] Central Inland Water Transport Company Limited vs Brojo nath Ganguly, 1986 SC 1571, affirmed.
Ramdas Vithaldas Durbar vs section Amarchand & 60., 43 Indian Appeals.
164 and V. Raghunadha Rao vs State of Andhra Pra desh, , referred to.
Anson 's Law of Contract, p. 6 and 7 and Professor Guido Calabresi of Yale University Law School "Refractivity, Paramount power and Contractual Changes", 1961 62 71 Yale Law Journal, P 1191, referred to.
2.1 The golden rule of statutory construction is that the words and phrases or sentences should be interpreted according to the intent of the legislature that passed the Act.
All the provisions should be read together.
If the words of the statutes are in themselves precise and unambig uous, the words, or phrases or sentences themselves alone do, then no more can be necessary than to expound those words or phrases or sentences in their natural and ordinary sense.
But if any doubt arises from the terms employed by the legislature, it is always safe means of collecting the intention, to call in aid the ground and cause of making the statute, and have recourse to the preamble, which is a key to open the minds of the makers of the statute and the mischiefs which the Act intends to redress.
In determining the meaning of statute the first question to ask always is what is the natural or ordinary meaning of that 163 word or phrase in its context.
It is only when that meaning leads to some result which cannot reasonably be supposed to have been the intent of the legislature, then it is proper to look for some other possible meaning and the court cannot go further.
[323D G] 2.2 The Doctrine of Reading Down is, therefore, an internal aid to construe the word or phrase in a statute to give reasonable meaning, but not to detract, disort or emasculate the language so as to give the supposed purpose to avoid unconstitutionality.
Thus, the object of reading down is to keep the operation of the statute within the purpose of the Act and constitutionally valid.
[324E, 325B] 2.3 It cannot be accepted that the Courts, in the proc ess of interpretation of the Statute, would not make law but leave it to the legislature for necessary amendments.
In an appropriate case, Judges would articulate the inarticulate major premise and would give life and force to a Statute by reading harmoniously all the provisions ironing out the creezes.
The object is to elongate the purpose of the Act.
[323B] 2.4 The Courts, though, have no power to amend the law by process of interpretation, but do have power to mend it so as to be in conformity with the intendment of the legis lature.
Doctrine of reading down is one of the principles of interpretation of statute in that process.
But when the offending language used by the legislature is clear, precise and unambiguous, violating the relevant provisions in the constitution, resort cannot be had to the doctrine of read ing down to blow life into the void law to save it from unconstitutionality or to confer jurisdiction on the legis lature.
Similarly it cannot be taken aid of to emasculate the precise, explicit, clear and unambiguous language to confer arbitrary, unbridled and uncanalised power on an employer which is a negation to just, fair and reasonable procedure envisaged under Articles 14 and 21 of the Consti tution and to direct the authorities to record reasons, unknown or unintended procedure.
[326H, 327A B] Elliott Ashton Walsh, H vs United States, ; ; Nalinakhya Bysack vs Shyam Sunder Haldar & Ors., ; at 544 45; United States vs Wunderlick, ; S.C. Jaisinghani vs Union of India, ; ; In re Hindu Women 's Right to Property Act, ; K.N. Singh vs State of Bihar, [1962] Suppl. 2 SCR 769; R.L. Arora vs State of U.P., ; ; Jagdish Pandev vs Chan cellor of the Bihar, ; Amritsar Municipality vs State of Punjab, ; ;Sunil Batra vs Delhi Admn., ; ; N.C. Dalwadi vs State of Gujarat, [1987] 3 164 SCC 611; Charanlal Sahu vs Union of India, [1989] Suppl.
Scale 1 at p. 61; Delhi Transport Undertaking vs Balbir Saran Goel, ; Air India Corporation vs Rebellow; , and Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay vs P.S. Malvankar, ; , re ferred to.
Federal Steam Navigation Co. vs Department of Trade and Industry, at p. 100 and Saints High School, Hyderabad vs Govt.
of A. P., ; , re ferred to.
Craies Statute Law, 7th Ed.
V, P. 64.
2.5 The language of Regulation 9(b) is not capable of two interpretations.
This power is in addition to the normal power in Regulation 15 to conduct an enquiry into misconduct after giving reasonable opportunity.
Thereby the legislative intention is manifest that it intended to confer such draco nian power couched in language of width which hangs like Damocles sword on the neck of the employee, keeping every employee on tenter hook under constant pressure of uncer tainty, precarious tenure at all times right from the date of appointment till date of superannuation.
It equally enables the employer to pick and choose an employee at whim or vagary to terminate the service arbitrarily and capri ciously.
Regulation 9(b), thereby deliberately conferred wide power of termination of services of the employee with out following the principles of audi alteram partem or even modicum of procedure of representation before terminating the services of permanent employee.
[327E G] 2.6 No doubt, the power to take appropriate and expedi tious action to meet the exigencies of weeding out ineffi cient, corrupt, indolent officers or employees from service should be provided and preserved to the competent authority but any action taken without any modicum of reasonable procedure and prior opportunity always generates an un quenchable feeling that unfair treatment was meted out to the aggrieved employee.
To prevent miscarriage of justice or to arrest a nursing grievance that arbitrary whimsical or capricious action was taken behind the back of an employee without opportunity, the law must provide a fair, just and reasonable procedure as is exigible in a given circumstance as adumbrated in proviso to article 311(2) of the Constitution.
If an individual action is taken as per the procedure on its own facts its legality may be tested.
But it would be no justification to confer power with wide discretion on any authority without any procedure which would not meet the test of justness, fairness and reasonable 165 ness envisaged under articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
Therefore, conferment of power with wide discretion without any guidelines, without any just, fair or reasonable proce dure is constitutionally anathema to articles 14, 16(1), 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution.
Doctrine of reading down cannot be extended to such a situation.
[328A C, 329B C] 2.7 In view of the march of law, made by Article 14 it is too late in the day to contend that the competent author ity would be vested with wide discretionary power without any proper guidelines or the procedure.
When it is found that the legislative intention is unmistakably clear, unam biguous and specific, the preamble, the other rules and the circumstances could not be taken aid of in reading down the provisions of the rules or the regulations of the constitu tional scheme.
[330F G] 3.1 The phrases "public policy", opposed to public policy, or "contrary to public policy" are incapable of precise definition.
It is valued to meet the public good or the public interest.
What is public good or in the public interest or what would be injurious or harmful to the public good or the public interest vary from time to time with the change of the circumstances.
Therefore, in the absence of specific head of public policy which covers a case, then the court must in consonance with public conscience and in keeping with public good and public interest invent new public policy and declare such practice or rules that are derogatory to the constitution to be opposed to public policy.
The rules which stem from the public policy must of necessity be laid to further the progress of the society, in particular when social change is to bring about an egalitar ian social order through rule of law.
In deciding a case which may not be covered by authority, courts have before them the beacon light of the trinity of the Constitution viz., the preamble, Part III and Part IV and the play of legal light and shade must lead on the path of justice social, economic and political.
Lacking precedent, the court can always be guided by that light and the guidance thus shed by the trinity of our Constitution.
[308C D, 309G H, 310A] 3.2 Since Constitutions are the superior law of the land, and because one of their outstanding features is flexibility and capacity to meet changing conditions, con stitutional policy provides a valuable aid in determining the legitimate boundaries of statutory meaning.
Thus public policy having its inception in Constitutions may accomplish either a restricted or extended interpretation of the liter al expression of a statute.
A statute is always presumed to be constitutional and where necessary, a constitutional meaning will be inferred to preserve validity.
Likewise, where a statute tends to extend or preserve a constitutional 166 principle, reference to analogous constitutional provisions may be of great value in shaping the statute to accord with the statutory aim or objective.
Therefore, when the provi sions of an Act or Regulations or Rules are assailed as arbitrary, unjust, unreasonable, unconstitutional, public law element makes it incumbent to consider the validity thereof on the anvil of inter play of articles 14, 16(1), 19(1)(g) and 21 and of the inevitable effect of the provi sion challenged on the rights of a citizen and to find whether they are constitutionally valid.
[310C D, 311E] 4.
The absence of arbitrary power is the first essential of the rule of law upon which our whole constitutional system is based.
In a system governed by rule of law, dis cretion, when conferred upon executive authorities, must be confined within defined limits.
The rule of law from this point of view means that decisions should be made by the application of known principles and rules and, in general, such decisions should be predictable and the citizen should know where he is.
If a decision is taken without any princi ple or without any rule it is unpredictable and such a decision is the antithesis of a decision taken in accordance with the rule of law.
[328D E] 5.
No doubt, it is open to the authorities to terminate the services of a temporary employee without holding an enquiry.
But in view of the march of law made, viz., that it is not the form of the action but the substance of the order which is to be looked into, it is open to the Court to lift the veil and pierce the action challenged to find whether the said action is the foundation to impose punishment or is only a motive.
The play of fair play is to secure justice procedural as well as substantive.
The substance of the order, the effect thereof is to be looked into.
[330C D] Shamsher Singh vs State of Punjab, , re ferred to.
It is for concerned authorities to make appropriate rules or regulations and to take appropriate action even without resorting to elaborate enquiry needed consistent with the constitutional scheme.
[331A] Workmen of Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs Hindustan Steel Ltd. & Ors.
; , , referred to.
Ram Chander vs Union of India, , referred to.
The ratio in Brojonath 's case was correctly laid down and requires no reconsideration.
[331D] 167 Central Inland Water Transport Company Limited vs Brojo nath Ganguly, , affirmed.
Per Mukharji, CJ., (Contra) 1.
The constitutionality of the conferment of power to terminate services of a permanent employee without holding an enquiry is sustained by reading that the power must be exercised on reasons relevant for the efficient running of the services or performing of the job by the societies or the bodies.
It should be done objectively, the reasons should be recorded, and the basis that it is not feasible or possible reasonably to hold any enquiry without disclosing the evidence which in the circumstances of the case would be hampering the running of the institution.
The reasons though recorded, need not be communicated, it is only for the purpose of running of the institution.
There should be factors which hamper running of the institution without the termination of the employment of the employee concerned at the particular time, either because he is a surplus or inefficient, disobedient and dangerous.
[235C E] 2.1 The philosophy of the Indian Constitution, as it has evolved, from precedent to precedent, has broadened the horizons of the right of the employees and they have been assured security of tenures and ensured protection against arbitrariness and discrimination in discharge or termination of his employment.
This is the basic concept of the evolu tion from the different angles of law of master and servant or in the evolution of employer and employee relationship.
It is true that the law has traveled in different channels, government servants or servants or employees having status have to be differentiated from those whose relationships are guided by contractual obligations.
However, the basic and fundamental question to be judged is, in what manner and to what extent, the employees of either of semi Government or statutory corporations or public undertakings who enjoy the rights, privileges, limitations and inhibitions of institu tions who come within the ambit of Article 12 of the Consti tution could be affected in their security of tenure by the employers consistent with the rights evolved over the years and rights emanating from the philosophy of the Constitution as at present understood and accepted.
[229D G] 2.2 Efficiency of the administration of these undertak ings is very vital and relevant consideration.
Production must continue, services must be maintained and run.
Efficacy of the services can be manned only by the disciplined em ployees or workers.
Discipline. decency and 168 order will have to be maintained.
Employees should have sense of participation and involvement and necessarily sense of security in semipermanent or quasi permanent or permanent employment.
There must be scope for encouragement for good work.
In what manner and in what measure, this should be planned and ensured within the framework of the Constitution and, power mingled with obligations, and duties enjoined with rights, are matters of constitutional adjustment at any particular evolved stage of the philosophy of our Constitu tion.
[230A C] 2.3 Arbitrary, whimsical or discriminatory action can flow or follow in some cases by the preponderance of these powers to terminate.
The tact that the power is entrusted with a high ranking authority or body is not always a safe or sound insurance against misuse.
At least, it does not always ensure against erosion of credibility in the exercise of the power in particular contingency.
Yet discipline has to be maintained, efficiency of the institution has to be ensured.
It has to be recognised that quick actions are very often necessary in running of an institution or public service or public utility and public concern.
It is not always possible to have enquiry because disclosure is diffi cult; evidence is hesitant and difficult, often impossible.
In those circumstances, the approach to the location of power, possession and exercise of which is essential for efficient running of the industries or services, has to be a matter both of balancing and adjustment, on which one can wager the salivation of rights and liberties of the employ ees concerned and the future of the industries or the serv ices involved.
[330D F] 2.4 The power to terminate the employment of permanent employment must be there.
Efficiency and expediency and the necessity of running an industry or service make it impera tive to have these powers.
Power must, therefore, be with authorities to take decision quickly, objectively and inde pendently.
Power must be assumed with certain conditions of duty.
The preamble, the policy, purpose of the enacting provision delimit the occasions or the contingencies for the need for the exercise of the power and these should limit the occasions of exercise of such powers.
The manner in which such exercise of power should be made should ensure fairness, avoid arbitrariness and mala fide and create credibility in the decisions arrived at or by exercise of the power.
All these are essential to ensure that power is fairly exercised and there is fair play in action.
Reasons good and sound, must control the exercise of power.
[230G H, 231A] Thus, for the running of the industry or the service, effi ciently, 169 quickly and in a better manner or to avoid dead locks or inefficiency or friction, the vesting of the power in cir cumstances must be such that it will evoke credibility and confidence.
Notice of hearing and opportunity in the form of an enquiry may or may not be given, yet arbitrariness and discrimination and acting whimsically must be avoided.
These powers must, therefore, be so read that the powers can be exercised on reasons, which should be recorded, though need not always be communicated, and must be by authorities who are high ranking or senior enough and competent and are expected to act fairly, objectively and independently.
The occasion for the use of power must be clearly circumscribed in the above limits.
These must also circumscribe that the need for exercise of those powers without holding a detailed or prolonged enquiry is there.
[231E, F G] Workmen of Hindustan Steel Ltd. & Anr.
vs Hindustan Steel Ltd. & Ors.
, ; ; West Bengal State Electricity Board and Others vs Desh Bandhu Ghosh and Oth ers, [1985] 3 SCC 116; Moti Ram Deka vs North East Frontier Railway, ; S.S. Muley vs J.R.D. Tata, ; Manohar P. Kharkhar vs Raghuraj, ; Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and Anr.
vs Brojo Nath Ganguly and Anr., ; Sukhdev Singh vs Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi, ; ; Union of India & Anr.
vs Tulsi Ram PateI, [1985] Suppl.
2 SCR 131 at p. 166; Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. vs Workmen & Anr., ; at 130; L. Michael & Anr.
vs M/s Johnston Pumps India Ltd.; , at 498; Delhi Transport Corporation Undertaking vs Balbir Saran Goel, ; at 764; Air India Corporation, Bombay vs V.A. Rebellow & Anr., ; ; Municipal Corpo ration of Greater Bombay vs P.S. Malvenkar & Ors., ; at page 1006; Roshan Lal Tandon vs Union of India, ; at 195 D E; Champak Lal Chiman Lal Shah vs The Union of India, at 204; Ram Gopal Chaturvedi vs State of M.P., ; at 475; Gheru Lal Parekh vs Mahadeodas Maiva & Others, [1959] Supp. 2 SCR 406 at 440; O.P. Bhandari vs I.T.D.C. & Ors., ; ; The Hindu Women 's Rights to Property Act, ; Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union (Regd.) Sindri and Others vs Union of India and Others, [1981] 2 SCR at 60 61; Ajay Hasia etc.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors. etc.; , at 100 102; A.V. Nachane & Anr.
vs Union of India & Anr.
, ; ; India Tobacco Co. Ltd. vs The Commercial Tax Officer, Bhavanipore & Ors., at 657; A.L. Kalra vs The Project and Equipment Corpora tion of India Ltd.; , at 664; Bandhua Mukti Morcha vs Union of India & Ors., [1984] 2 170 SCR 79 at 101; Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. vs The Workmen & Ors.
, ; at 669; The Collector of Customs, Madras vs Nathella Sampathu Chetty, ; at 825; Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh vs Radhakrishan & Ors., (supra); Gurdev Singh Sidhu vs State of Punjab & Anr., ; at 592 593; U.P. State Electricity Board vs Hari Shankar Jain, ; A.R. Antulay vs R.S. Nayak and Anr., ; ; S.G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India and Ors., ; at p. 718 19 and Kesavananda Bharati vs State of Kerala, [1973] Supp. 1 SCR 1, referred to.
A. Schroeder Music Publishing Co. Ltd. vs Macaulay, (formerly Instone), , referred to.
Chitty on Contract, 46th Edition Vol.
II, p. 808 or 25th Edition Vol.
II p. 712 paragraph and Halsbury 's Law of England, 4th Edition Vol.
No. 16 paras 607 and 608, referred to.
3.1 Courts have been tempted to read down in the path of judicial law making on the plea that legislature could not have intended to give powers to the authorities or employers which would be violative of fundamental rights of the per sons involved in the exercise of those powers and, there fore, should be attributed those powers on conditions which will only make these legal or valid.
Our law making bodies are not law unto themselves and cannot create or make all laws.
They can only confer powers or make laws for the conferment of powers on authorities which are legal and valid.
Such powers conferred must conform to the constitu tional inhibitions.
[232C D] 3.2 Legislation, both statutory and constitutional, is enacted from experience of evils.
But its general language should not necessarily be confined to the form that the evil had taken place.
Time works changes, brings into existence new conditions and purposes and new awareness of limita tions.
Therefore, a principle to be valid must be capable of wider application than the mischief which gave it birth.
This is particularly true of the constitutional construc tions.
Constitutions are not ephemeral enactments designed to meet passing occasions, but designed to approach immor tality as nearly as human institutions can approach it.
In the application of a Constitutional limitation or inhibi tion, the interpretation cannot be only of 'what has been ' but of 'what may be '.
Therefore.
in the interpretation of the provisions of an Act, where two constructions are possi ble, the one which leads towards constitutionality of the legislation would be preferred to that which has the effect of 171 destroying it.
If the Courts do not read the conferment of power in the aforesaid manner, the power is liable to be struck down as bad.
[233B D] 3.3 The Court must proceed on the premise that the law making authority intended to make a valid law to confer power validly or which will be valid.
The freedom therefore, to search the spirit of the enactment or what is intended to obtain or to find the intention of parliament gives the Court the power to supplant and supplement the expressions used to say what was left unsaid.
This is an important branch of judicial power, the concession of which if taken to the extreme is dangerous, but denial of that power would be ruinous and this is not contrary to the expressed inten tion of the legislature or the implied purpose of the legis lation.
[234G H; 235A] 3.4 It has been said that if the legislature has mani fested a clear intention to exercise an unlimited power, it is impermissible to read down the amplitude of that power so as to make it limited.
This cannot be agreed to.
Our legis latures are limited by the constitutional inhibitions and it is made, that the Court should read their Acts and enact ments with the attribute that they know their limits and could not have intended to violate the Constitution.
It is true that the Court should be loath to read down where there are clear, unambiguous and positive terms in a legislation and should proceed with a straight forward method of strik ing down such legislations.
But where the statute is silent or not expressive or inarticulate, the Court must read down in the silence of the statute and in the inarticulation of its provisions, the Constitutional inhibitions and transmute the major inarticulate premise into a reality and read down the statute accordingly.
[236H, 237A B] 3.5 The plain thrust of legislative enactment has to be found out in the inarticulate expressions and in the silence of the legislation.
In doing so, to say what the legislature did not specifically say is not distortion to avert any constitutional collision.
[237E] In the language of the relevant provisions of the instant cases, there is no intention of the legislature to flout the constitutional limitations.
[237E] Elliot Ashto Welsh 11 vs United States; , , 26 Ed.
308, referred to.
3.6 It is not that the reading down is used for a purpose which is just the opposite which the legislature had intended.
Legislature had not 172 intended arbitrary or uncontrolled or whimsical power.
Indeed it considered.
This is not the proper way to read that power in the Regulation 9(b).
Para 522 of the Shastri Award, read properly, must be circumscribed with the condi tions indicated above as a necessary corollary or conse quence of that power.
It is also not reading to the legisla ture conditions which were not there in the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
[237H, 238A B] Union of India & Anr.
vs Tulsiram Patel, [1985] Supp.
2 SCR 131, relied on.
No doubt, absolute powers cannot be regulated without essential legislative policy, but in the instant cases properly read, absolute power was not there.
Power that was only constitutionally valid, that power can be presumed to have been given and if that presumption is made, conditions indicated above inevitably attach.
But these conditions are necessary corollary flowing from the conferment of the power of termination in a constitutional manner for the smooth, proper and efficient running of the industry.
[238C, E] 3.7 In the circumstances power must be there, the power must be read down in the manner and to the extent indicated above, of terminating the services of permanent employees without holding any enquiry in the stated contingencies and this would be either by virtue of the silence of the provi sion indicating the contingencies of termination or by virtue of constitutional inhibitions.
That reading would not violate the theory that judges should not make laws.
[238F G] Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Justice Tandolkar, ; at 299; Jyoti Prasad vs The Administrator for the Union Territory of Delhi, ; at 139; Union of India vs Col. J.N. Sinha & Anr., ; at 461; N.C. Dalwadi vs State of Gujarat, paragraphs 9 and 10 at page 619; Commissioner of Sales Tax, M.P., Indore & Ors.
vs Radhakrishan & Ors.
, ; at 257; Olga Tellis & Ors. etc.
vs Bombay Municipal Corporation & Ors., [1985] Suppl.
2 SCR 51 at 89; R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs Union of India; , at p. 935 and 938; Kedar Nath Singh vs State of Bihar, [1962] Supp. 2 SCR 769; R.L. Arora vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Jagdish Pandev vs The Chancellor, University of Bihar & Anr., ; , at pages 236 237; Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration & Ors., ; ; Tinsukhia Electric Supply Co. Ltd. vs State of Assam & Ors., ; ; Charan Lal Sahu & Ors.
vs Union of India, , at 173 pages 53 and 54, paras 101 as well as p. 61 para 114; Shah & Co. vs State of Maharashtra, ; at 477 78; M. Pentiah and Ors.
vs Veera Mallappa and Ors., ; ; Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board etc.
vs A. Rajappa & Ors., ; ; Minerva Mills Ltd.& Ors., vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , at p. 239 and 259; Elliott Ashton Welsh, 11 vs United States, 26 Lawyers ' Edition 2nd, 308 at 327; Malinakhva Bysack vs Shyam Sunder Haldar & Ors., ; , at p. 544 545 and Municipal Committee, Amritsar & Anr.
vs State of Punjab & ors.
; , , referred to.
United States of America vs Edward A.
Rumely, 97 Law yers Edition 770 at 775; Reg.
vs Sadiers Co., ; , 460 and 463; Framamus vs Film Artists Association, at 542 and Seaford Court Estates, , referred to.
H.M. Seervaid 'Constitutional Law of India ', 3rd Edn.
1 pages 119 120 and Lord Denning: "The discipline of Law", at p. 12, referred to.
3.8 Termination simpliciter under Regulation 9(b) of the Regulation 1952, Delhi Road Transport Authority (Conditions of Appointment and Services) or similar powers can be exer cised only in circumstances other than those in Regulation 9(a).
The exercise of such powers can only be for purposes germane and relevant to the statute, viz., the employee is incompetent or unsuitable so as to make his continuance in the employment detrimental to the interest of the institu tion, or where the continuance of the employee is a grave security risk making his continuance detrimental to the interest of the Corporation and where because of the conduct of the employee, or there is lack of confidence in the employee which makes it necessary in the interest of the Corporation to immediately terminate the services of the employee etc., etc.
Therefore, each case of conferment of power involved should be judged on the aforesaid basis.
[236E G] 3.9 Having regard to the finality of the position of law and having regard to the theory that parties have ad justed their rights on the understanding of the law as it was, justice of the situation would be met if pending liti gations are examined and disposed of in the light of afore said principles.
Where issues of damages or consequences of termination by virtue of exercise of the power are still pending adjudication in any forum and have been finally adjudicated, these should be re examined by the appropriate authorities before whom these issues 174 are pending, but previous terminations, where no lis is pending, will not be reopened.
To that extent, the law will be prospective.
[239D F] 4.
This Court.
under Article 141 of the Constitution, is enjoined to declare law.
The expression 'declared ' is wider than the words 'found or made '.
To declare is to announce opinion.
Indeed, the latter involves the process.
while the former expresses result.
Interpretation, ascertainment and evolution are parts of the process, while that interpreted, ascertained or evolved is declared as a law.
The law de clared by this Court is the law of the land.
To deny this power to this Court on the basis of some outmoded theory that the Court only finds law but does not make it, is to make ineffective the powerful instrument of justice placed in the hands of the highest judiciary of this country.
Therefore.
there should be a more active and creative role for the courts in declaring what the law is.
[240E G] 1.
C. Golaknath & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Anr.
, ; @ 811,813/84, referred to.
