The East Punjab Molasses Control (Amendment) Act, 1973 substituted the definition of "molasses" in section 2(c) of the East Punjab Molasses (Control) Act, 1948 to mean "the mother liquor produced in the final stage of manufacture of sugar or khandsari sugar".
The unamended section 2(c) had hitherto referred only to sugar.
Consequent changes were also made in other provisions of the Principal Act to give effect to the amendment.
The appellants dealers in khandsari molasses aggrieved by the expanded definition of molasses challenged the con stitutionality of the Amendment Act, 1973 on the ground that it had imposed direct and immediate restrictions upon their trade and commerce unsupported by the previous sanction of the President of India in terms of Article 304(b) of the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that the appellants were not shown to have been aggrieved solely by reason of the amendment on the view that their business had been in equal measure controlled by the Principal Act itself.
In this appeal by special leave, the appellants reiter ated their contentions advanced before the High Court.
For the respondents it was contended that the provisions of the Amendment Act, 1973 were regulatory measures enacted to facilitate trade and therefore they did not come within the ban of the proviso to clause (b) of Article 304 to require the previous sanction of the President.
500 Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The main object of the Amendment Act, 1973 was to clarify that the Principal Act applies in equal measure to a khandsari unit as it does to any other sugar factory.
It was always well understood in trade that khandsari sugar was also sugar and that any reference to sugar, in the absence of specific exclusion or qualification, was capable of equal application to sugar of all kinds including khand sari.
The Act did not become applicable to the appellants only as a result of the amendment.
Even though persons who dealt with the statute may have understood its provisions in a restricted sense, such mistaken construction of the stat ute did not bind the Court so as to prevent it from giving it its true construction.
[316A C] The Trustees of the Clyde Navigation vs Laird & Sons, 8 AC 658, 670 and National & Grindlays Bank Ltd. vs The Munic ipal Corporalion of Greater Bombay; , , re ferred to. 2.
The Principal Act being an "existing law" within the meaning of Article 366(10) read with Article 305 of the Constitution, and the provisions of the Amendment Act being clarificatory, the previous sanction of the President was not required.
[316D E] Syed Ahmad Aga vs Stale of Mysore, , referred to.
