The appellant was appointed as a Tracer in the Municipal Corporation in 1955.
with the appointment of a Town Planning Officer in 1957.
the appellant came to be appointed as a Tracer in the Town Planning Establishment.
Later, the post of Junior Draftsman fell vacant in the Town Planning Estab lishment.
Respondent No. 6 was posted to fill the vacancy.
However, his appointment was cancelled shortly thereafter and the appellant was appointed as Junior Draftsman with effect from 4.12.
The next higher post of Surveyor cum Draftsman fell vacant in 1962.
Meanwhile, the appellant was suspended.
The Industrial Court granted approval for his removal from service, but suggested that he may be reappointed.
Accord ingly.
the appellant was appointed afresh as junior Drafts man in the Estates Department of the Municipal Corporation where he was previously working.
Aggrieved, the appellant filed a writ Petition before the High Court.
Setting aside the order.
the High Court remanded the matter to the Industrial Court for fresh dis posal.
The Special Leave Petition preferred by the employer, viz., the Municipal Corporation against the High Court 's order was dismissed.
The Industrial Court reheard the matter and declined approval for the removal of the appellant from service.
The appellant was reappointed as Junior Draftsman in the Town Planning Establishment which was abolished subsequently, and he was reverted to the service of the Municipal Corporation as a Tracer, and not as a Junior Draftsman.
The appellant filed an appeal against the said order.
but it was rejected on the ground that direct recruits were already working as Junior Draftsmen and that there was no vacancy against which the appellant could be appointed.
581 The appellant moved the High Court by way of a Writ petition.
contending that since he had been appointed as junior Draftsman in the Town Planning Establishment, he could not be repatriated to a lower post, viz. Tracer in the Municipal Corporation.
It was also contended that the Deputy Municipal Commissioner, was a person lower in rank than the appointing authority viz., the Municipal Commis sioner and hence the order passed by him was without juris diction.
The High Court proceeded on the footing that the appel lant was on deputation from Municipal Corporation to the Town Planning Establishment and dismissed the writ Petition.
The appellant has preferred this appeal against the High Court 's order dismissing his Writ Petition.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court.
HELD: 1.
I The appellant 's promotion as junior Draftsman and proposed promotion as Surveyor cum Draftsman in the Town Planning Establishment cannot confer any rights on him in his parent department.
When he left the Municipal Corpora tion and joined the Town Planning Establishment he was a Tracer and he can go back to the Estate Department or any other Department of the Municipal Corporation only to his original post i.e. as Tracer, subject to the modification that, if in the meantime he had qualified for promotion to a higher post.
that benefit cannot be denied to him.
1.2 The order dated 16.8.
1965 was passed in pursuance of the recommendation of the Industrial Court, while approv ing the appellant 's removal, that he may be reconsidered for appointment.
In view of this order of the Industrial Court, the appellant had to be given a posting and since he had been discharged from service when he was a Junior Draftsman.
orders were passed appointing him as junior Draftsman.
This again was made as an order of fresh appointment and the appellant 's representation that he should be given seniority was rightly not accepted.
There is also the further fact that the appellant was relieved from this post with effect from October 1, 1967.
There has been, apparently, no chal lenge to this order.
Moreover, theses orders lost their basis once the petitioner was restored to his post in the Town Planning Establishment.
In these circumstances the order dated 16.8.65 or the determination of his seniority in 1966 are of no relevance to the present case.
2.1 What the appellant is really attempting is to challenge the 582 appointments of Respondents 6 to 11, which had been made in 1963 64, by a Writ Petition filed in 1978, more than a decade after the above selections and appointments had been made.
It is true that, at that time the appellant, was under a cloud because he had been suspended and subsequently removed from service.
But all the same, if he had desired to challenge those appointments, he should have taken immediate steps.
Anyhow, these obstacles had disappeared when the tribunal, on remand by High Court, had and disapproved the appellant 's removal from service by the order dated 13.5.1964.
Atleast in 1971, when the order was passed re storing him to the position of Junior Draftsman in the Town Planning Establishment, he could and should have taken steps to Obtain his "pro forma" promotion in the parent depart ment.
The fact remains that he took no effective steps to challenge the appointment of respondents 6 to 11 from 1963 64 right upto 15.2.1978, when he filed the Writ Petition or atleast upto 1.10.1976, when he made a representation against the order of reversion.
2.2 section 54(2) of the Municipal Act, dispenses with the Staff Selection Committee when it is proposed to fill the appointment from among persons already in municipal service.
But the nature of the recruitment that took place is not known.
That apart, the constitution of a Staff Selection Committee to decide upon the selections cannot be said to be illegal even though not mandatory in the situation.
The High Court has found that respondents 6 to 11 had been directly selected as Junior Draftsmen after proper scrutiny by the Staff Selection Committee.
Admittedly there was a circular among the Municipal employees in regard to these appoint ments and selections.
The appellant should have made an application for selection at that time or, if he thought it more appropriate, should have challenged the constitution of Staff Selection Committee and the direct recruitment and put forward his claim for promotion as Junior Draftsman by virtue of his seniority.
That he tailed to do at the crucial time.
It may be that this was because he had certain diffi culties facing him by way of suspension and subsequent expulsion from service.
But even in 1971, after his original order of suspension and removal had been set aside, he took no immediate steps to claim his rights in the parent depart ment.
He.was apparently satisfied with his restoration as Junior Draftsman in the Town Planning Establishment.
Having regard to the circumstances of the appointment of respond ents 6 to 11, the appellant was not entitled to any promo tion in preference to them and he cannot claim appointment as Junior Draftsman when there was no such post in 1976 to which he could he appointed.
