The writ petitioners/appellants had been appointed as Government Counsel (Civil, Criminal, Revenue) by the State of U.P.
By its circular dated 6.2.1990 the State terminated the appointment of all Government Counsel with effect from 28.2.
1990 irrespective of the fact whether the term of the incumbent had expired or was subsisting.
At the same time the Government directed preparation of fresh panels to make appointments in place of existing incumbents.
The appellants challenged the validity of this State action, which was rejected by the High Court.
Before this Court it was contended inter alia on behalf of the petitioners/appellants that the relationship of the Government Counsel with the Government was not merely one of client and counsel as in the case of a private client, but one of status in the nature of public employment or appoint ment to a `public office ' so that termination of the ap pointment of a Government Counsel could not be equated with the termination by a private litigant of his Counsel 's engagement, which was purely contractual.
without any public element attaching to it.
On behalf of the State it was urged that: (i) the rela tionship of the appointees to these offices of Government Counsel in the districts was purely contractual depending on the terms of the contract and was in the nature of an en gagement of a Counsel by a private party who could be changed at any time at the will of the litigant, with there being no right in the counsel to insist on continuance of the engagement; (ii) there was no element of public employ ment in such appointments and the provisions in the Legal Remembrancer 's Manual and Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure were merely to provide for making a suitable choice; (iii) the appointment of a District Government Counsel was only professional engagement terminable at will on either side and not appointment to a post under the Government, and the Government had 626 the power to terminate the appointment at any time `without assigning any cause ' and hence this circular did not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
Allowing the writ petitions and the appeals, this Court, HELD: (1) The provisions in the Legal Remembrancer 's Manual clearly show that the Government Counsel in the districts are treated as law Officers of the State who are holders of an `office ' or `post '.
These provisions further indicate that the appointment and engagement of District Government Counsel is not the same as that by a private litigant of his counsel and there is obviously an element of continuity of the appointment unless the appointee is found to be unsuitable either by his own work, conduct or age or in comparison to any more suitable candidate available at the place of appointment.
(2) All Government Counsel are paid remuneration out of the public exchequer and there is a clear public element attaching to the `office ' or `post '.
(3) Clause 3 of para 7.06 of the L.R. Manual which enables the Government to terminate the appointment `at any time without assigning any cause ' merely means that the termination may be made even during the subsistence of the term of appointment, and the expression `without assigning any cause ' means without communicating any cause to the appointee whose appointment is terminated.
(4) The non assigning of reasons or the non communica tion thereof may be based on public policy, but termination of an appointment without the existence of any cogent reason in furtherance of the object for which the power is given would be arbitrary and, therefore, against public policy.
Liberty Oil Mills vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
(5) In the case of Public Prosecutors, the public ele ment flowing from statutory provisions in the Code of Crimi nal Procedure, undoubtedly, invest the Public Prosecutors with the attribute of holder of a public office `which cannot be whittled down by the assertion that their ' engage ment is purely professional between a client and his lawyer with no public element attaching to it.
627 Mahadeo vs Shantibhai, ; Mundrika Prasad Sinha vs State of Bihar, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759; Mukul Dalaiand Others vs Union of India and Others, ; and Malloch vs Aberdeen Corporation, , referred to.
(6) The presence of public element attached to the `office ' or `post ' of District Government Counsel of every category covered by the impugned circular is sufficient to attract Article 14 of the Constitution and bring the ques tion of validity of the impugned circular within the scope of judicial review.
(7) The scope of judicial review permissible in the present case does not require any elaborate consideration since even the minimum permitted scope of judicial review on the ground of arbitrariness or unreasonableness or irration ality once Article 14 is attracted, is sufficient to invali date the impugned circular.
(8) Even otherwise and sans the public element so obvi ous in these appointments, the appointment and its concomi tants viewed as purely contractual matters after the ap pointment is made, also attract Article 14 and exclude arbitrariness permitting judicial review of the impugned State action.
(9) The personality of the State, requiring regulation of its conduct in all spheres by requirements of Article 14, does not undergo such a radical change after the making of a contract merely because some contractual rights accrue to the other party in addition.
It is not as if the require ments of Article 14 and contractual obligations are alien concepts, which cannot co exist.
(10) The scope and permissible grounds of judicial review in such matters, and the relief which may be avail able are different matters but that does not justify the view of its total exclusion.
This is more so when the modern trend is also to examine the unreasonableness of a term in such contracts where the bargaining power is unequal so that these are not negotiated contracts but standard form con tracts between unequals.
(11) To the extent challenge is made on the ground of violation of Article 14 by alleging that the impugned act is arbitrary, unfair or unreasonable, the fact that the dispute also falls within the domain of contractual obligations would not relieve the State of its obligation to comply with the basic requirements of Article 14.
628 (12) It is significant to note that emphasis now is on review ability of every State action because it stems not from the nature of function, but from the public nature of the body exercising that function; and all powers possessed by a public authority, howsoever conferred, are possessed `solely in order that it may use them for the public good '.
Jones vs Swansea City Counsel, [1990] 1 W.L.R. 54, referred to.
(13) It can no longer be doubted at this point of time that Article 14 of the Constitution of India applies also to matters of governmental policy and if the policy or any action of the Government, even in contractual matters, fails to satisfy the test of reasonableness, it would be unconsti tutional.
Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs The International Airport Authority of India, ; ; Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs State of Jammu and Kashmir, ; and Col. A.S. Sangwan vs Union of India, [1980] Supp.
SCC 559, referred to.
(14) The basic requirement of Article 14 is fairness in action by the State and it is difficult to accept that the State can be permitted to act otherwise in any field of its activity, irrespective of the nature of its function, when it has the uppermost duty to be governed by the rule of law.
Non arbitrariness, in substance, is only fair play in ac tion.
This obvious requirement must be satisfied by every action of the State or its instrumentality in order to satisfy the test of validity.
M/s Dwarkadas Marlaria and Sons vs Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay, ; and Mahabir Auto Stores (15) There is a presumption of validity of the State action and the burden is on the person who alleges violation of Article 14 to prove the assertion.
However, where no plausible reason or principle is indicated nor is it dis cernible and the State action, therefore, appears to be exfacie arbitrary, the initial burden to prove the arbi trariness is discharged shifting onus on the State to justi fy its action as fair and reasonable.
(16) The wisdom of the policy or the lack of it or the desirability of a better alternative is not within the permissible scope of judicial review in such cases.
It is not for the courts to recast the policy or to substitute it with another which is considered to be more appropriate, once the attack on the ground of arbitrariness is success fully repelled by 629 showing that the act which was done was fair and reasonable in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Council of Civil Service Union vs Minister for the Civil Service, ; (17) Arbitrariness is the very negation of the rule of law.
Satisfaction of this basic test in every State action is sine qua non to its validity and in this respect.
the State cannot claim comparison with a private individual even in the field of contract.
(18) Every State action must be informed by reason and it follows, that an act uninformed by reason, is arbitrary.
Rule of law contemplates governance by laws and not by humour, whims or caprices of the men to whom the governance is entrusted for the time being.
(19) Irrespective of the nature of appointment of the Government Counsel in the districts in the State of U.P and the security of tenure being minimal as claimed by the State, the impugned circular, in order to survive, must withstand the attack of arbitrariness and be supported as an informed decision which is reasonable.
S.G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India, ; (20) In the present case.
the initial burden on the petitioners appellants has been discharged by showing that there is no discernible principle for the impugned action at the district level throughout the State of U.P. since there is nothing in the circular to indicate that such a sweeping action for all districts throughout the State was necessary which made it reasonable to change all Government Counsel in the districts throughout the State.
even those whose tenure in office had not expired.
(21) Non application of mind to individual cases before issuing a general circular terminating all such appointments throughout the State is itself eloquent of the arbitrariness writ large on the face of the circular.
John Wilkes 's case (22) Arbitrariness is writ large in the impugned circu lar issued by the State of Uttar Pradesh.
It gives the impression that this action was 630 taken under the mistaken belief of applicability of "spoils system" under our Constitution and the cavalier fashion in which the action has been taken gives it the colour of treating the posts of D.G.Cs.
as bounty to be distributed by the appointing authority at its sweet will.
Nothing worth while has been shown on behalf of the State of U.P. to support the impugned action as reasonable and non arbitrary.
