The agitation that started in February 1985 against government policy of reservation in the State of Gujarat turned into communal riots of shocking magnitude between Hindus and Muslims in March 1985, and resulted in mass exodus of Dabgars, a Hindu community, from their houses in the affected locality.
When calm was partially restored, some of them returned.
Maniben one of the deceased however continued to live in her house with other members of her family.
On 9th June, 1985, due to absence of military which had been stationed there, members of minority community con verged from two sides and indulged in most cowardly and shameful act of pushing open the door of Maniben 's house, setting fire to it, and then chaining it from outside re sulting in death of the lady, her two daughters, four grand children and son of a neighbour.
Next house set ablaze was of Navin and then many others.
Charge was framed against sixty three under Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1985 and various offences including section 302, Indian Penal Code.
Fifty six were acquitted by the Trial Judge.
Those convicted have come up in appeal.
At the same time, a reference has been made for confirmation of death sentence.
Allowing the appeals and acquitting the accused and discharging reference.
this Court, HELD: (1) Sentiments or emotions, howsoever strong, are neither 109 relevant nor have any place in a court of law.
Acquittal or conviction depends on proof or otherwise of the criminologi cal chain which invariably comprises of why, where, when, how and who.
Each knot of the chain has to be proved, beyond shadow of doubt to bring home the guilt.
Any crack or loos ening in it weakens the prosecution.
Each link must be so consistent that the only conclusion which must follow is that the accused is guilty.
Heinousness of crime or cruelty in its execution howsoever abhorring and hateful cannot reflect in deciding the guilt.
[110H; 111A B] (2) Credibility of witnesses has to be measured with same yardstick, whether it is an ordinary crime or a crime emanating due to communal frenzy.
Law does not make any distinction either in leading of evidence or in its assess ment.
[111C] (3) To bring home the guilt the prosecution was required to prove the presence of witnesses, possibility of seeing the incident by them and identification of the appellants.
[115C] (4) From the location of Ambalal 's house it is clear that one could see front of Maniben 's house only if he stood in front of it with face towards west south.
But that is not the prosecution case.
In fact prosecution is silent on this aspect.
There is no whisper of the place from where the incident was seen by the witnesses.
Was it front of house of Ambalal or inside or roof? This was very relevant as every witness admitted that from interior of Ambalal 's house the front of neither Maniben 's nor Navin 's house could be seen.
Evidence thus regarding possibility of seeing the appellants from house of Ambalal is very shaky.
The prosecution left an important lacuna.
[116A C] (5) Indentification of accused from out of the mob even if they were known from before becomes highly doubtful.
[116G] (6) The finding of the Judge that even though the house of Ambalal is slightly obliquely situated as compared to the house of Maniben, it would not at all be difficult for the witnesses who had hid themselves in the house of Ambalal to have correctly identified the accused, is not based on appreciation of evidence but on imagination.
[117G H] (7) The prosecution version suffered from serious in firmity.
Its failure to bring on record evidence which could establish the possibility or even probability of the witness seeing the occurrence demolishes the whole structure.
[118A] 110
