In these matters, the petitioners viz., four companies in the private sector, two public sector corporations owned substantially by a State Government, and a private individu al sought clarifications and directions in relation to the orders passed by this Hon 'ble Court on 30.4.87 and 6.10.87 on the Writ Petition.
All these petitions arose out of applications for grant of right for the mining of chrome ore or chromite in the State of Orissa.
Since chrome ore is one of the minerals specified in the first and second schedules to, and not a 'minor mineral ' within the meaning of Section 3(f) of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, the right to grant the mining right in respect of this mineral is vested in the State Government subject to the control by Union of India, and as such they are respond ents in these matters.
While disposing of the matters, this Court referred the entire controversy to the Secretary to Government of India in the Ministry of Mines, viz., Mr. Rao, for a detailed consideration of the claims made by the parties.
Before Mr. Rao, the two public sector undertakings also put forward their claims that the public sector units in the State were entitled to the grant of mining rights in the State to the exclusion of all private parties in as much as there was a reservation in their favour by an appropriate notification issued by the State Government.
The other parties raised objection on the ground that the claims were made at a belated stage of the proceedings.
On applications made by the Public Sector Undertakings, this Court directed that their claims would also be examined by Rao. 28 In his report dated 1.2.1988 Rao accepted the claim of reservation made by the two Public Sector Undertakings, viz., Orissa Mining Corporation (OMC) and Industrial Devel opment Corporation of Orissa Ltd. (IDCOL).
He also partially accepted the claims of the three private parties.
viz., Indian Metals and Ferro Alloys Limited (IMFA); Ferro Alloys Corporation Limited (FACOR); and Aikath and rejected the claims of the other two private parties viz., Orissa Cements Ltd. (OCL) and Orissa Industries Ltd. (ORIND).
Though he accepted the claim of the two public sector undertakings, he recommended for them leases in respect of only the balance of the lands left, after fulfilling the claim of the others which he had accepted.
The present petitions biter alia sought directions on the report of Rao.
It was contended that Rao was nothing more than a Commissioner appointed by this Court to examine the various parties and hence this Court should pass appro priate orders on his report.
Various contentions were ad vanced by the petitioners as well as respondents as regards the legal character of the Rao Report and of giving effect to it either in toto or with modifications in certain re spects.
Reservation in favour of Public Sector Undertakings was challenged by the private parties.
Plea of Promissory Estoppel was also raised on behalf of some of the petition ers.
Disposing of the matters, this Court, HELD: 1.
The statute must lay down clearer guidelines and procedure.
Having regard to the new avenues for vast industrial development in the country, a more workable procedure would be for the State Government to call for applications in respect of specified blocks by a particular date and deal with them together, other later entrants not being permitted in the field.
Otherwise only confusion will result, as here.
There was a time when the State Government looked to private enterprises for mineral development in its territory.
Of late, however, competition has crept in.
The State Government has its own public sector corporations and various enterpreneurs are interested in having mining leases for their purposes.
It is, therefore, vital that there should be a better and detailed analysis, district wise and area wise and that a schedule for consideration of applica tions in respect of define areas should be drawn up with a strict time frame so that the State is no longer constrained to deal with sporadic applications or make a routine grant of leases in order of priority of applications.
These are aspects which call for careful consideration and appropriate amendments to the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regu lation) Act, 1957 and the Rules made thereunder.
[72D G] 29 2.
Chromite ore is an important major mineral and the importance of its conservation and proper utilisation for our country 's development cannot be gainsaid.
The State Government rightly decided upon a policy of reservation in 1967 and this was kept up till 1974.
In February 1974 the State Government was in favour of free issue of mining leases but gave up this policy in pursuance of the Central Government 's letter of 15.5.74.
Reservation was, therefore, clamped in 1977 again.
Applications could still be consid ered to see how far a relaxation was permissible having regard to the nature of the applicant 's needs, the purpose for which the lease was asked for, the nature of the ore sought to be exploited, the relative needs of the State, the availability of a public undertaking to carry out the mining more efficiently and other relevant considerations.
There is no material on record to substantiate the plea that the State Government has been acting arbitrarily or mala fide in its policy formulations in this regard.
[82C E] Venkataraman vs Union, ; , referred to.
Rao 's decision, that the leases that have been grant ed already in favour of IMFA, FACOR be confirmed, should be upheld.
These should be treated as leases legitimately granted to them in exercise of the powers of relaxation under rule 59(2).
It is true that the orders granting the leases do not elaborately record the reasons but they were passed in the context of this litigation and have to be considered in the light of the affidavits and counter affi davits filed herein.
Rao 's decision regarding the grant of a lease to AIKATH (not yet implemented) should also be upheld.
In these three cases, the records disclose sufficiently the reasons on the basis of which the leases have been decided upon and are adequate to justify the mining leases actually granted. ]89B D] 4.
The claims of OCL and ORIND have been rejected sum marily by Rao without an advertence to the various consider ation urged by them.
This part of Rao 's decision has to be set aside as being too cryptic and unsustainable.
Pursuant to this conclusion, it is directed that these claims be considered afresh by the Central Government.
It would be more expedient if the claims of OCL and ORIND are restored, for detailed consideration in all their several aspects, before the State Government, as the State Government has had no opportunity to consider the various aspects pointed out and as this course will also provide an opportunity to the claimants to approach the Central Government again, if dissatisfied with the State Government 's decision to consid er whether, despite the reservation, some relaxation can be made also in 30 Favour of these two companies The State Government has to take into account various factors and aspects before grant ing a mining lease to an individual concern carving out an exception to its reservation policy.
It has done this in respect of IMFA and FACOR for certain special reasons re corded by it.
Whether it would do so also in favour of OCL and ORIND is for the State to consider.
It would be noticed that the applications of these two companies have not been considered in this light earlier The applications of OCL and ORIND are restored for the consideration of the State Government.
[94B G] 5.
The State Government has rejected ORIND 's applica tion, inter alia, on the ground that, in view of the penden cy of the Writ Petition before this Court, it could not at that stage pass any order on the application.
It would, therefore, be open to ORIND to ask the State Government to reconsider the application in the light of the present order.
There is no necessity for insisting on such a formal request and therefore, the State Government is directed to consider ORIND 's application afresh in the light of this judgment.
[95A B] 6.
So far as OMC and IDCOL are concerned, Rao has recomamended that the areas left after the grants to IMFA and FACOR, be given on lease to OMC.
There were huge areas of mineral bearing lands which have been reserved for the public sector.
Its interests do not clash or come into conflict with those of private applicants which can only claim a right to the extent the State Government is willing to relax the rule of reservation.
This Court does not think OMC or IDCOL have any voice in requiring that the State Government should keep certain extent of land reserved and should not grant any mining lease at all in favour of any private party.
The interests of these corporations are safe in the hands of the State Government and the allocation of mining leases to these organisations is a matter of discre tion with the State Government strictly speaking, therefore, no question of any application by them for mining lease need arise at all.
But, when made, their applications are consid ered by the State Government and, on revision by the Central Government as a matter of form.
To this extent, they have a statutory remedy.
[95C El 7.
When the State Government agreed to lease out the areas to MFA and FACOR it was pointed out that this could not be given effect to without the Central Government 's approval.
This Court thereupon directed that the State Government should seek such approval.
The direction to the Central Government is only that its approval should be given within the particular time limit set out therein It cannot be 31 construed, reasonably, as a direction compelling the Central Government to grant approval whether it agreed with the State Government 's decision or not.
Thus the grant of mining leases to IMFA and FACOR are to be treated as having been made in exercise of the power of relaxation under Rule 59(2).
Though there is no specific recording of reasons by the State Government or Central Government inasmuch as these leases came to be granted by way of compromise, it is a fair inference that the compromise proposals were prompted by the, at least partial, acceptance of the claim put forward by these parties.
Since the grant of leases to these parties can be attributed to the relaxation of the reservation rule in particular cases, the finding of Rao that these leases may be confirmed deserves acceptance.
[90C F] 8.1 AIKATH is admittedly an individual who discovered chromite ore in the State.
He had secured a lease as early as in 1952 though that lease was annulled by the State when it took over.
Again, as against a lease of 640 acres which he had once obtained and started operating upon, the State Government has finally approved of a lease in respect of only 140 acres.
AIKATH had been actually working some mines from 1.5.53.
His original grant had been approved before the areas was reserved on 3.7.62.
If the State Government con siders these to be weighty considerations and entered into a compromise with him for a lease of 140 acres and this has also been recorded by the High Court, these are no grounds to interfere with that decision of the State Government.
[89D F] 8.2 Though the State Government and AIKATH had entered into a compromise as early as 4.12.1984, no lease has yet been granted in his favour perhaps as the Central Government has had no occasion to consider the matter earlier.
However, no useful purpose would be served by remitting the matter and asking the State Government to seek the formal approval of the Central Government therefore.
The decision of Rao itself can be taken as containing the approval of the Cen tral Government in this regard and is thus upheld.
The State Government is ' directed to execute, at as early a date as possible, a mining lease in Favour of AIKATH in respect of the 140 acres agreed to be leased to him under the compro mise dated 4.12.1984.
[90G H; 91A] 9.
Although Rao has approved the grants made in favour of IMFA and FACOR by the State Government (which, he re marks, were perhaps based on the observations made by this Court), he has clearly reached his conclusions on these independently.
In fact, he has set out a basis for justify ing the grants of IMFA and FACOR.
It is also clear that 32 there were no Court orders that could have influenced his decisions on the claims of the other parties.
[87F G] 10.1 In the context of the scheme of the Act and the importance of a lease being granted to one or more of the better qualified candidates where there are a number of them, it would not be correct to say that, as the State Government 's order of 29.10.1973 has been set aside, ORIND 's application should be restored for reconsideration on the basis of the situation that prevailed as on 29.10.1973 and that, therefore, it has to be straightaway granted as there was no other application pending on that date before the State Government.
In matters ,like this, subsequent applica tions cannot be ignored and a rule of thumb applied.
[74C E] 10.2 Though section 11 tries to enunciate a simple general principle of "first come, first served", in practice, prior ity of an application in point of time does not conclude the issue.
In this case itself, for instance, during the period ORIND 's application of 1971 has been under consideration before various authorities and in the writ petition filed in the High Court, several other competitors have come into the picture.
The statutory provision is not clear as to which of the applications in respect of any particular area, are to be considered together.
If ORIND 's application of 1971 were to be considered only on the basis of the persons who had made applications at that time or a short time before or after, one result would follow; if, on the other hand, all the applications pending for disposal at the time ORIND 's application is to be granted or rejected are to be consid ered, the result would be totally different.
Since the interest of the nation require that no lease for mining rights should be granted without all applicants therefore at any point of time being considered and the best among them chosen or the area distributed among such of them as are most efficient and capable, the latter is the only reasona ble and practical procedure.
That is why this Court, in its order dated 30.4.87, laid down that all applications pending for consideration as on 30.4.87 should be considered by Rao.
[71G H; 72A B] Ferro Alloys Corporation of India vs Union, ILR 1977 Delhi 189 and Mysore Cements Ltd. vs Union, AIR , distinguished.
11.1 Previously, rule 58 did not enable the State Gov ernment to reserve any area in the State for exploitation in the public sector.
The existence and validity of such a power of reservation was upheld by this Court.
Rule 58 has been amended in 1980 to confer such a power on the State Government.
It is also not in dispute that a notification of reservation was made on 3.8.77.
The State Government, OMC and IDCOL are, 33 therefore, right in contending that, ex facie, the areas in question are not available for grant to any person other than the State Government or a public sector corporation unless the availability for grant is renotified in accord ance with law (rule 59(1)(e) or the Central Government decides to relax the provisions of rule 59(1).
[79D F] Amritlal Nathubhai Shah and Ors.
vs Union of India and Anr.
; , relied on.
Kotiah Naidu vs State of A.P., AIR 1959 AP 185 and Amritlal Nathubhai Shah vs Union, AIR 1973 Gujarat 117, referred to. 11.2 In the present matters, except for two or three instances.
where leases have been granted by the State Government on its own, the State Government has generally and consistently adhered to its stand that the chromite bearing lands are reserved for exploitation in the public sector.
The rules permit the Central Government to relax the rigid requirements of reservation in individual cases after recording special reasons.
Such exceptional and isolated instances of lease are not sufficient to sustain the plea of the parties that the policy of reservation is merely being raised as a formal defence and has never been seriously implemented by the State Government.
[81G H; 82A B] 11.3 The conclusion that the areas in question before this Court were all duly reserved for public sector exploi tation does not, however, mean that private parties cannot be granted any lease at all in respect of these areas for, as pointed out earlier, it is open to the Central Government to relax the reservation for recorded reasons.
Nor does this mean that the public sector undertakings should get the leases asked for by them.
This is so for two reasons.
In the first place, the reservation is of a general nature and does not directly confer any rights on the Public Sector Under takings.
This reservation is of two types.
Under section 17A(1), inserted in 1986, the Central Government may after consult ing the State Government just reserve any area not covered by a Private Lease or a Mining Lease with a view to conserv ing any mineral.
Apparently, the idea of such reservations is that the minerals in this area will not be exploited at all, neither by private parties nor in the public sector.
The second type of reservation was provided for in rule 58 and such reservation could have been made by the State Government (without any necessity for approval by the Cen tral Government) and was intended to reserve areas for exploitation, broadly speaking, in the public sector.
The notification itself might specify the Government Corporation or Company that was to exploit the areas or may be just general, on the 34 lines of the rule itself.
Whether such areas are to be leased out to OMC or IDCOL or some other public sector corporation or a Government Company or are to be exploited by the government itself is for the Government to determine de hors the statute and the rules.
There is nothing in either of them which gives a right to OMC or IDCOL to insist that the leases should be given only to them and to no one else in the public sector.
There are no competitive applica tions from organisations in the public sector controlled either by the State Government or the Central Government, but even if there were, it would be open to the State Gov ernment to decide how far the lands or any portion of them should be exploited by each of such Corporations or by the Central Government or State Government.
, Both the Corpora tions are admittedly instrumentalities of the State Govern ment and the decision of the State Government is binding on them.
If the State Government decides not to grant a lease in respect of the reserved area to an instrumentality of the State Government, that instrumentality has no right to insist that a Mining Lease should be granted to it.
It is open to the State Government to exercise at any time, a choice of the State or any one of the instrumentalities specified in the rule.
It is true that if, eventually, the State Government decides to grant a lease to one or other of them in respect of such land, the instrumentality whose application is rejected may be aggrieved by the choice of another for the lease.
The question whether OMC or IDCOL can object to the grant to any of the private parties on the ground that a reservation has been made in favour of the public sector, has to be answered in the negative in view of the statutory provisions.
For the State Government could always denotify the reservation and make the areas available for grant to private parties.
Or, short of actually deserv ing a notified area, persuade the Central government to relax the restrictions of rule 59(1) in any particular case.
It is, therefore, open to the State Government to grant private leases even in respect of areas covered by a notifi cation of the State Government and this cannot be challenged by any instrumentality in the public sector.
[82F H; 83A H; 84A C] 12.
In these matters, no grounds have been made out which could support a plea of promissory estoppel.
The grant of a lease to ORIND had to be approved by the Central Gov ernment.
The Central Government never approved of it.
The mere fact that the State Government, at one stage, recom mended the grant cannot stand in the way of their disposing of the application of ORIND in the light of the Central Government 's directives.
[78E F] Kanai Lal Sur vs Paramnidhi Sadhukhan, ; M/s 35 Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. (P) Ltd. vs State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors., ; ; Gujarat State Financial Corporation vs M/s Lotus Hotels Pvt. Ltd., ; Surya Narain Yadav & Or,5.
vs Bihar State Electricity Board Godfrey Philips India Ltd., [1985] Suppl.
3 SCR 123 and Mahabir Auto Stores & Ors.
vs Indian Oil Corporation Ors., [1990] JT I SC 363, referred to.
