The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 was enacted inter alia to provide for the prevention and control of water pollution, the maintaining or restoring of wholesomeness of water, etc.
Section 25 of the said Act provides that no person shall without the consent of the State Board, bring into use any new or altered outlet for the discharge of sewage or trade effluent into a stream or well, or begin to make any new discharge of sewage or trade effluent into a stream or well.
Section 26 lays down that persons discharging sewage or trade effluent into a stream or well before the commencement of the Act shall apply for consent within a period of three months of the Constitution of State Board.
Thereafter the was enacted to provide for the levy and collection of cess on water consumed by persons carrying on certain industries, Power (Thermal & Diesel) Generating Industry was one such industry included at item No. 14 in Schedule I to the Act.
Section 3 of the 1977 Act provides that there shall be levied and collected a cess for the purposes of the 1974 Act and utilisation thereunder.
The cess under the Act is made payable by every person carrying on any specified industry and the same has to be calculated on the basis of the water actually consumed at rates speci fied in the Schedule.
Section 7 of the Act provides for rebate.
The appellant has established a Thermal Power Station on the bank of River Chambal for generating energy.
It consumes water from the river for condensor cooling.
After the water is used for cooling, it is treated as a trade effluent in the neutralisation plant before it is discharged into the river.
According to the appellant, the temperature, 121 after following the prescribed procedure, is brought down to below 40 C, when it is discharged into the river.
The appel lant had also installed a 0.4 MGD plant for treatment of sewage.
According to the appellant both these plants are working satisfactorily.
The appellant, as required by the rules, submitted monthly returns of the water consumed from the river for its Thermal Station for the period from July 1983 to January 1984 and February 1984 to June 1984.
The respondent authority.
assessed the cess at Rs.13,13,710 for the first period and Rs.9,42,013 for the subsequent period.
No rebate was allowed under Section 7 of the 1977 Act on the ground that the so called neutralisation plant was not a plant for the treatment of sewage or trade effluent within the meaning of the said provision.
The appellant filed an appeal under section 13, in respect of the cess claimed for the period July 1983 to January 1984, but the appellate authority dismissed the same holding that the cess was correctly assessed and that the appellant was not entitled to rebate.
As regards the period from February 1984 to June 1984.
the appellant submitted a review petition which was rejected by respondent No. 2.
Thereupon, the appellant filed separate writ petitions before the High Court challenging the assessment orders.
Both the writ petitions were dismissed by the High Court.
The High Court opined that there was nothing on record to show that the appellant had applied for consent of the State Board to install a plant either under section 25 or section 26 of the 1974 Act nor was there any evidence to show that such consent was given.
It accordingly held that the author ities under the Act had rightly disallowed the claim of rebate to the appellant under section 7.
Against the orders of the High Court as also against various assessment orders which were passed subsequent to the orders of the High Court the appellant has filed these appeals, after obtaining special leave.
Allowing the appeals, and remanding the cases to the Assessing Authority for fresh disposal, this Court HELD: A plant has undoubtedly been installed for the treatment of sewage and no dispute in that behalf was raised.
However, as the bulk consumption of water from the river is used at the condensor cooling plant the question is whether the appellant can be said to have installed a plant for the treatment of a trade effluent.
[130G] The Appellate Authority took the view that a 150 fl.
long channel meant for carrying the trade effluent cannot be described as treatment plant.
The appellant contended that the treatment plant installed 122 by it comprised of an arrangement to lift the water to a height of 2211.
and then drop it from that height into an open channel so that it cools down on coming in contact with the atmosphere and then flows towards and into the river.
[130H; 131A] Section 7 as well as Rule 6 do not envisage the Board 's consent under Section 25(1) of the 1974 Act as a sine clua non.
Under Section 7 the consumer has only to show that he has installed a plant for the treatment of sewage or trade effluent and that it functioned successfully during the relevant period to earn rebate.
Section 25(1) operates in a different field and has nothing to do with a plant installed for the treatment of a trade effluent although the grant of consent to a new outlet can be conditional on the existence of a plant for the satisfactory.
treatment of effluents to safeguard against pollution of the water in the stream.
[131C E] Since the Board 's consent under Section 25(1) was not imperative that part of the High Court 's order cannot be sustained.
[131E]
