The appellant, a tenant, claimed protection of the Jammu and Kashmir Houses and Shops Rent Control Act, 1966.
The courts below disallowed the claim, on the ground that clause (iii) of sub section (3) of Section 1, read with the Expla nation was attracted in respect of the appellant.
The appellant challenged the validity of clause (iii) of sub section (3) of Section 1 of the Jammu and Kashmir Houses and Shops Rent Control Act, 1966 before the High Court on the ground that it violated Article 14 of the Constitution.
The High Court, following its earlier decision in the J & K Bank Lid.
vs State of J & K & Another, AIR1987 J & K 18 upheld validity of the clause.
In the appeal before this Court, the appellant tenant contended (i) that the clause was discriminatory and arbi trary, because it drew an artificial distinction between tenants on the basis of their income, in that while those tenants earning net income below Rs.40,000 per annum were protected by the beneficial provisions of the Act, those with annual net income in excess of the statutory limit of Rs.40,000 were unreasonably and unfairly denied the protec tion and this statutory discrimination placed them at the mercy of the landlords, who could easily evict them by recourse to the far less restrictive provisions of the Transfer of 219 Property Act, 1882 and on the strength of their agreements of lease, (ii) that the clause did not take into account the nature of the building, or the need and income of the land lord or any other factor and withheld or extended protection solely on the financial capacity of the tenant, which could vary from year to year, depending upon the nature of his business and other factors, thus exposing the tenant to eviction when the business was prosperous, but protecting him when the business declined and income fell, (iii) that "income" was not a clear and precise concept; limiting it to net income did not make it clearer, and the Act did not indicate the permissible deductions for arriving at the "net" and (iv) that the Section was invalid because it was too broad or vague and any classification based on such vague differentia was unintelligible and, therefore, viola tive of Article 14; and in any view, the classification sought to be made between persons falling on either side of the specified income had no reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute.
Dismissing the above appeal, and another similar appeal (Civil Appeal No. 1370 of 1987), this Court, HELD: 1.1 The object of the Jammu and Kashmir Houses and Shops Rent Control Act, 1966 is undoubtedly to protect the weaker section of tenants from unreasonable eviction and unfair rent.
At the same time, the legislature did not desire to discourage persons from constructing buildings.
Thus, while protection is afforded to deserving tenants, construction of new buildings is encouraged by exempting buildings occupied by richer classes of tenants from the provisions of the Act.
While a building is covered by the Act when occupied by a tenant whose annual net income is less than the specified amount, the protection is withheld when the same building is occupied by a richer tenant whose annual net income is higher than the specified amount.
Where a building is occupied by more than one tenant, the applica bility of the Act to each of them would depend upon his net income.
It is the tenant that the legislature intends to protect and not the landlord or his building.
The test adopted by the legislature for this purpose is with refer ence to the tenant 's net income, whether accruing inside or outside the State, as on the date of the landlord 's applica tion for eviction as well as on the date of the decree for eviction.
[224B E] 1.2 The legislative object is, therefore, to protect tenants who are economically weaker in comparison to those affluent tenants falling outside the specified limit of income, and at the same time to encourage construction of new buildings which will result in better availability of 220 accommodation, employment opportunity and economic prosperi ty.
This is a reasonable classification which does not suffer from the vice of being too vague or broad.
[224E F] 1.3 Classification based on income is well known to law.
Such classification has a reasonable relation to the twin legislative object of protecting economically weaker tenants and encouraging new constructions.
There is nothing unrea sonable or irrational or unworkable or vague or unfair or unjust in the classification adopted by Section 1(3)(iii) of the Act.
[224F; 22SD] 1.4 The legislature in its wisdom is presumed to under stand and appreciate correctly the problems of the State and the needs of the people made manifest by experience.
Absent blatant disregard of constitutional provisions, legislative innovation by social and economic experimentation must be permitted to continue without judicial interference.
[225B] The J & K Bank Ltd. vs State of J & K & Another, AIR 1987 J & K 18, approved.
Rattan Arya & Others vs State of Tamil Nadu & Another, ; and Motor General Traders & Another vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Others, ; , distin guished.
Kerala Hotel & Restaurant Association & Ors.
vs State of Kerala & Ors., [1990] 1 JT SC 324, relied on.
Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar & Others, ; , referred to. 2.
There is no lack of clarity in the concept of "in come" or net income.
Income is money or other benefit peri odically received.
It is profit or revenue and not capital.
It is a gain derived from capital or labour or both.
Net income is income obtained after deducting all expenses incurred for the purpose of earning the income.
It is income minus operating expenses.
The concept of net income is what it is ordinarily understood to be in common parlance, and not necessarily limited by the technicalities of any fiscal enactment.
[224G H] Banarasi Das vs Jagdish Raj Kohli, AIR 1960 J & K 5.
re ferred to.
