One post of Upper Division Clerk/English Clerk fell vacant in the Small Causes Court.
Appellant made his claim to the post on the footing that he was a graduate and on the basis of Rule of Rotation embodied in Rule VI of the High Court Rules and Orders, Volume 1, Respondent No. 1 made his claim on the basis of seniority.
The Judge, Small Causes Court took the view that the appellant was entitled to promotion in preference to Respondent No. 1 because of the rule of rotation.
On an Administrative Appeal, the District applicable to the establishment of Judge, Small Causes Court, and appointed Respondent No. 1 as Upper Division Clerk.
The Appellant preferred a departmental appeal which was heard by a Single Judge on the Administrative side of the High Court.
He took the view that the promotion in question could be made by the District & Sessions Judge, and should be in accordance with the rule of rotation.
Respondent No. 1 challenged the said decision by way of a Writ Petition.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition and held that not only initial appointments but also ap pointments by promotion were to be made by the Judge, Small Causes Court and not by the District & Sessions Judge, and that the rule of rotation was not applicable.
Against the High Court 's decision, the appellant has preferred this appeal contending that the promotion in question could only be made by the District & Sessions Judge and that the rule of rotation was applicable even to the appointment by promotion.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Whenever a specific mention is made regarding a 134 particular officer of an establishment in a rule, that particular rule would normally apply to that establishment alone and the powers conferred by that rule would be con ferred on the officer mentioned in the rule.
Rule VI(1) of the High Court Rules speaks of appointments to the higher grades of the ministerial establishments and states that these appointments should ordinarily be made by seniority from lower grades provided that the officer to be promoted possesses the qualifications prescribed.
The first proviso to that rule goes on to say that the permanent vacancies in the original grade of Rs.75 5 125 shall be filled in by the District & Sessions Court by rotation as set out in the said sub rule (1) of Rule VI.
The 1st part of Rule VI deals with appointments by promotion to the higher grade of ministerial establishment.
Generally it must be held applicable to the establishment of the District & Sessions Court as well as that of the Judge, Small Causes Court.
This part, however, does not deal specifically with the question as to who is the officer competent to promote.
In view of this, the proviso can only be construed as laying down that, where the power of appointment by promotion is vested in the District & Sessions Judge, in making appointments by promotion to fill in the permanent vacancies in the said original grade of Rs.75 5 125, rule of rotation set out in the first provi so to clause (I) of Rule VI should ordinarily be followed.
It is not disputed that there is a separate Cadre for the Court of Small Causes.
Rule IV(3) shows that the first appointment of the ministerial officers in the Court of Small Causes is to be made by the Judge of the Small Causes Court.
[139F H; 140A C] 2.
A reading of sub section (1) of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 the High Court Rules, and Notification issued makes it clear that appointments by promotion to the posts in the entire ministerial cadre other than those in the process serving and mental establishments in the Court of Small Causes have to be made by the Judge, Court of Small Causes and the first proviso to Rule VI(1) prescribing the rule of rotation has no application to such appointments.
Moreover, it would be unreasonable to apply the principle of rotation to the Court of Small Causes where there is only one U.D.C.
The principle of rotation can be made applicable to the District & Sessions Court because there are a number of posts of Upper Division Clerks.
It would be irrational to apply that principle of rotation to the Court of Small Causes in which there is only one Upper Division Clerk/English Clerk.
[140D E]
