A group of Block Level Extension Officers rendered surplus in their parent department were appointed as Sales Tax Inspectors, Class III (Executive) posts, in the respond ent State between 13th February, 1967 and 28th September, 1970.
By an order dated 29th March, 1967, they were exempted from the requirement of going through competitive examina tion for the purpose of absorption.
By memorandum dated 22nd May, 1967 it was provided that seniority of surplus Class III ministerial employees of the development blocks on their absorption in other departments shall be determined with regard to the completed years of service counted for fixa tion of initial pay.
By a subsequent memorandum dated 8th November, 1967 this facility was also extended to employees absorbed in Class III executive posts.
Another order issued on 19th July, 1973 on the subject maintained the provision with regard to seniority as contained in the memorandum dated 22nd May, 1967.
Subsequently these Sales Tax Inspec tors were made permanent to that post retrospectively with effect from 31st March, 1967 by an order dated 15th Febru ary, 1980.
In the combined seniority list prepared accord ingly some of the directly recruited Sales Tax Inspectors were shown junior to the absorbed Sales Tax Inspectors.
On cross petitions being filed by the existing Sales Tax Inspectors and the absorbed Sales Tax Inspectors assailing the seniority list the High Court quashed the order dated 15th February, 1980 and seniority was directed to be fixed in accordance with the Recruitment Rules and general condi tions of Service Rules.
In these appeals by special leave, it was contended for the existing Inspectors that the absorbed Inspectors could not be confirmed on 15th February, 1980 retrospectively with effect from a presumed date, namely, 31st March, 1967; that the determination of seniority taking 155 confirmation as the basis was erroneous as they were enti tled to have the entire period between their actual appoint ment and confirmation taken into consideration, and that the appointment of the absorbed Inspectors was illegal having been made not in conformity with the relevant rules and without the recommendations of the Public Service Commis sion.
For the absorbed Inspectors it was contended that since they had been working in another department of the State Government from various dates between 13th November, 1956 and the actual date of their absorption they were entitled to have the entire period of their service in that department taken into consideration and the fixation of their seniority on the basis of their having been confirmed from the presumed date of 31st March, 1967 was erroneous, that none of the rules relied on by the existing 'Inspectors was applicable to them, and that it was the executive in structions issued in this behalf particularly dated 29th March, 1967, 22nd May, 1967, 8th November, 1967 which ap plied to their absorption.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The order of the State Government dated 15th February, 1980 giving retrospective confirmation to the absorbed Sales tax Inspectors from a presumed date and determination of inter se seniority on the basis of the dates of confirmation was valid.
[159H] 2.1 Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority shall be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirma tion.
His transfer to the same or an equivalent post in another Government department cannot wipe out his pre exist ing length of service in the parent department.
[162D; 164G] Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers ' Associa tion vs State of Maharashtra & Ors., ; ; Wing Commander J. Kurnar vs Union of India & Ors., ; and K. Madhavan & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, , referred to.
2.2 It is, however, perfectly within the power of the Government to have a rationalisation of the entire situation and determine with objectivity and fairness what rules should govern the inter se seniority and ranking of the personnel working in the concerned department.
The Courts will only insist that the rules so formulated should be reasonable, just and equitable.
[165E; 166E] R.S. Makashi vs I.M. Menon, ; ; K.C. Vasudeva 156 S.G. Jai Singhghani vs Union of India, ; , referred to. 2.3 In the instant case, if the period between the dates of appointment and confirmation of the existing Inspectors was counted for fixing their seniority but the period during which absorbed Inspectors worked in their parent department was ignored, the former would have obviously been placed on a more advantageous position but only to the prejudice of the latter as it would have amounted to sacrificing their interest.
If, on the other hand, the periods of continuous service of both the sets of Inspectors was taken into ac count it would have resulted in granting benefit to the absorbed Inspectors at the cost of existing ones and presum ably including those who had already been promoted as As sistant Sales Tax Officers, even prior to 22nd May, 1967, inasmuch as the period during which they had served in their parent department was much longer than the period of offici ation of existing Inspectors.
This was the situation with which the State Government was faced and it was its duty to evolve some policy or equitable formula which did justice, as far as possible, to the competing claims of both the sets of officers.
The decision taken by the Government in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case could not be said to be either arbitrary or discriminatory.
No statutory rule has been brought to Court 's notice which could run counter to it.
[165H; 166A D] 3.
The services of the absorbed Inspectors have not been shown to have ever been factually terminated in their parent department.
Again, though the nature of appointment of these officers in the Sales Tax Department was temporary they were allowed to uninterruptedly continue to hold the said post and were subsequently not only confirmed on that post but were also given ad hoc promotion as Assistant Sales Tax Officers.
Furthermore, no relief for the quashing of their appointment was sought for by the direct recruits before the High Court nor was any such relief pressed there.
In fact, even the fixation of their pay as Inspectors consequent upon their absorption, which was done in accordance with the executive instructions does not seem to have been ever challenged.
The validity of their appointment in the Sales Tax Department, therefore, could not be assailed.
[160G;
