The appellant, who was a firm acting as managing agents of a limited company (the Mills), purchased four plots of land adjoining the Mills on various dates between 1941 and 1942, and about five years later sold them to the Mills, as a result.
of which the appellant realised a sum of Rs. 43,887 in excess of the purchase price, For the assessment year.
1948 49 the Income tax Officer treated the amount as the income.
of the appellant 'and assessed it to income tax under head 'business ', on the ground that there was no evidence to show that the appellant had purchased the said lands for agricultural purposes or that they were acquired as an investment, and, that since the lands: were adjacent to the Mills the appellant must have purchased them solely with a view to sell them to the Mills; with.
profit. 'He considered that the transaction ' had ;ill the elements of a business transaction ' and was thus an adventure in the, natural of 'trade within section 2(4)of the Indian Income tax Act 7 The Appellate, Tribunal rejected the explanation given by the appellate 'regarding" the object with which it had purchased the plots of land agreed 641 with the view taken by the Income tax Officer.
At the instance of the appellant the Tribunal referred to the High Court the question: " whether there was material for the assessment of the sum of.
Rs. 43 87 being the difference between the purchase and sale price of the four plots of land as income from all adventure in the nature of trade.
The High Court held that ' the transaction in question was an adventure in the nature of trade and so the income tax authorities were justified in taxing the amount under the head 'business ' for the relevant year.
On appeal by special leave to the Supreme Court, it was contend ed for the appellant that on the facts and circumstances of the case it was erroneous in law to hold that the transaction ill question was an adventure in the nature of trade.
On the other hand, it was urged for the respondent that the question as raised before the High Court was one of fact not liable to be challenged under section 66(1) of the Act.
Held, (1) that the expression " adventure in the nature of trade " in sub section
(4) Of section 2 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, postulates the existence of certain elements in the adventure which in law would invest it with the character of trade or business and that a tribunal while considering a question as to whether a transaction is or is not an adventure in the nature of trade, before arriving at its final conclusion on facts, has to address itself to the legal requirements associated with the concept of trade or business.
Such a question is one of mixed law and fact and the decision of the tribunal thereon is open to consideration under section 66(1) of the Act.
Meenakshi Mills, Madurai vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, ; and Oriental Investment Co., Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay; , , relied on.
Edwards vs Bairstow ; , considered and held not inconsistent with the above said decisions.
2) that in the circumstances of this case it would be more appropriate to frame the question in this from: " whether, on the facts and circumstances proved in the case, the inference that the transaction in question is an adventure in the nature of trade is in law justified.
" Held, further, that even an isolated transaction might be regarded as an adventure in the nature of trade within section 2(4) Of the Act, if it is characterised by some of the essential features that make up trade or business.
Though judicial decisions which deal with the character of transactions alleged to be in the nature of trade do not purport to lay down any general or universal test, the presence of all the relevant circumstances, mentioned by. them my help the court to draw a similar inference, but it is not a matter of merely counting the number of facts and circumstances pro and con; it is the total effect of all the relevant factors and circumstances that determine the distinctive character of the transactions 648 If a person invests money in land intending to hold it, enjoys its income for some time, and then sells it at a profit,then it is a case of capital accretion and not profit derived from an adventure in the nature of trade.
But where a purchase has been made solely and exclusively with the intention to resell at a profit and the purchaser had no intention of holding the property for himself or otherwise enjoying or using it, there would be a strong presumption that the transaction is an adventure in the nature of trade; but this may be rebutted by the other facts or circumstances of the case.
The Californian Copper Syndicate (Limited and Reduced) vs Harris (Surveyor of Taxes), ; T. Beynon lnland Revenue vs Livingston, ; Martin vs Lowry, ; Rutledge vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, ; Balgownie Land Trust, Ltd. vs The Commissioners of Inland Revenue, ; F. A. Lindsay, A. E. Woodward and W. Hiscox vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, and Cayzer, Irvine and Co., Ltd. vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, , considered.
Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs Reinhold, , distinguished and considered as not laying down any general proposition of law.
In the present case, the circumstances showed that the appellant whose ordinary business was not to make investment in lands had purchased the plots of land with the sole intention of selling them to the Mills at a profit and this intention raised a strong presumption that the purchase and the subsequent sale were an adventure in the nature of trade; and, it was held that in the absence of any rebutting evidence, the Income tax authorities were justified in taxing the amount in question as income from business.
