Respondents Nos. 1 and 2, direct recruit Income Tax Officers, CIasa I, flied a petition before the Central Administrative Tribunal contending that they were not ap pointed to the next higher post of Assistant Commissioner according to their turn in the seniority list prepared as per directions given by the Court in Bishan Sarup Gupta etc.
vs Union of India; , and Union of India Etc.
vs Majji Jangammayya, ; , adversely af fecting their seniority as Assistant Commissioners, and hence it required correction.
The Tribunal quashed the seniority list of Assistant Commissioners and Commissioners of Income Tax and directed the appellants to redetermine their seniority in the cadre of Assistant Commissioners via a via the seniority of re spondents No. 3 to 20, also direct recruits and other con cerned officers, in the light of the directions and princi ples laid down by this Court in Majji Jangamayya 's case.
Hence the appeal by the Department.
was contended on behalf of the respondents that in view of the instructions of this Court in 1st B.S. Gupta case (1975) Supp SCR 491, as explained in Majji Jangamayya 's case, while selecting the Income Tax Officers to the post of Assistant Commissioners, the Departmental Promotion Commit tee was required to consider the cases of the Income Tax Officers falling within the zone with reference to the records, either on the date of seniority list was prepared i.e. February 2, 1972 (as approved by the Court in 2nd Gupta case) or on the date the Committee met for selection, and not with reference to their records relevant to the year for which their selection was to made, but since the Committee had followed the latter course, it had violated the direc tions of this Court.
It was also urged that the selection was not rode according to the instruc 336 tions given in the Government Memorandum of 1957, and that while making the promotions, merit cum seniority and not seniority cummerit formula, should have been followed.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The dispute with regard to the seniority be tween the direct recruits and the promoters in the Income Tax Department was set at rest by this Court in 2nd B.S. Gupta case wherein this Court accepted as correct the sen iority list of Income Tax Officers, prepared in accordance with the directions given in the 1st B.S. Gupta case.
While upholding the selection list for promotion of Income Tax Officers, Class I to the posts of Assistant Commissioners prepared on the basis of the aforesaid seniority list and the instructions in the Government Memorandum of 1957, in Majji Jangamayya 's case, this Court explained the observa tions made in the 1st B.S. Gupta 's case.
[338B C; F] 1.2 What was desired by this Court in the 1st B.S. Gupta case and Majji Jangamayya case was that if according to the new seniority list there were cases of officers who were entitled to be considered for promotion much before they were considered on the basis of the old seniority list, the Committee should look into such cases, and should adjust the promotion given right from the year 1962 onwards by consid ering the cases of such unjustly superseded officers.
Hence the Committee was required to consider the vacancies in the posts of Asstt.
Commissioners year wise from 1962 onwards and if the superseded officers were found fit for such promotion, they were to be given seniority as Asstt.
Commis sioners from the year in which they would have been promot ed.
Thus, while considering the promotions in the earlier years, the Committee had to consider the record of the officers relevant to those years.
The Committee could not have taken into consideration the record of future years for promotion in the earlier years.
This is the import of the observations of this Court.
[340D F; B] 1.3 The Committee, which met from 1977 to 1979 to adjust the promotions as directed by this Court, considered in 1978 the cases of Respondents No. 1 and 2 with reference to their claims which arose in September 1968, February 1969 and September 1969.
They were not selected for the vacancies in September 1968 and February 1969, on the basis of compara tive merit.
However, they were selected for the vacancies in September 1969 and given deemed promotion with reference to that date and their seniority as Assistant Commissioners fixed as on that date.
The Committee has strictly and cor rectly abided by the directions in both the cases.
[340G H] 337 1.4 The comparative merits of the two respondents were considered on each of the three occasions and they were selected only on the third occasion.
They have since been appointed as Chief Commissioners according to their seniori ty as determined by the department and approved by this Court.
[342C] Bishan Sarup Gupta vs Union of India and Ors., [1975] Supp.
SCR 491; Union of India etc.
vs Majji Jangamayya etc.
; , explained and Bishan Sarup Gupta etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
Etc., ; , re ferred to.
