The land in this case was leased by the Government to one R in 1931 and a regular lease deed was drawn in 1938.
It was a perpetual lease.
The lessee constructed a residential building on the land, and assigned the lease in favour of one L.
On the death of L, the interest in the lease devolved on the respondents.
Respondent No. 1 sent a letter through his Advocate to the Land & Development Officer, stating that he proposed to construct a multi storeyed building demolish ing the bungalow and demanding to know the charges for conversion of the land use from residential to commercial purposes.
The Land & Development Officer replied that the letter was receiving attention.
Actually the names of the respondents were mutated in the property register after the exchange of the above letters.
However, no application for conversion of the land user was made on behalf of the les sees of the land.
Again in 1978 the parties sent a letter to the Land & Development Officer demanding to know the terms for con struction of a commercial building on the lease land and the charges to be paid for the same.
The Assistant Settlement Commissioner sent a reply requesting that a formal applica tion be made in the prescribed proforma for permission to construct multi storeyed commercial building duly signed by all the co lessees.
In 1980 a reminder was sent to the parties.
Only thereafter the parties filed an application in the prescribed form.
In 1984, the Government intimated the parties that it was willing to comply with the request, provided the parties were willing to abide by certain terms and conditions in advance.
The parties made a representation to the Works & Housing Minis 301 ter requesting for reconsideration of the terms and condi tions.
After a good deal of correspondence the Government rejected the representation.
Thereafter the parties ap proached the High Court by way of a Writ Petition challeng ing the terms and conditions imposed by the Government.
It was contended that since they applied for permission to convert the user of land on 15.2.1978, they were liable to pay charges calculated with reference to that date only; that no charges for misuse of the land could be levied after 15.2.1978; that no interest could be charged on the alleged additional premium which was calculated by taking into consideration May 25, 1981 as the base date.
Accepting the contentions, the High Court held that there was no need to make any application for conversion after 1962 when the Master Plan was prepared by the Delhi Development Authority declaring the region as a commercial zone and that the conversion was automatic and statutory.
The High Court held that the Respondents were not,obliged to make the payment of conversion charges calculated at rates prevalent in April, 1984 instead of the rates obtaining in February, 1978.
It directed the Government to recompute the additional premium and other charges.
Aggrieved by the High Court Judgment, the Government preferred the present appeal.
The same contentions as were raised in the High Court were advanced before this Court, by both the parties.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The land has to be used as per the agreement between the contracting parties, and no change of the user can be made contrary to the agreement even if the Master Plan permits such user.
The Plan helps the parties to change the user, if the parties mutually agree to do so.
It does not permit the occupant to change the user unilaterally.
It is not, therefore, correct to say that no permission of the landlord was needed to change the user of the land.
The High Court is not right in holding that there was an automatic or a statutory conversion of the user of the land because in the Plan the land in question fell in the area reserved for commercial use.
The High Court failed to appreciate that the change of user of the land permitted by the Plan was only enabling in nature.
It lifted the restriction which was otherwise there for using the land for commercial purpose.
[312B C & A] 2.
All that the parties wanted to know from the Land & Development Officer were the terms and conditions for the construction of a commercial building on the land and the charges to be paid for the same.
This can hardly be called an application for permission to con 302 struct a commercial building on the land.
It is no more than an enquiry.
It is immaterial in this connection whether any regular form of application was prepared and was available for use at the relevant time.
Even assuming that such a form was prescribed for the first time on June 15, 1978, the letter of February 15, 1978 could hardly be described as an application signed by the lessees meaning thereby all the lessees for permission to convert the user of the land.
The absence of a prescribed form does not make the letter the required application.
The least that is expected in an application for the purpose is a request by all the lessees to permit the change of the user of the land showing readi ness and willingness to abide by the terms and conditions for such conversion or the user.
The letter in question, on the other hand, did nothing more than make an enquiry sug gesting that the application for the change of the user would be made after the terms and conditions including the charges for the same are known.
Thus, the letter of February 15, 1978 was not an application made for the change of the user of the land.
[309F H; 310A B] 3.
It is clear from the authority 's letter dated March 1, 1980 that different persons were seeking permission for change of the user of the land and some of them were not even the co lessees of the land.
Since there was no firm application by the authorised person or persons for conver sion of the user of the land the authority had asked the lessees to sent the application in the prescribed form duly signed by all the co lessees.
There was no reply to this letter of March 1, 1980 and hence a reminder was sent by the authority on June 3, 1980 warning the lessees that in case no reply was received from them within 15 days, the matter would be treated as closed.
It is pursuant to this reminder that on February 27, 1981 a letter accompanied by an appli cation in the prescribed form was sent, and both the letter as well as the prescribed form were duly signed for the first time by all the co lessees.
The contents of the accom panying letter make it clear that even the lessees treated this application as the first duly made application for the purpose.
As has been stated in the application, the plans for the construction of the commercial building were sanc tioned only on January 21, 1981 and the exemption applica tion made to the competent authority under Section 20(1) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 was even then still under process.
It is in response to this application that the sanction was given by the authority on January 12, 1984 to convert the user of the land.
Thus, it was only on February 27, 1981 that an application for the change of the user of the land was made by or on behalf of the respondent lessees of the land.
[310G H; 311A D] 4.
There is no explanation given by the appellants as to why the 303 application made by the respondents on February 27, 1981 was not replied to till January 12, 1984.
Hence in the absence of anything else on record, it will have to be taken that the date with reference to which conversion charges have to be counted is 27th February, 1981.
[311E] 5.
The additional premium should be calculated by the appellants on the basis of the rate which was prevalent as on February 27, 1981 which is the date of the application made for the change of the user.
The interest should be charged on such additional premium w.e.f. 12th April, 1984 since a period of three months from the date of notice, viz., January 12, 1984 was available to the respondent lessees to make the payment of the additional premium.
The respondent lessees would not be entitled to convert the present user of the land into the commercial user uniess and until the last of the three annual installments of the addi tional premium together with the interest thereon is paid.
[312C E] 6.
The respondents will further be liable to pay the misuse charges mentioned at items 6 and 7 of the notice of 12.1.1984 till 12th April, 1984 from which date, they would be paying the conversion charges.
[312F]
