The appellants were in service as tubewell operators in the Irrigation Branch of the Public Works Department of the Punjab Government.
The State took a decision to transfer all the tubewells in this branch to the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation, a company wholly owned and managed by the State of Punjab.
Consequent on this decision, a notification was issued on 30th November, 1982 abolishing all the posts of tubewell operators in the Irrigation Branch, and accordingly notices terminating the services of the appellants were issued.
The appellants challenged the termination notices before the High Court contending (i) that the notification by which the tubewells were transferred was mala fide, the only object being to frustrate certain claims of the petitioners which had been judicially recognised; (ii) that the impugned notices did not fulfill the requirements of clauses (b) and (c) of section 25F of the in so far as the compensation amount of each individual was not deliv ered at his door, and the notices under clause (c) were not sent by registered post; and (iii) that, in case the action of the State was upheld, the respondent Corporation should be held to be under an obligation to employ the appellants with continuity of service and under the same terms and conditions which they were enjoying prior to their retrench ment from the service of the State.
The High Court rejected the petitions flied by the appellants.
The High Court inter alia found that the appel lants had been given all the benefits which they had ob tained from the court.
It was also found that the respondent corporation had made an offer of re employment to all the appellants effective from the date of expiry of the notices of their retrenchment by the State Government.
According to the learned 368 Judges, the sole object of the issuance of the notification was to get rid of the tubewells which were the cause of constant and ever increasing loss to the State exchequer and not any mala fide or extraneous reasons.
The services of the appellants have since been taken over by the Corporation.
Though at one stage the Corporation had taken the stand that the appellants would be taken as fresh appointees in the Corporation, it had subsequently fixed them up at the same level of pay at which they were in Government service immediately before retrenchment, and they were also being granted increments on that scale.
There remained two grounds of dissatisfaction: (1) that the appellants would be junior in service to the tubewell operators who had been engaged by the Corporation on its own account before the appellants joined the service of the Corporation, giving the appellants the apprehension that their down gradation in seniority would affect them in case the Corporation started closing down some of the tubewells and discharging its staff, and (2) if treated as retrenched Government servant, they would be able to get terminal benefits and pension only on the basis of their present lengths of service in the Government.
Before this Court, the contention of the appellants in this regard was that the Corporation was really nothing but a Department of the Government, and that in such circum stances, its "corporate veil" had to be torn as under and its basic identity as department of the Government recog nised and given effect to.
Alternatively it was argued that even if the Corporation be taken to be a separate enti ty, it was clearly a "successor" to the Government Depart ment as the Government had assured the Corporation that, if it suffered any losses because of the transfer, the losses would be made good by the Government, that having regard to the virtual identity of the Corporation and the Government, this was really a case of the Corporation having taken over a department of the Government, and that both the Irrigation Branch of the State Government as well as the Corporation admittedly constituted an "industry" within the meaning of the .
and the problem should be looked at from the point of view of industrial law.
The respondent 's case was that the State 's obligation came to an end with the payment of retrenchment compensa tion, that the Corporation went out of its way to confer a favour on the appellants by agreeing to take them into its service; that it would be unfair on the part of the Corpora tion to give the appellants benefit of their earlier service in the 369 Government and make them senior to other employees who had been serving in the Corporation right from the beginning: and that this was a fresh employment subject to the normal rules and regulations of the Corporation and the appellants had no right to claim any continuity of service in the circumstances.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The fact appears to be that the tubewells were not being operated profitably by the Government and the Government seems to have taken a decision that it would he more efficient, economical and prudent to have these tube wells run by the Corporation.
There is no reason to doubt the bona fides or the genuineness of this arrangement.
[378B C] (2) When individual drafts for the amounts of compensa tion due to the various tubewell operators were forwarded to the divisional subdivisional offices, sufficiently in time to be available to be taken by them by 31st August, 1983 there was sufficient compliance with the provisions of clause (a) of section 25 F. [379C D] (3) The running of tubewells constitutes an "industry" whether in the hands of the government or in the hands of the Corporation.
[381D] (4) There is no incompatibility in applying some of the provisions of the to persons in the service of the Government.
[381D] State of Bihar vs Industrial Tribunal, (5) Notices under clause (c) of section 25 F were sent to the Labour Department as well as to the employment ex change through the poen book.
The High Court is right in pointing out that such a requirement can be treated errone ous to hold that unless sent by registered post, the notices cannot be treated as complying with the statute.
[379E] (6) Where the transferor and transfree is a State or a State instrumentality, which is required to act fairly and not arbitrarily, the Court has a say as to whether the terms and conditions on which it proposes to hand over or take over an industrial undertaking embody the requisite of "fairness in action".
In such circumstances it will be open to this Court to review the arrangement between the State Government and the corporation and issue appropriate direc tions.
The princi 370 ple sought to be applied is a constitutional principle flow ing from the contours of article 14 of Constitution which the State and Corporation are obliged to adhere to.
[387F H; 388A] New Gujarat Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Labour Appellate Tribu nal, [1957] II L.L.J. 194; Ramjilal Nathulal vs Himabai Mills Co. Ltd., [1956] II L.L.J. 244; Indian Hume Pipe Co. 'Ltd. vs Bhimarao, ; Ban Nigam Karamchari Kalyan Sangh vs Divisional Logging Manager & Ors., J.T. ; Workmen vs Dahingeapara Tea Estate, ; Anakapalla Co op.
Agricultural & Industrial Society Ltd. vs Its Workmen, [1963] Supp.1 S.C.R. 730; Hariprasad vs Divikar, [1957] S.C.R. 121; Bombay Garage Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal, [1953] I L.L.J. 14; Artisan Press vs L.A.T., [1954] II L.L.J. 14; Kapur vs Shields, ; Accountant and Secretarial Services P. Ltd. vs Union; , and Mahabir Auto Stores vs Indian Oil Corporation, [1990] 3 S.C.C. 752, referred to.
{7) Looking at the facts of this case in the above perspective, it appears that the State Government has acted arbitrarily towards the appellants.
The conduct of the Government in depriving the appellants of substantial bene fits which have accrued to them as a result of their long service with the Government, although the tubewells continue to be run at its cost by a Corporation wholly owned by it, is something which is grossly unfair and inequitable.
This type of attitude designed to achieve nothing more than to deprive the employees of some benefits which they had earned, can be understood in the case of a private employer but seems ill from a State Government and smacks of arbi trariness.
[388B; 389D E] (8) The appellants will be entitled to add their service in the Government to their length of service in the Corpora tion for purposes of computation of their salary, length of service and retirement benefits.
The Corporation is also directed to ensure, as far as possible, that none of the appellants are retrenched as surplus on account of any closure of tubewells or other like reason until they retire or leave the service of the Corporation voluntarily for any reason.
The advantage of counting the period of their past service with the Government will, however, not enable them to claim any seniority over the former employees of the Corporation.
[391G H; 390E] (9) Even before the insertion of section 25FF in the Act,.the employees of a predecessor had no right to claim re employment by the successor in business save in excep tional circumstances.
Even where 371 available, that claim was not a matter of absolute right but one 01 ' discretion, to be judicially exercised, having regard to all the circumstances.
[391G H]
