Pursuant to a newspaper advertisement by the State Government calling for applications for Grade I and Grade II teacher posts (Post Graduate Teacher and Trained Graduate Teachers) the respondent in the appeal applied for the same.
The qualification prescribed in the advertisement was a second class degree in M.A.
However, the respondent who held a third class degree in M.A. was selected, and an order was issued appointing her as a Post Graduate Teacher in Hindi, subject to the production of original certificates, and compliance with the other necessary formalities.
When the respondent approached the authorities with her certificates, it was noticed that she was not qualified for the post, and was, therefore, not allowed to join service.
The respondent approached the State Administrative Tribunal for relief, which held that the appellants had issued the order of appointment knowing fully well that she was not qualified, and that she was selected for appointment because there was no other candidate available with better marks, and passed an Order directing the appellants to allow the respondent to join duty and pay her salary from the date she reported for duty.
The appellants appealed to this Court.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
When an advertisement mentions a particular quali fi 560 cation and an appointment is made in disregard of the same, it is not a matter only between the appointing authority and the appointee concerned.
The aggrieved are all those who had similar or even better qualifications than the appointee or appointees but who had not applied for the post because they did not possess the qualifications mentioned in the adver tisement.
[562F] 2.
It amount to a fraud on the public to appoint persons with inferior qualifications unless it is clearly stated in the advertisement that the qualifications are relaxable.
[562G] 3.
No Court should be a party to the perpetuation of the fraudulent practice.
The State Administrative Tribunal lost sight of this fact in the instant case.
[562G] 4.
It is common knowledge that sometimes either by mistake or otherwise the notes put up before the Selection Committee contain erroneous data prepared by the office and sometimes the Selection Committee proceeds on the basis that all those who appear before it, are otherwise qualified.
However, the second stage at which the documents are scruti nised is when the higher authorities go through them at the time the candidate concerned approaches them for resuming duties alongwith the original certificates.
It is at that stage that the mistake in the instant case was discovered, and the respondent was not permitted to resume her duties.
There is nothing wrong in such action.
[562B C] [The Court felt it would be unjust to deprive the re spondent of the post at this stage, as she had subsequently acquired another degree in M.A. with second class and there by qualified herself to be appointed, that she may be over aged for the post and many who were underqualified were appointed to the post earlier, and directed that she be appointed in the post from the beginning of the academic year 1990 1991.] [563B C]
