In these petitions in the nature of public interest litigation under Article 32 of the Constitution, the relief asked for is one for mandamus to the Union of India to fill the vacancies of Judges in the Supreme Court and the several High Courts of the country and ancillary orders or direc tions in regard to the relief of filling up of vacancies.
In response to the rule, the Union of India, relying upon S.P. Gupta vs Union of India, [1982] 2 SCR 365, raised a preliminary objection as to the justiciability of the issue.
The objection, however, was later withdrawn by the succeed ing Attorney General who made a statement that it was the constitutional obligation of the Union of India to provide the sanctioned Judge strength in the superior courts and default, if any, was a matter of public interest, and the writ petitions requiring a direction to the Union of India to fill up the vacancies were maintainable.
Disposing of the petitions, this Court, HELD: (1) The ratio in S.P. Gupta 's case left the matter of fixing Up Of the Judge strength to the President of India under the constitutional scheme, and the choice of Judges to the prescribed procedure, but once the sanctioned strength was determined it was the obligation of the Union of India to maintain the sanctioned strength in the superior Courts.
[437H; 438A] (2) It is too late in the day to dispute the position that justice has to be administered through the courts and such administration would relate to social, economic and political aspects of justice.
The Judiciary therefore be comes the most prominent and outstanding wing of the Consti tutional System for fulfilling the mandate of the Constitu tion.
434 For its sound functioning, it is necessary that there must be an efficient judicial system and one of the factors for providing the requisite efficiency is ensuring adequate strength.
[440E F] (3) For the availability of the appropriate atmosphere where a Judge would be free to act according to his con science it is necessary that he should not be over burdened with pressure of work which he finds it physically impossi ble to undertake.
This necessarily suggests that the judge strength should be adequate to the current requirement and must remain under constant review in order that commensurate Judge strength may be provided.
[441F G] Bradley vs Fisher, ; 1871, referred to.
(4) It is a matter for immediate attention of all con cerned and of Government in particular that the Adminis tration of Justice is made a plan subject and given appro priate attention.
[444C] (5) Backlog in Courts has become a national problem.
The adjudicatory process is being blamed for not equalling itself to the challenge of the times.
There is a general complaint that the judicial system is on the verge of col lapse.
It is, therefore, the obligation of the constitution al process to keep the system appropriately manned.
There is no justification for the sluggish move in such an important matter.
[447C D] (6) If in a given case the Chief Justice of the High Court has recommended and the name has been considered by the Chief Minister and duly processed through the Governor so as to reach the hands of the Chief Justice of India through the Ministry of Justice and the Chief Justice of India as the highest judicial authority in the country, on due application of his mind, has given finality to the process at his level, there cannot ordinarily be any justi fication for reopening the matter merely because there has been a change in the personal of the Chief Justice or the Chief Minister of the State concerned.
This has to be the rule and the policy adopted by the Union of India should immediately be given up.
[448B D] (7) In the functioning of public offices there is and should be continuity of process and action and all objective decisions taken cannot be transformed into subjective issues.
That being the position, recommendations finalised by the Chief Justice of India unless for any particular reason and unconnected with the mere change of the Chief 435 Justice or the Chief Minister justifying the same should not be reopened and if in a given case the Union of India is of the view that the matter requires to be looked into again a reference should be made to the Chief Justice of India and there can be a fresh look at the matter only if the Chief Justice of India permits such a review of the case.
[448E F] (8) Consistent with the constitutional purpose and process it becomes imperative that the role of the institu tion of the Chief Justice of India be recognised as of crucial importance in the matter of appointments to the Supreme Court and the High Courts of the States.
This aspect dealt with in Gupta 's case requires re consideration by a larger bench.
[450E] (9) In India the judicial institutions, by tradition, have an avowed a political commitment and the assurance of a non political complexion of the judiciary cannot be divorced from the process of appointments.
Constitutional phraseology of "consultation" has to be understood and expounded consistent with and to promote this constitutional spirit.
These implications are, indeed, vital.
The constitutional values cannot be whittled down by calling the appointment of Judges as an executive act.
The appointment is rather the result of collective, constitutional process.
It is a participatory constitutional function.
It is, perhaps, inappropriate to refer to any `power ' or `right ' to appoint judge.
It is essentially a discharge of a constitutional trust of which certain constitutional functionaries are collectively repositories.
[457D F] (10) The executive, on whose advice the President acts, as a participant in the process has its own important and effective role.
To say that the power to appoint solely vests with the executive and that the executive, after bestowing such consideration on the result of consultations with the judicial organ of the State, would be at liberty to take such decision as it may think fit in the matter of appointments, is an over simplification of a sensitive and subtle constitutional sentence subversive of the doctrine of judicial independence.
[457F G] (11) The word "consultation" is used in the constitu tional provision in recognition of the status of the high constitutional dignitary who formally expresses the result of the institutional process leading to the appointment of judges.
To limit that expression to its literal limitations, shorn of its constitutional background and purpose, is to borrow Justice Frankfurter 's phrase, "to stick in the bark of words".
[458B] (12) Judicial Review is a part of the basic constitutional structure 436 and one of the basic features of the essential Indian Con stitutional policy.
This essential constitutional doctrine does not by itself justify or necessitate any primacy to the executive wing on the ground of its political accountability to the electorate.
[458C] (13) It might under certain circumstances be said that Government is not bound to appoint a judge so recommended by the judicial wing.
But to contemplate a power for the execu tive to appoint a person despite his being disapproved or not recommended by the Chief Justice of the State and the Chief Justice of India would be wholly inappropriate and would constitute an arbitrary exercise of power.
[458D E] (14) The purpose of the `consultation ' is to safeguard the independence of the judiciary and to ensure selection of proper persons.
The matter is not, therefore, to be consid ered that the final say is the exclusive prerogative of the executive government.
The recommendations of the appropriate constitutional functionaries from the judicial organ of the State has an equally important role.
"Consultation" should have sinews to achieve the constitutional purpose and should not be rendered sterile by a literal interpretation.
[458F G] (15) There are preponerant and compelling cousideratious why the views of the Chief Justices of the States and that of the Chief Justice of India should be afforded a decisive import unless the executive has some material in its posses sion which may indicate that the appointment is otherwise undesirable.
[458G H] (16) The correctness of the opinion of the majority in S.P. Gupta 's case relating to the status and importance of consultation, the primacy of the position of the Chief Justice of India and the views that the fixation of Judge strength is not justiciable should be reconsidered by a larger bench.
[459B] (17) In view of the fact that the bulk of vacancies in the High Courts have been filled up, and in view of the assurance held out by the learned Attorney General that prompt steps are being taken to fill up the remaining vacan cies, further monitoring for the time being is not neces sary.
[459F]
