The appellant is a registered society of agriculturists of Tamil Nadu, who are entitled to riparian rights of Cauv ery river in cultivating their lands over the years.
It seeks from this Court that directions be given to the Union of India Respondent No. 1 to refer the dispute relating to the water utilization of the Cauvery river and equitable distribution thereof in terms of section 4 of the Inter State Water Disputes Act 1956.
Also to issue a mandamus to the State of Karnataka not to proceed to construct dam projects, reservoirs across the said river or its tribu taries within the state and to restore supply of water to the State of Tamil Nadu as envisaged in the agreements dated 18th February, 1924.
In this petition State of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Union Territory of Pondicherry have also been added as Respondent No. 2 to 5 respectively.
In the year 1970, the State of Tamil Nadu requested Union of India to set up a Tribunal for settling the ques tion of equitable distribution of waters under sec.
3 of the Act.
A suit was filed under Article 131 of the Constitution in this Court but was withdrawn on political consideration so as to evolve a mutual and negotiated settlement.
According to the petitioners it is submitted that sever al attempts were made through bilateral and multilateral talks for a negotiated settlement but no solution could be reached and the problem continued 84 The State of Karnataka filed several affidavits opposing the maintainability of the petition and the Union of India has also opposed the application on the basis of section 11 of the Act.
The petition was filed on November 18, 1983 and on 12.12.83 the Court directed issue of notice.
The State of Tamil Nadu supported and associated itself with the peti tioner seeking the same relief on 6.5.87 the State also filed an affidavit in this Court supporting the contention of the petitioner and also effectively joined the dispute by adopting the stand of the petitioner.
The mainstream of the river Cauvery has its origin in the hills of Coorg.
Some tributaries of the river have origin in the State of Kerala and others in the State of Karnataka.
The river flows for about 300 Kms.
in the State of Karnataka and almost for an equal span within the State of Tamil Nadu before joining the Bay of Bengal.
It is an inter state river as per Article 262, Entry 56 of List I of 7th Schedule of the Constitution, so the regulation and development of the said river is under the control of the Union of India and is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
Article 262 of the constitution provides for adjudica tion of disputes (1) with respect to the use, distribution and control of the waters (2) Parliament may by law provide that neither the Supreme Court or any other Court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute as is referred to in clause (1).
As per section 3 of the Act if it appears to the Govern ment of any State that a water dispute with the Government of another State has arisen or likely to arise and the interests of the State or of any of the inhabitance, thereof are likely to be affected prejudicially, the State Govern ment in the prescribed manner request the Central Government to refer the Water dispute to a Tribunal for adjudication.
Allowing the petition, this Court, HELD: This dispute in question is one over which the people and the State of Tamil Nadu have been clamouring for more than 20 years.
The matter has been pending in this Court for the last 6 1/2 years.
It is on 85 record that over these years 26 sittings of the Chief Minis ters of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu have been there and in some of these even the Central Ministers of Water Resources have also participated but have not succeeded in bringing about negotiated settlement.
No serious attempt seems to have been made to have the dispute resolved.
This Court has given several adjournments to accommodate the attempts for negoti ations because of the nature of the subject matter.
Ulti mately on 26.2.90 order by the Court was given that the Writ Petition would be listed for final hearing on 24.4.90 since sufficient opportunity and time to these two states at the behest of the Central Government or otherwise has been given to arrive at negotiated settlement.
On 26th April 1990 the Union of India also informed the Court that Central Govern ment did not want to undertake any further negotiations and left the matter for the disposal by this Court.
[89G H; 90B C; 91D] There was no reason for the dispute to protrect for such a long period.
Any further delay in taking statutority mandated action is bound to exasperate the feelings further and lead to more bitterness.
[91H; 92A] Section 4 of the Act indicates that on the basis of the request referred to in Section 3, if Central Government is of the opinion that water dispute cannot be settled by negotiation, it is mandatory for the Central Government to constitute a Tribunal for adjudication of the dispute.
[92B] The Central Government to fulfil the statutory obliga tion notify in the official Gazette the constitution of an appropriate tribunal for the adjudication of the Water Dispute.
The same should be done within a period of one month.
