Grih Kalyan Kendra is a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act 1960.
It is a welfare organization working under the aegis of the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms, Ministry of Home Affairs.
Its object is to establish Kendras to help needy Government servants especially those belonging to the lower income group by providing to their dependents opportunity of gainful work and training during their leisure time so that the dependents of such Government servants may be able to supplement to the meagre income of the family and to acquire skill and experience for obtaining employment elsewhere.
In furtherance of this object, the kendra has set up nursery centres, craft centres, and creches etc.
In Delhi and other cities where the work of imparting necessary training is carried on.
The management of the Kalayan Kendras vests in the Board which consists of officers of the Department of Personnel and in order to augment its resources the Ministry gives grant to the kendras.
The terms and conditions or tenure of service of its employees have not been regulated by any Rules framed by the kendra.
The staff of the Kendras fall in two categories viz. (i) regular staff taken on deputation from other central government offices who draw their salaries in regular scales of pay with the deputation and other allowances as admissible to the central government employees and (ii) employees employed at the various centres of the kendra on ad hoc basis, some of whom have been working an fixed salary called honorarium while others are working on the piece rate wages, without any gratuity or pension or Provident fund.
The Workers ' Union of the Kendra has filed this writ petition for a declaration that the kendra wherein the workers are employed is a 'State ' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and such it is prayed by them that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to pay regular pay scale on par with other employees 16 performing similar work under the Union of India, New Delhi Municipal Committee and other Departments of the Delhi Administration, as according to them wages paid to them are low as compared to the employees performing identical duties in the said Departments.
Their contention is that the Kendra being a 'State ', the respodents are under constitutional obligation to pay them higher scale of pay prescribed for the Government Departments, on the principle "equal pay for equal work".
They have raised claim to pension, gratuity and provident fund etc.
The respondents contest their claim on the plea that the employees working in the kendra are not regular employees and the duties performed by them are not comparable to any of the employees working under NDMC or any other DEPARTMENT OF THE Delhi Administration or Union of India, the Status of the Kendra being unique.
Dismissing the writ petition the Court, HELD: There being no other Government or semi Government employees who can be regarded, even broadly, as being situated similarly as the employees of the Kendra, the principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be said to be violated by the payment of mere honorarium to these employees.
[27E] The findings recorded by the former Chief Justice to whom the matter was referred earlier clearly shows that there has been no discrimination as the petitioners are not being discriminated from those who are situated equally.
The petitioner 's claim for the benefit of equal pay for equal work, therefore must fail.
Their claim for the issue of direction to the respondents to provide for the pension, gratuity and provident fund for the employees of the Grih Kalyan must also fail.
[27H; 28A B] Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs International Airport Authority of India and ors.
; , ; P.K. Ramachandra lyer & Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; ; B.S. Minhas vs
Indian Statistical Institute and Ors., ; ; Bihar State Harijan Kalyan Parishad vs Union of india and ors.
; , ; Surya Narain Yadav & Ors.
vs Bihar State Electricity Board and Others, ; ; Randhir Singh vs Union of India, ; ; Daily Rated Casual Labour Employed under P Dhirendra Chamoli vs State of U.P.,[1986] 1 SCC 637, Engineer in Chief, CPWD R.D. Gupta vs Lt. Governor, Delhi Administration, ; ; Bhagwan Dass vs
State of 17 Haryana, [1987] 4 SCC 634; Jaipal vs State of Haryana, [1988] 3 SCC 354; Dharwad District P.W.D. Literate Daily Wage Employees Association and Ors.
vs State of karnataka and Others; , ; Federation Of all India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers vs Union of India, [19890 3 SCC 1, referred to.
