The petitioner filed a writ petition in this court by way of public interest litigation alleging that the respondents, West Bokaro Collieries and Tata Iron and Steel Company (TISCO) were polluting the river Bokaro by discharging surplus waste in the form of sludge/slurry as effluent from their washeries into river making the river water unfit for drinking and irrigation purposes thereby causing risk to the health of the people; the State of Bihar and the State Pollution Control Board have failed to take appropriate steps for prevention of the pollution and instead the State of Bihar has granted leases on payment of royalty to various persons for collection of slurry.
Accordingly the petitioner prayed for directions to the respondents to take immediate steps prohibiting the pollution of the river and to take legal action against TISCO under the .
The petitioner also claimed interim relief from this Court that he should be permitted to collect sludge/slurry flowing out of washeries of the respondents.
6 The respondents contested the petition denying the petitioner 's allegations.
Bihar State Pollution Board asserted that directions have been issued to the Bokaro Collieries to take effective steps for improving the quality of the effluent going into the river Bokaro and that the TISCO Company has been granted permission to discharge their effluents from their outlets in accordance with sections 25 and 26 of the 1974 Act.
On behalf of TISCO and the Bokaro Collieries it was contended that all effective steps have been taken to prevent the pollution and they have complied with the instructions of the State Pollution Board.
By an order dated 13.12.1990, this Court dismissed the writ petition with costs.
Giving reasons for dismissal of the petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
Article 32 is designed for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights of a citizen by the Apex Court.
It provides for an extra ordinary remedy to safeguard the fundamental rights of a citizen.
Right to life is a fundamental right under Article 21 of the Constitution and it includes the right of enjoyment of pollution free water and air for full enjoyment of life.
If anything endangers or impairs that quality of life in derogation of laws, a citizen has right to have recourse to Article 32 of the Constitution for removing the pollution of water or air which may be detrimental to the quality of life.
A petition under Article 32 for the prevention of pollution is maintainable at the instance of affected persons or even by a group of social workers or journalists.
But recourse to proceeding under Article 32 of the Constitution should be taken by person genuinely interested in the protection of society on behalf of the community.
Public interest litigation cannot be invoked by a person or body of persons to satisfy his or its personal grudge and enmity.
If such petitions under Article 32 are entertained it would amount to abuse of process of the Court, preventing speedy remedy to other genuine petitioners from this Court.
Personal interest cannot be enforced through the process of this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution in the garb of a public interest litigation.
Public interest litigation contemplates legal proceeding for vindication or enforcement of fundamental rights of a group of persons or community which are not able to enforce their fundamental rights on account of their incapacity, poverty or ignorance of law.
A person invoking the jurisdiction of this Curt under Article 32 must approach this Court for the vindication of the fundamental rights of affected persons and not for the purpose of vindication of his personal grudge or enmity.
It is duty of this Court to 7 discourage such petitions and to ensure that the course of justice is not obstructed or polluted by unscrupulous litigants by invoking the extra ordinary jurisdiction of this Court for personal matters under the garb of the public interest litigation.
[13C H; 14A] Bandhua Mukti Morcha vs Union of India, ; ; Sachindanand Pandey vs State of West Begal, ; ; Ramsharan Autyanuprasi & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, [1989] Suppl.
1 SCC 251; Chetriya Pardushan Mukti Sangharsh Samiti vs State of U.P. & Ors., [1990] 4 SCC 449, referred to. 2.
The present petition is not filed in public interest instead the petition has been made by the petitioner in his own interest.
Infact there is intrinsic evidence in the petition itself that the primary purpose of filing this petition is not to serve any public interest instead it is in self interest.
The petitioner has been purchasing slurry from the respondents for the last several years.
With the passage of time he wanted more and more slurry but the Company refused to accept his request.
He removed the Company 's slurry in an unauthorised manner for which criminal cases are pending against him and his brother.
Since the respondent company refused to sell additional slurry he entertained a grudge against the company and in order to feed fat his personal grudge he resorted to several proceedings against the company including the present one.
The prayer for the interim relief made by the petitioner i.e. permitting him to arrest/collect sludge/slurry flowing out of the washeries of the respondents with a direction to the State of Bihar, its officers and other authorities for not preventing him from collecting the sludge/slurry and transporting the same also collecting the sludge/slurry and transporting the same clearly indicates that he is interested in collecting the slurry and transporting the same for the purposes of his business.
Therefore, there is no good reason to accept the petitioner 's allegation that the water of the river Bokaro is being polluted by the discharge of sludge or slurry into it form the washeries of the respondent company.
On the other hand it is evident from records that the State Pollution Control Board has taken effective steps to check the pollution.
[14B;12F G] Kundori Labours Cooperative Society Ltd. & etc.
vs State of Bihar & Ors.
, AIR 1986 Patna 242; Bharat Cokin Coal Ltd. vs State of Bihar & Ors. ; Judgments Today, vol.
3, , referred to.
