The appellants were the claimants land owners, whose lands were acquired for establishing a residential cum commercial complex.
The Land Acquisition Collector belting the land in three parts awarded compensation for block `A ' at the rate of Rs. 4.13 per sq.yd.; for block `B ' at the rate of Rs. 2.43 per sq.yd.
and for block `C ' at Rs. 1.65 per sq.
In First Appeal the High Court was persuaded to confine to belting `A ' & `B '.
The High Court fixed compensation at the rate of Rs. 23 per sq.yd.
for belt `A ' and for belt `B ' Rs. 16 per sq.yd.
The Claimants by special leave filed present appeals for enhancement contending that the acquired land comprises of a large area, situated alongside the G.T. Road in a strip approximately 3 kms.
in length on the other side of which was the railway line; that the belting had been done in a haphazard way; that the land having been acquired for building purposes, its quality as agricultural land should not have weighed; and compensation should have been assessed uniformally.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The rate of Rs. 42 per sq.yd. is claimed on the basis that a part of land measuring about 125 sq.yd. which found part of the acquired land, was, before the acquisition, purchased by a purchaser at the rate of Rs. 42 per sq.
and that was an indication that the land acquired would have fetched Rs. 42 per sq.yd.
[3E] 2.
The High Court had rejected the contention of the appellants taking the twin view that firstly the land involved was small in measure and secondly it was fully constructed having a house and a godown facing the G.T. Road itself.
This reasoning is sound.
[3F] 3.
The judgement in which Rs. 42 had been awarded in another 2 case has not been brought on record as a piece of evidence to be relied upon by the claimants, and no permission has been sought to adduce additional evidence.
The said judgement cannot therefore be used as a precedent even to persuade this Court to take the view that the rate should be Rs. 42 per sq.yd.
for belt `A ' if not uniformally.
All these factors cumulatively lead to the view that appellants have no case for enhancement and have been adequately compensated for the land acquired.
[3H; & A B]
