The respondent assessee, a private limited company and a licensee, under an agreement was required to pay to its foreign colaborators (licensors) certain amounts towards cost of working drawings and royalty.
It applied to the Income Tax Officer to grant the necessary certificate to enable it to approach the Reserve Bank of India for remittance to its foreign collaborators.
The Income Tax officr held that the remittance represented payment for supply of technical know how and for use of the trade name and manufacturing right of the licenser company and that the said amount neither fell within the exempted category nor did the agreement for avoidance of double taxation apply to the case, and directed the assessee to deduct tax @ 65% on the sum to be remitted.
The assessee did not dispute the assessability of the royalty, but challenged in appeal, that since the whole of the sum towards the cost of working drawings exceeded the remuneration, the same was not taxable, and that the assessment was barred by the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement.
The Appellate Asstt.
Commissioner rejected the Double Taxation Avoidance plea, but determined the cost of the working drawings at 75% and the net profit chargeable at 25% of the amount to be remitted to the non resident company.
The Revenue appealed before the Appellate Tribunal challenging the jurisdiction of the appellate authority under section 248 to determine the quantum of income, and that the Appellate Asstt.
Commissioner was wrong in allowing expenses @ 75% of the remittance.
The assessee filed cross objection.
Holding that the Appellate Asstt.
Commissioner could pass an order regarding the quantum, that the amount fixed by him 118 could not be said to be unreasonable, and that the amount brought to charge by the Income Tax Officer was not exempt under the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement, the Tribunal dismissed the Department 's appeal and partly allowed the assessee 's cross objection.
At the instance of the Revenue, the Tribunal referred the question to the High Court which was answered in favour of the assessee.
In the appeal by certificate to this Court, it was contended that: the order passed by the Income Tax Officer under section 195(2) was not appealable to the Appellate Asstt.
Commissioner under section 248, and that the appellate authority had no jurisdiction to deal with the quantum of the sum chargeable under the provision of the Income Tax Act from which the assessee was liable to deduct tax under section 195.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Once an appeal has been preferred to the Appellate Asstt.
Commissioner under section 248 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, on the matter of liability of the company to deduct taxes, the appellant authority was well within its competence to pass an order on quantum also.
[124D] 1.2 Section 251(1)(c) gives full power to the appellate authority to pass such orders in the appeal as it thinks fit.
[125A] 1.3 The right to appeal under section 248 of the Income Tax Act is clear and it cannot be said that such a right is restricted and the Appellate Asstt.
Commissioner was not competent to fix the quantum or to revise the proportion of the amount chargeable under the provisions of the Act as determined by the Income Tax Officer.
[124F] 2.
The language of section 248 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is wide enough to cover any order passed under section 195.
The Appellate Asstt.
Commissioner was also competent to pass an order with regard to quantum when once he is seized of the matter.
[123F; 124D] 3.
Under section 248 a person having deducted and paid tax under s.195 may appeal to the Appellate Asstt.
Commissioner denying his liability to make such deduction and for a declaration that he is not liable to make such deduction.
[124E] Meteor Satellite Ltd. vs Income Tax Officer Companies Circle IX, Ahmedabad, , held inapplicable.
