The appellant tenant executed a lease agreement of the demised premises on a standard rent of Rs. 900 per month.
In addition thereto, the tenant also undertook to pay a lump sum of Rs. 120 per month by way of education cess and other daxes in respect of the premises.
The 1st respondent filed a suit for eviction of the tenant inter alia on the ground that he was in arrear of rent for more than six months and had failed and neglected to pay the amount within one month from the date of receipt of the notice served on him terminating the tenancy and for eviction.
During the pendency of the suit, section 12(3) of the Bombay Rent, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 was amended whereby clauses (a) and (b) of sub section 3 of section 12 were deleted and instead a new sub section 3 was substituted which restricted the court 's right to pass a decree of eviction on the ground of arrears of standard rent, etc., if the tenant paid or tendered in Court the arrears as stipulated in the amended clause.
The appellant claimed that the said amendment had retrospective effect and he was entitled to the benefit thereof.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit.
The Court held that since the tenant had failed to pay or deposit the arrears claimed by the eviction notice within one one month from the receipt thereof, he was liable to be evicted under section 12(3)(a) of the Act, but in view of the substituted section 12(3), he was entitled to protection he had paid the entire arrears together with interest and costs before the passing of the decree.
On appeal, the Appellate Court reversed the decree of the trial 52 Court.
The Appellate Court held that the tenant having failed to pay arrears within one month of receipt of a valid notice, he was liable to be evicted under section 12(3)(a) of the Act, since the amended section 12(3) was prospective in nature.
The appellant tenant preferred a writ petition to the High Court, which was dismissed on the ground of sub letting.
Before this Court it was inter alia contended on behalf of the appellant that (i) since the tenant was obliged to pay the education cess and other taxes, by way of permitted increases, which were payable at the end of the year, the case would not attract section 12(3)(a) as a part of the rent became payable annually and not monthly and therefore the case attracted section 12(3)(b); and (ii) the tenant having deposited the arrears, etc., in time, the courts below were justified in granting and eviction decree for arrears of rent under section 12(3)(a).
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the respondent that the case was clearly governed by the provisions of section 12(3)(a) since indisputably the rent inclusive of the quantified tax amount was payable by the month.
It was argued that once the quantum in respect of the tax was determined by agreement between the parties, same formed part of the rent and it was not open to contend that notwithstanding the agreement the tax amount remained payable by the year and the tenant was obliged to pay the same only after the landlord had paid the taxes to the local authority.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD:(1) In view of the decision of this Court, the case would be governed by section 12(3) as it stood before its amendment, since the substituted section 12(3) was found to be prospective in nature.
[57G] Arjun Khaimal Makhijani vs Jamnadas C. Tuliani, , followed.
(2) It is clear from the term of the lease agreement that the parties intended the tenancy to be a monthly tenancy.
[62C] (3) The statutory right to recover the amount of education cess in respect of the demised premises from the occupant/tenant can be quantified by agreement of parties so long as the amount quantified does not exceed the total amount actually paid by the owner by way of education case.
[62E] 53 (4) It seems to be well settled that education cess is a part of 'rent ' within the meaning of the ACt and when the same is claimed addition to the contractual or standard rent in respect of the demised premises it constitutes a permitted increase within the meaning of section 5(7) of the Act and being payable on a year to year basis, the rent ceases to be payable by the month within the meaning of section 12(3)(a) of the Act.
[63D E) Panchal Mohanlal Ishwardas vs Maheshwari Mills Ltd.
,[1962] ; Prakash Surya vs Rasiklal Ishverlal Mehta, ; Vanlila Vadilal Shah vs Mahendrakumar J. Shah, A.I.R. 1975 Guj. 163; Muktabai Gangadas Kadam vs Muktabai Laxman Palwankar,[1969] 71 B.L.R. 752; Bombay Municipal Corporation vs Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay, ; (5) If for convenience and to facilitate payment, the parties by mutual consent work out an arrangement for the enforcement of the owner 's statutory right to recover the tax amount and for discharging the tenant occupant 's statutory obligation to reimburse the owner, no reasons are seen for refusing to uphold such a contract and if the parties have agreed thereunder to the tenant occupant discharging his liability by a fixed monthly payment not exceeding the total tax liability, the said monthly payment would constitute 'rent ' payable by the month within the meaning of section 12(3) (a) Act.
[64B.C] Vishwambar Hemandas vs Narendra Jethalal Gajjar, A.I.R. 1986 Guj.
153 overruled.
(6) As the tenant had failed to comply with the requirement of section 12(3)(a) to seek protection from eviction, the Courts below were justified in ordering his eviction.
