A division Bench of this Court in V.J. Jain vs Shri Pradhan and Ors., ; observed that the representation of the detenu should be considered by the detaining authority as early as possible before any order is made confirming the detention.
The confirmation of the detention order without the consideration of representation would be invalid and the subsequent consideration of the representation would not cure the invalidity of the order of confirmation.
This view was reiterated in the later case of Om Prakash Bahl vs Union of India, W.P.No. 845 of 1979 decided on 15.10.1979.
As the aforesaid view required reconsideration, the instant SLPs and WPs had been referred to and heard by a constitutional bench.
On December 1, 1988, the officers of the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence upon getting information that contraband gold has been secreted in the room of petitioner No. 1 searched the room in the presence of independent witnesses.
Another person was also present inside the room.
The officers recovered one Samsonite punch, and some bundles of Indian currencies from the table drawer in that room.
Inside the said pouch, there were five gold biscuits of 24 ct.
purity and of foreign origin, and seized the same under a Mahazar.
On 24th February, 1989, that State Government passed two separate orders of detention under section 3(1)(iv) of the Conservation of 103 Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act 1974 and the petitioners were taken into custody and detained in the Central pension.
On 17th April, 1989, the detenus made representation to the Government, which could not be immediately considered since they required translation, and collection of information and comments.
In the meanwhile, the matter was referred to the Advisory Board, which had its meeting on 20th April, 1989 considered the case of the detenus, and reported that there was sufficient cause for detention.
On 27th april, 1989, the Government accepted the report and confirmed the detention orders.
On 6th and 7th May, 1989 the Government considered and rejected on representation of the detenus and they were informed of the same.
The detention orders were challenged in the High Court through a writ petition but the High Court dismissed the same.
In the appeals and writ petition to this Court, the main question for consideration was, whether the confirmation of detention order upon accepting the report of the Advisory Board renders itself invalid solely on the ground that the representation of the detenu was not considered, and the subsequent consideration of the representation would not cure that invalidity.
Disposing of the matters, the Court, HELD: 1(a) With regard to liberty of citizens the Court stands guard over the facts and requirements of law, but Court cannot draw presumption against any authority without material.
[115G] (b) The confirmation of detention does not preclude the Government from revoking the order of detention upon considering the representation of the detenu.
[115G] (c) There may be cases where the Government has to consider the representation only after the confirmation of the detention.
[115H] 2(a) There are two constitutional safeguards, viz: Clause (4) of Article 22, and Clause(5) of Article 22.
The former requires that if a detenu is liable to be detained for a longer period than three months, hiscase shall be referred to the Advisory Board which, must report before the expiration of the said period of three months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention.
The latter provides that when any person is detained in pursuance of an order made under any 104 law providing for preventive detention the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such person the grounds on which the order has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order.
[108E G] 2(b) The detenu has two rights under clause (5) of Article 22 of the Constitution: (i) to be informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds on which the order of detention is based, that is, the grounds which led to the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority, and (ii) to afforded the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order of detention.
[108H; 109A] 3.
The function of the Advisory Board is purely advisory and its report will enable the Government to detain the person beyond three months provided the detention is valid on its merits and does not otherwise offend the Constitution.
[108F] 4(a) The constitution right to make representation under clause (5) of Article 22 by necessary implication guarantees the constitutional right to a proper consideration of the representation.
The obligation of the Government to afford to the detenu an opportunity to make representation and to consider such representation is distinct from the Government 's obligation to refer the case of detenu along with the representation to the Advisory Board to enable it to from its opinion and send a report to the Government.
[110B C] 4(b) It is implicit in clause (4) and (5) of Article 22 that the Government while discharging its duty to consider the representation, cannot depend upon the views of the Board on such representation.
it has to consider the representation on its own without being influenced by any such view of the Board.
The obligation of the Government to consider the representation is different from the obligation of the Board to consider the representation at the time of hearing the reference.
The Government consider the representation to ascertain essentially whether the order is in conformity with the power under the law.
[110C D] 4(c) The Board, on the other hand, considers the representation and the case of the detenu to examine whether there is sufficient case for detention.
The consideration by the Board is in additional safeguard and not a substitute for consideration of the representation by the Government.
[110E] 4(d) The right to have the representation considered by the 105 Government, is safeguarded by clause (5) of Article 22, and it is independent of the consideration of the detenu 's case and his representation by the Advisory Board under clause (4) of Article 22 read with section 8(c) of the .
[110F] SK.
Abdul Karim & Ors.
vs State of West Bengal, ; , Pankaj Kumar Chakrabarty & Ors.
vs State of West bengal; , ; Shayamal Chakraborty vs The Commissioner of Police Calcutta and Anr.,[1969] 2 SCC 426; B. Sundar Rao & Ors.
vs State of Orissa, ; John Martin vs State of West Bengal, [1975] 3SCR 211; .
S.K. Sekawat vs State of West Bengal, and Haradhan Saha & Anr.
vs State of West Bengal & Ors.
,[1975] , referred to.
5(a) The representation relates to the liberty of the individual, the highly cherished right enshrined in Article 21 of our Constitution.
Clause (5) of Article 22 therefore, casts a legal obligation on the Government to consider the representation as early as possible.
It is a constitutional mandate commanding the concerned authority to whom the detenu submits his representation to consider the representation and dispose of the same as expeditiously as possible.
[110H;111A] 5(b) The words "as soon as may be" occuring in clause (5) of Article 22 reflect the concern of the Framers that the representation should be expeditiously considered and disposed of with a sense of urgency without an avoidable delay.
However, there can be no hard and fast rule in this regard.
It depends upon the fact and circumstances of each case.
There is no period prescribed either under the Constitution or under the concerned detention law, within which the representation should be dealt with the requirement however, is that there should not be supine indifference slackness or callous attitude in considering the representation.
Any unexplained delay in the disposal of the representation would be a breach of the constitutional imperative and it would render the continued detention impermissible and illegal.
[11B D] Jayanarayan Sukul vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Frances Coralie Mullin vs W.C. Khambra and Ors., ; ; Rama Dhondu Borade vs V.K. Saraf, Commissioner of Police & Ors., ; and Aslam Ahmed Zahire Ahmed Shaik vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
6(a) There is no constitutional mandate under clause (5) of Arti 106 cle 22, much less any statutory requirement to consider the representation before confirming the order of detention.
As long as the Government without delay considers the representation with an unbiased mind there is no basis for concluding that the absence of independent consideration is the obvious result if the representation is not considered before the confirmation of detention.
indeed there is no justification for imposing the restriction on the power of the Government.
[115C D] 6(b) Clause 5) of Article 22 suggests that the representation could be received even after confirmation of the order of detention.
The words "shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order" in clause (5) of Article 22 suggest that the obligation of the Government is to offer the detenu an opportunity of making a representation against the order, before it is confirmed according to the procedure laid down under section 8 of the Act.
But ifthe detenu does not exercise his right to make representation at that stage, but presents it to the Government after the Government has confirmed the order of detention, the Government still has to consider such representation and release the detenu if the detention is not within the power conferred under the statue.
The confirmation of the order of detention is not conclusive as against the detenu.
It can be revoked suo motu under Section 11 or upon a representation of the detenu.
[116A B] 6(c) So long as the representation is independently considered by the government and if there is no delay in considering the representation, the fact that it is considered after the confirmation of detention makes little difference on the validity of the detention or confirmation of the detention.
The confirmation cannot be invalidated solely on the ground that the representation is considered subsequent to confirmation of the detention.
Nor it could be presumed that such consideration is not an independent consideration.
[116C D] V.J. Jain vs Shri Pradhan & Ors.
, ; ; Om Prakash Bahl vs Union of India & Ors., W.P. No. 845 of 1979 decided on 15.10.1979 and Khairul Haque vs State of West Bengal W.P.No.
246/69 decided on 10.9.1969, over ruled; Khudiram Das vs State of West Bengal & Ors., ; , distinguished.
