The appellant contested the election to the Karnataka State Legislative Council from the Chitradurga Local Author ities Constituency, comprising 121 Mandal Panchayats.
The last date and time fixed for receiving nomination papers was 3.00 p.m. on 3.6.1988.
and revision, if any, of the elector al roll had to be completed before that time.
The polling took place on 3.7.1988 and the appellant was declared as the successful candidate.
Earlier, a decision had been taken by the Chitradurga Zilla Parishad on 28.5.1988 to nominate two members from each Mandal Panchayat, that is, a total number of 242 mem bers.
With a view to complete the nomination, the Deputy Commissioner took the necessary steps in accordance with the Karnataka Zila Parishads, Taluk Panchayat Samithis, Mandal panchayats and Nyaya Panchayats Act, 1983, read with the rules framed thereunder, and sent out the names for affixing the same on the notice boards of the office of the concerned Tehsildar and Mandal Panchayat and in the Chavadis.
On his satisfaction that the publication of 2/3rd of the total number of the names was complete, the Deputy Commissioner was free to proceed further and to revise the electoral roll under the Representation of the People Act, 1950 by includ ing all the nominated members.
In this regard, in his writ ten statement before the High Court the Deputy Commissioner stated that the electoral roll had been up dated and a copy pasted in the office on 3.6.1988 at 8.55 p.m. Sub section (1) of section 40 of the Parishads Act made it abundantly clear that a nominated person became the member of a 337 Panchayat only on the publication of his name under section 5(9) of the Parishads Act read with rule 73 of the Parishads Rules.
A petition was filed in the High Court challenging the appellant 's election on the ground that the inclusion of the 242 nominated members in the electoral roll took place after the period for nomination was over and they were, therefore, not included in the electoral roll in the eye of law.
After examining the evidence led by the parties the High Court held that the names were not included in the electoral roll by 3.00 p.m. on 3.6.1988.
Accordingly, the High Court set aside the election of the appellant and directed recount of votes after excluding those of 242 members.
Before this Court in appeal it was inter alia contended on behalf of the appellant that (i) the evidence on the record established that information of the publication of the names of more than 2/3rd of the total number of nominat ed persons had reached the Deputy Commissioner in time for the amendment of the Council Constituency roll, and that the Deputy Commissioner had actually made an order for the inclusion of the names in the roll on 2.6.1988 (ii) putting the final voters list on the notice board was not a neces sary requirement under the law; and (iii) since the burden was on the election petitioner to prove such facts which may vitiate the election, he must fail in the present state of evidence.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that the electoral roll must be held to have been modified in the eye of law only at 8.55 p.m. on 3.6.1988 when the alleged inclu sion of the names was made public and not earlier.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) A plain reading of the evidence suggests that both the up dating of the electoral roll and pasting a copy thereof took place on 3.8.1988 at 8.55 p.m. [346G] (2) The circumstances that (i) the Deputy Commissioner was not able to assert in his evidence before the Court that the revision of the roll had taken place before 3.00 p.m.; (ii) he was under an impression that the revision was per missible till the midnight; and (iii) in spite of the docu ments available to him he was not in a position to assert that the 338 report of publication of the names of 2/3rd or more of the nominated persons in the offices of the Mandal Panchayats had been received in his office before the deadline, strong ly support the case of the election petitioner.
[346H; 347A] (3) Besides fixing the identity of the persons to be allowed to vote at the election, the purpose of the prepara tion of the roll is to enable the persons included therein to decide as to whether they would like to contest the election and to help such persons in assessing their chances of success.
[348F] (4) The intending contestants and their supporters thus heavily depend upon the final electoral roll for deciding their future conduct, and it is, therefore, extremely essen tial that it is made available to them before the expiry of the period fixed for filing the nomination papers.
[348G] (5) If the roll as it stood earlier, was confidentially corrected by the Electoral Registration Officer concerned sitting in his office which did not see the light of the day, the same cannot be considered to have been prepared accordingly to law.
[348H] Bachhittar Singh vs The State of Punjab, [1962] Supp. 3 SCR 713, referred to.
(6) It is correct that putting the final voters list on the notice board is not a necessary requirement under the law.
But that does not lead to the further conclusion that the electoral roll can be prepared secretly and kept in the drawers of the Officer without any information knowledge to persons who are interested in finding out its final shape.
[349B] S.K. Srinivasan and others vs State of Karnataka and Others, , referred to.
(7) The Acts of the legislature are passed by the ac credited representatives of the people who in theory can be trusted to see that their constituents know what has been done, and this is done only after debates take place which are open to the public.
The matter thus receives wide pub licity through the media.
But the case is different with the delegated legislation and, if one may add, also in the case of orders passed by the authorities like that in the present appeal.
The mode of publication can vary but there must be reasonable publication of some sort.
[349H; 350A B] 339 Harla vs State of Rajasthan, ; ; Fatma Haji Ali Mohammad Haji vs State of Bombay, ; ; State of Maharashtra vs Mayer Hans George, ; and Johnson vs Sargant & Sons, , referred to.
