The dispute between the parties is regarding the ownership rights and right of removal of timber clear felled from 150 acres of jungle area in Kallar Valley in the erstwhile Travancore territory of Kerala State commonly called the Kanan Devan Hills Concession area over which the Poonjar Raja held free hold proprietary rights under the suzerainty of Travancore State.
By a deed dated July 11, 1877 called the 'First Concession ' (Exhibit P 1) the Raja conveyed the concession area with all the Hills and Forests to one J.D. Munro for a certain cash consideration and a deferred perpetual annual payment from 1884 onwards.
This was followed by another deed (exhibit P 2) between the same parties reiterating all the original terms.
This grant to Munro was ratified by the Travancore Government by a deed dated November 28, 1878 (Exhibit P 62).
Munro in turn assigned the area to the North Travan core Land Planting & Agricultural Society Ltd. Later an agreement was executed between the Travancore Government and the Society in August 1886 (Exhibit P 64).
In 1899 the entire territory comprising the Kanan Devan Hills including the concession area was declared part of Travancore State.
After several transfers the concession area finally came to be vested in the Respondent Company in virtue of a Deed dated July 16, 1900.
Somewhere in 1963 the Respondent Company clear felled about 150 acres in the concession area for cultivation and sought permission from the State Government for grant of free passes to carry the felled timber out of the concession area.
The Government by order dated 25.11.1966 informed the company that it could not take out the timber 262 from the concession area without payment of Kuttikanamin terms of the deeds of conveyance/ratification.
Thereupon the company filed a suit against the State praying inter alia for a declaration claiming full ownership, title and right to remove the timber without payment of Kuttikanam, a mandatory injunction directing the defendants to grant free passes for removal of the timber and a prohibitory injunction to restrain it from taking any further steps under its order dated 25.11.1966.
On the interpretation of Exhibits P 1, P 2, P 62 and P 64 the trial court came to the findings that the company did not acquire absolute proprietary rights over the concession area or the trees and timber.
It also held that the Government was justified in demanding Kuttikanam in terms of the Rules framed under the Travancore Cochin Forest Act, 1951.
Accordingly the suit was dismissed.
The Company preferred an appeal to the High Court which was allowed and the decree of the Trial Court set aside.
The decision of the High Court has been challenged by the State in this appeal by way of special leave.
This court while allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, HELD: The respondent company did not acquire absolute proprietary rights over the Concession Area or the trees and the timber therein.
The company only acquired the right to fell the trees and use the timber subject to the restrictions imposed in clause 7 of the agreement Exhibit P 64.
Since the respondent company has no right to remove the timber beyond the limits of the Concession Area, the State Government was justified in refusing to permit free transportation of timber from the said area.
[269C] Clause 7 states that no unworked timber or articles manufactured therefrom shall be carried outside the limits of the grant except in conformity with the rules of the forest department for the time being in force.
[270D] The Government of Kerala, in exercise of its rule making power under Section 93 of the Travancore Cochin Forest Act, 1951 had by a notification dated July 9, 1958 framed rules regulating the levy of Kuttikanam on trees standing on Government land.
[270E] The rules were holding the field at the relevant time and the Government was justified in demanding Kuttikanam from the Company.
[272A B] 263
