The appellant, had illicit connection with Agya Devi (P.W. 3), wife of the deceased and in that connection he used to visit her house quit frequently to which the deceased and his two brothers & mother living separately in the adjacent house used to object.
It may be pointed that the Agya Devi was related to the appellant 's wife.
On August 18, 1973, at about 11 p.m. when the deceased was not in house, the appellant came to visit Agya Devi.
A shortwhile later, the deceased also came home and he objected to the presence of the appellant whereupon an altercation and exchange of hot words ensued between the appellant and the deceased.
The appellant took out a kirpan (chhurra) from his waist and stabbed the deceased in the chest.
The deceased fell down crying that the appellant has killed him and the appellant fled away with the weapon.
the incident was witnessed by Agya Devi (P.W. 3) and P.W. 2, deceased 's brother from the roof of the house.
The deceased died as a result of the injury.
The prosecution was thereupon launched against the appellant and the prosecution examined and amongst others P.W. 2 and P.W. 3.
P.W. 3 turned hostile, with the result the prosecution was left with only P.W. 2 (brother of the deceased) as eye witness.
The trial court relied on the evidence of P.W. 2 and also held that his evidence was corroborated by the P.Ws. 1 and 5 and recorded the conviction under section 302, I.P.C. and sentenced him to imprisonment for life for causing the death of Champat Rai, the deceased, which order was later affirmed by the Delhi High Court.
Hence this appeal by the appellant, after obtaining special leave.
The main contention of the appellant is that even if the prosecution case is to be accepted, an offence of murder is not made out as the accused was entitled to the right of private defence; even otherwise the accused having inflicted only one injury which proved fatal, the offence would be one amounting to culpable homicide.
203 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: `Intention ' is different from ``motive ' or ignorance or ``negligence '.
It is the `knowledge ' or `intention ' with which that act is done that makes difference, in arrival at a conclusion whether the offence is culpable homicide or murder.
[208 E] The language of Clause Thirdly of Section 300 speaks of intention at two places and in each the sequence is to be established by the prosecution before the can can fall in that Clause.
The `intention ' and `knowledge ' of the accused are subjective and invisible states of mind and their existence has to be gathered from the circumstances, such as the weapon used, the ferocity of attack, multiplicity of injuries and all other surrounding circumstances.
The framers of the Code designedly used the words `intention ' and `knowledge ' and it is accepted that the knowledge of the consequences which may result in doing an act is not the same thing as the intention that such consequences should ensue.
Firstly, when an act is done by a person, it is presumed that he , must have been aware that certain specified harmful consequences would or could follow.
But the knowledge is bare awareness and not the same thing as `intention ' that such consequences should ensue.
As compared to `knowledge ', `intention ' requires something more than the mere foresight of the consequences, namely the purposely doing of a thing to achieve a particular end.[211H 212C] `Knowledge ' as contrasted with `intention ' signify a state of mental realisation with the bare state of conscious awareness of certain facts in which human mind remains supine or inactive.
On the other hand, `intention ' is a conscious state in which mental faculties are aroused into actively and summoned into action for the purpose of achieving a conceived end.
[213B C] The circumstances would show that the accused intentionally inflicted that injury though it may not be pre mediated one.
All the circumstances would certainly indicate such a state of mind namely that he aimed and inflicted that injury with a deadly weapon.
In the absence of evidence or reasonable explanation to show that the appellant did not intend to stab in the chest with kirpan with that degree of force sufficient to penetrate the heart, it would be perverse to conclude that he did not intend to inflict that injury that he did.
When once the ingredient `intention ' is established then the offence would be murder as the intended injury is found to be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
Therefore an offence of murder is made out.
[218D E] 204 Tholan vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; Jagrup Singh vs State of Haryana, ; ; Randhir Singh vs State of Punjab ; Kulwant Rai vs State of Punjab, ; Hari Ram vs State of Haryana, ; Jagtar Singh vs State of Punjab, ; Ram Sunder vs State of U.P., Crl.
Appeal No. 555/83 decided on 24.10.1983; Chahat Khan vs State of Haryana ; Chamru Budhwa vs State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1954 SC 652; Willie (William) Slaney vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; Harjinder Singh alias Jinda vs Delhi admn.
; , ; Laxman Kalu Nikalji vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Gurmail Singh and Ors.
vs State of Punjab, , referred to.
Virsa Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , followed.
