The appellant was a manufacturer of egg trays and other similar items.
Before the introduction of (new Tariff) effective from 1.3.1986, Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 (old Tariff) was applicable to the relevant products.
The appellant, classifying its product under Item 68 of the old Tariff, was paying duty accordingly.
By Notification dated February 28, 1982, issued under Rule 8(1) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, the Central Government exempted articles of paper and paper board falling under Item 17(4) of the old Tariff.
The appellant filed a revised classification list for its products seeking classification under item 17(4).
The Asstt.
Collector, Central Excise held the products classifiable as 'articles of pulp ' under Item 68 of the old Tariff, and the appellant was required to pay excise duty accordingly.
On appeal, the Collector (Appeals) reversed the order of the Asstt.
Collector, and held that the products were made out of waste paper and were classifiable under Item 17(4) as 'articles of paper and paper board '.
The Revenue filed appeals before the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal.
On introduction of the new Tariff, the appellant classified the relevant products as 'containers ' under sub heading 4818.19 and claimed exemption.
The Asstt.
Collector held that the products were not 'containers ' but were 'articles of pulp ' falling under sub heading 4819.90 and accordingly chargeable to duty.
Setting aside the order in 318 appeal, the Collector held that the products were 'packing containers ' and classifiable under sub heading 4818.19.
The Revenue appealed before the Appellate Tribunal, which allowed all the appeals by a common judgment, but remanded the matter to the Collector (Appeals) with regard to the recovery for a certain period.
In the assessee 's appeal to this Court it was contended that the `egg trays ' manufactured by the appellant were 'containers ' under Item 17 and Heading 48.18 of the respective Tariffs; that merely because the egg tray was described as a tray does not mean that it was not a container; and that it was not required that a container should be closed from all sides.
On the question whether: egg trays and other similar products manufactured by the appellant are 'containers ' falling under Item No. 17(4) or 17(3) of the First Schedule to the and Heading 48.18 of the .
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1. 1 'Egg trays ' being receptacles which are not covered or enclosed cannot be used for transportation of articles and cannot be regarded as 'containers ' under Item 17 of the First Schedule to Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 and Heading 48.18 of the Schedule to .
[326B] 1.2 Moulded pulp egg trays containing the eggs are put in a standard case for the purpose of transport.
The case in which the egg trays are put, are 'containers ' and not the 'egg trays ' itself.
[326E F] 1.3 The expression 'container ' is used in three different senses: in a broad sense, it means a receptacle which contains; in a narrower sense, it means a receptacle in which articles are covered or enclosed and transported; and in a more limited sense, it means enclosures used in shipping or railway for transport of goods.
If used in a broad sense, `container ' would include a tray because it is a receptacle which contains articles and, therefore, an egg tray would be a 'container '.
But an egg tray would not be a 'container ' in a narrower sense because articles placed in it are not covered or enclosed and they cannot be transported as such.
[325D F] 319 1.4 In item 17 of the First Schedule to the word 'containers ' is preceded by the words 'boxes, cartons, bags and other packing ' and in Heading 48.18 of the Schedule to , the word 'containers ' is preceded by the words 'cartons, boxes ' and is followed by the words 'and cases '.
Considering the expression 'containers ' in the context in which it is used in the relevant tariff items, the said expression has to be construed to mean 'packing containers ' which are analogous to boxes and cartons, that is, an enclosed receptacle which can be used for storage and transportation of articles.
[325G, 326A B] Webster 's New Collegiate Dictionary, 1975 Chambers ' 20th Century Dictionary Indian Standard Glossary of Terms Glossary of Packaging Terms (USA) Glossary of Packaging Terms (Australia) New Encyclopedia Britannica, referred to. 2.
It is a well accepted canon of statutory construction that when two or more words which are susceptible of analogous meaning are coupled together they are understood to be used in their cognate sense.
It is based on the principle that words take as it were their colour from each other, that is, more general is restricted to a sense analogous to a less general.
[325G H, 326A) Dr. Devendra M. Surti vs State of Gujarat, ; , relied on.
