The petitioners, who were Central Government employees, on their absorption in a Central Public Sector Undertaking, retired from Central Government service on different dates prior to 31.3.1979, and commuted their original pension for a lump sum as permissible under the Civil Service (Pension) Rules, 1972.
The Central Government issued O.M. dated 13.2.1976, enabling an officer who commuted a portion of his pension to be eligible for relief and ad hoc reliefs on the full amount of his original pension, but persons who got themselves absorbed in Public Sector Undertakings were not eligible to the said benefits.
Taking note,of the erosion in the value of the rupee, the Government, by O.M. dated 25.5.1979, introduced the Liberalised Pension Formula, benefit of which, by this Court 's decision in D.S. Nakara 's case was extended to all Central Government pensioners irrespective of the dates of their retirement.
In order to implement the said decision, the Government issued O.M. dated 22.10.1983, but the benefit was not given to those persons who got them selves absorbed in Central Public Sector Undertakings and received/opted to receive commuted raise of 1/3rd of pension as well as 357 terminal benefits equal to the commuted value of the balance amount of pension left after such commutation.
The petitioners challenged the validity of the aforesaid O.Ms.
dated 13.2.1976 and 22.10.1983 and contended that for the purposes of grant of the full benefit of relief or ad hoc relief, the Rules do not make any distinction between an officer who has sought commutation of a portion of his original pension and one who has not sought any such commutation; and as the petitioners who opted for commutation of their original pension in accordance with the Rules were being arbitrarily and without just and reasonable cause deprived of the relief, the aforesaid Office Memoranda were vitiated by an inherent discrimination and were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The facts of the appeal were identical to those of the petitions except that the appellant came before this Court in appeal against the order of the High Court which dismissed his writ petition.
On the question: whether the petitioners/appellants fell in the category of Central Government pensioners for the purpose of entitlement to the benefit of the Liberalised Pension Formula or did they fall in a different class altogether and were not entitled to get any such benefit, Dismissing the writ petitions and the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. Clause 5 of O.M. dated 22.10 1983 is clear that such Central Government employees who got themselves absorbed under Central Public Sector Undertakings prior to 1.4.1979 and opted to receive commuted raise for 1/3rd of pension as well as terminal benefit equal to the commuted value of the balance amount of pension were not entitled to any benefit as they were not Central Government Pensioners as on 1.4 1979.
[362B C] 2.Commutation brings about certain advantages.
The person who commutes his pension gets a lump sum which ordinarily he would have received in the course of his spread over period subject to his continuing to live The two advantages of the commutation are the availability of a lump sum and the risk factor.
The allowance of Family Pension to such person does not however make them entitled to get any benefit that is given to the pensioners on account of Liberalised Pension Rules taking note of the fallen value of the rupee.
[362F G, 363A B] 3.1 In the instant case, the petitioners had not only got 1/3rd of 358 their pension commuted but exercised the option of getting the entire pension commuted and in lieu thereof got a lump sum.
Such persons cannot fall in the category of Central Government pensioners for the purposes of getting benefit of the Liberalised Pension Rules which can be made applicable only to Central Government pensioners.
[362G H, 363A] 3.2 The petitioners fell in a different class altogether and were not entitled to claim any benefit granted to the Central Government Pensioners.
After getting a lump sum in lieu of entire pension, they did not fall in the class of Central Government pensioners and were not entitled to any benefit granted to such pensioners.
The case of the Central Government pensioners who got their 1/3rd pension commuted also fail in a different class inasmuch as they got 2/3rd pension, and after 15 years of such commutation or having attained the age of 70 years whichever was later, they became entitled to full pension.
[363C D] "Common Cause" a Registered Society & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; , distinguished.
D.S. Nakara & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
