The appellant, a registered dealer under the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948 despatched some part of the manufactured goods outside the state, without paying the tax on the taxable raw material consumed in the manufacture of such goods.
The assessing authority issued a show cause notice for the assessee 's failure to pay the said tax.
Interest was also demanded on the tax amount.
The assesses disputed its liability to pay penalty and interest on the amount of tax withheld on the plea that there was no wilful default on its part, as it was under a bona fide belief that no tax was to be paid on the raw material used in the manufactured goods sent outside State.
The assesses further stated that it had acted on legal advice that it was not liable to pay any Purchase Tax and, therefore, in the absence of a clear intention to avoid the payment of tax, there could be no question of imposition of penalty and demand for interest.
The assessee 's submissions did not find favour with the Revenue, as also the Tribunal, and the assesses sought a reference to the High Court under section 22(1) of the Act.
But the Tribunal rejected application for reference.
Thereafter the assesses preferred appeals to this Court, against the Tribunal 's rejection of reference as also the Tribunal 's order in appeal.
On behalf of the appellants, it was contended that the main question involved in this case is concluded by several decisions of this Court, and it was not liable to pay the tax, as demanded by the Revenue.
On behalf of the Revenue it was contended that the assesses was liable to pay the tax on the raw materials used in the manufactured goods sent outside the State.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, 348 HELD: 1.1 Under Section 4B of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948 the tax becomes exigible not on the purchase of the raw material or on the use thereof in the manufacture of a new and distinct commodity but only after the goods so manufactured are despatched to a place outside the State.
Once the goods are sent outside the State the purchaser is made liable to pay the tax at the rate prescribed on the purchase of such goods provided no tax is payable on the purchase thereof under any other provision of the Act.
It is obvious that the tax though described as purchase tax is in effect a tax on consignment since it becomes effective on the happening of an event which has nothing to do with the actual purchase.
Even if the raw material is used in the manufacture of any taxable goods, the purchaser does not become liable to pay tax on the raw material until the manufactured item is sent out of the State.
And between the manufacture of the goods out of the purchased raw material and their actual despatch outside the State there may be a long time gap.
The liability of tax only after despatch of the manufactured goods outside the State and that event may have no relation to the actual purchase or manufacture.
That being so, the tax though described as a purchase tax is actually a tax on the consigmment of the manufactured goods, the levy of which is beyond the competence of the State as the power to impose such tax is vested in Parliament by virtue of clause (h) of Article 269(1) of the Constitution read with Entry 92B in Schedule 7, List 1.
[352H; 353A E; 354B] 1.2.
Even though the language of section 4B of the Act is not identical to section 9(1) of the Haryana Sales Tax Act, it is in substance similar in certain respects, particularly in respect of the point of time when the liability to pay tax arises.
Under that provision also the liability to pay purchase tax on the raw material purchased in the State which was consumed in the manufacture of any other taxable goods arose only on the despatch of the goods outside the State.
[353D E] M/s. Goodyear India Ltd. vs State of Haryana, ; ; applied.
State of Tamil Nadu vs M. K. Kandaswami etc., [ 19761 1 SCR 38; referred to.
Since the Revenue was not entitled to levy the tax which it purported to levy as purchase tax on the raw material, there can be no question of imposition of penalty or interest on the unpaid amount of tax.
Therefore, the action taken in exercise of power under section 10(6) and section 11D of the Act cannot be allowed to stand.
[354G H] 349
