The petitioner Corporation imported certain goods.
The goods were bounded.
and could not be got released due to the ban imposed by the Income Tax authorities, under Section 132(1) of the Income Tax Act.
Subsequently after the ban was lifted, the petitioner approached the authorities for clearance of the goods, but the customs authorities demanded payment of customs duty at the enhanced rate which was prevailing at the time of clearance.
Hence the petition er filed a Writ Petition before this Court challenging the demand as arbitrary.
illegal and unconstitutional.
It was contended that though the petitioner was willing to clear the goods on payment of the then prevailing custom duty, the goods could not be cleared due to circumstances beyond its control, by the order of the Income Tax authori ties and, therefore, the authorities could not claim en hanced duty.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that in view of Section 15(1)(b) of the , especially the expression "actually removed" used therein, the liability of the petitioner to pay the duty was the duty at the time of clearance of the goods.
Disposing of the Writ Petition, this Court, 622 HELD: 1.
Section 15(1)(b) of the clearly requires that the rate of duty, rate of exchange and tariff applicable to any imported goods shall be the rate and valuation in force on the date on which goods are actu ally removed from the warehouse.
Therefore, in view of the language used in Section 15(1)(b) of the Act, specially in the light of the expression 'actually removed ' the petition er was liable to pay excise duty at enhanced rate prevailing on the date the goods were cleared.
The prohibitory orders, arbitrary or not, would postpone the date of clearance, and as such would postpone the determination of the duty.
[626F; 627C] Prakash Cotton Mills (P) Ltd. vs B. Sen & Ors., [1979] 2 SCR 1142, relied on.
2.1 Recourse to article 32 of the Constitution can be had if there is a breach of the fundamental rights, provided the other conditions are satisfied.
BUt in a matter where li ability of a citizen to pay a particular duty depends on interpretation of law and determination of facts and the provision of a particular statute, for which elaborate procedure is prescribed, enforcing of those provisions of the Act would not breach fundamental right and, without taking any resort to the provisions of the Act, it is not permissible to move this Court on the theoretical basis that there is breach of fundamental right.
Whenever a person complains and claims that there is a violation of law, it does not involve breach of fundamental right for the en forcement of which alone article 32 of the Constitution is attracted.
[627E; 628A D] Smt.
Ujjam Bai vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1963] 1 SCR 778, relied on.
2.2 In a particular situation whether customs duty is payable at the rate prevalent on a particular date or not has to be determined under the four corners of the .
[627F] In the instant case, the petitioner has no fundamental right as such to clear any goods imported without payment of duties in accordance with the law.
There is procedure pro vided by law for determination of the payment of customs duty.
The revenue has proceeded on that basis.
The petition er cannot seek to remove the goods without payment at that rate or without having the matter determined by the proce dure envisaged and enjoined by the law for that determina tion.
The petitioner, without seeking to take any relief within the procedure envisaged under the Act, had moved this Court for breach of funda 623 mental right.
This is not permissible and should never be entertained.
[627F H] Relief under Article 32 of the Constitution is there fore, wholly inappropriate in the facts and circumstances of the instant case.
[628B]
