The High Court in a reference under the held that in computing the net principal value of the estate for the purpose of the Act, the appellant was not entitled to deduct either the estate duty payable on the estate or the amount attributable to the maintenance of the wife of the deceased.
The question was answered accordingly in favour of the Revenue.
The appellant contended in the appeal by certificate that estate duty being a first charge on the estate passing on the death was an encumbrance and, therefore, deductible and the amount of the maintenance of the wife during her husband 's life was also deductible.
The Respondent contended that estate duty being payable only upon the estate passing on the death, it was not a liability which was deductible.
Deduction in respect of the maintenance of the wife during the life of her husband also was not permissible.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The levy is upon the principal value of the property ascertained as provided under the Act.
Property changes hands at the time of the death, by reason of the death, and, therefore, subsequent to the death.
The imposition of the charge under the Act does not arise until the death has actually occurred and the property has, thereupon, passed.
[453E G] 449 2.
The liability to pay estate duty is fastened on the persons accountable.
But their liability is limited to, and will not exceed, the assets of the deceased actually received by them, or which, but for their neglect or default, they might have received.
Apart from the Personal liability cast on the persons accountable, and their liability to penalty in the event of default or concealment, the duty payable is charged On the property itself and any private transfer or delivery is void against any claim in respect of such duty.
Essentially and basically, therefore, the duty is a burden on the estate and that burden is fastened on the estate upon the death of the deceased.
During his life, no liability under the Act arose or could arise.
[453G 454A] 3.
Subject to the limitations and exceptions statutorily specified, the allowable deductions in the determination of the chargeable value of the estate are the debts and encumbrances incurred before the death of the deceased.
Estate duty falling upon property passing upon the death had not become a debt or encumbrance until the death of the deceased, and is, therefore, not deductible.
[454B C] 4.
As regards the claim for deduction of the amount attributable to the maintenance of the wife of the deceased during his life, there is no evidence or any finding to show that the estate had been burdened with any such debt or encumbrance by reason of the husband 's failure to act upto his statutory obligation to maintain his wife.
[454E F] 5.
The expression "passes on the death" denotes change in the title or possession of the whole property taking place at the death.
It is immaterial to whom the property passes.
[453D E] Inland Revenue Commissioner vs Crossman, ; Winans & Another vs Attorney General, , referred to ; [1978] Ill ITR 365 (Gujarat); [1981] 127 ITR 642 (Allahabad); [1981] 132 ITR 871 (Madras); [1982] 137 ITR 801 (Gauhati); [1990]186 ITR 29 (Bombay); Controller of Estate Duty vs Estate of Late Omprakash Bajaj, approved.
