The appellant Union, representing about 900 casual labourers falling under the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1971 some of whom formed Co operative societies and entered into contracts with the respondent refinery while others worked for contractors who had contracts with the refinery, filed a writ petition in this court claiming parity in wages and service conditions with the regular workmen of the respondent refinery.
This Court disposed the petition by directing the Central Government to refer to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication the questions whether the petitioners and some of the workmen whose services were terminated were employees of the refinery; whether their termination was justified and to what relief they were entitled to.
The Government referred and the Tribunal decided the questions against the appellant union by holding that the labourers were employees of the contractors and not of the refinery and their termination was justified.
But the Tribunal gave certain directions by way of relief for consideration by the Advisory Board about the desirability of continuance of the contract system in the refinery, for providing minimum pay of scale of regular employees to the contract labour and giving them preference in the regular employment.
Against the award of the Industrial Tribunal, the Union filed an appeal in this Court praying for directions to the refinery to absorb and regularise the casual labourers in a phased manner.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 469 HELD:The contract laboures are not, and have also not been found to be, having a direct connection with the Refinery, even though it is a State for the purpose of enforcement of fundamental rights.
The directions given by the Tribunal was the only relief which was due to the appellant_union and its members.
Hence the Tribunal has given to the appellant union the maximum which could be given in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Therefore, the impugned Award of the Tribunal cannot be improved upon.
[472E F] BHEL Workers Association, Hardwar and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; , referred to.
Dharwad Distt.
P.W.D. Literate Daily Wage Employees Association and Ors.
V. State Of Karnataka and Ors.
, ; , distinguished.
