The petitioner 's son was arrested on 19.10 1989 on the accusation that he and his brothers were involved in extensive illicit cultivation of ganja plants in violation of the provisions of (NDPS Act).
The Magistrate before whom he was Produced, rejected the bail application.
The Sessions Court granted conditional bail.
The detention order dated 25.1.1990 was served on the detenu on 30.1.1990.
The order stated that though prosecution was likely to be initiated under the NDPS Act, there was every likelihood of his continuing the cultivation of ganja plants and thus there was a compelling reason to detain him under the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988.
The detenu was informed of his right to make a representation to the detaining authority, Central Government and the Central Advisory Board against the detention order.
The mode of representation was also indicated along with the grounds of detention, in accordance with Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
In accordance with the procedure, the Central Government referred the case to the Central Advisory Board.
During the pendency of the reference, the detenu made a representation to the Advisory Board.
The Advisory Board considered the reference along with the detenu 's 422 representation and came to the conclusion that there was sufficient cause to justify his preventive detention.
Thereafter, the Central Government made an order dated 24.4.1990 confirming its earlier order and directing his detention for a period of two years.
In the present Writ Petition, the mother of the detenu prayed for quashing of the detention order contending that there has been infraction of the guarantee under Article 22(5) of the Constitution as a result of the Central Government 's omission to consider the representation of the detenu, independent of its consideration by the Advisory Board.
Petitioner also challenged the stand of the Central Government that there was no obligation on it to consider the representation of the detenu independently since the same was addressed to the Advisory Board and not to the Central Government.
Allowing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
The obligation of the Government to consider the representation is different and in addition to the obligation of the Advisory Board to consider it at the time of hearing the reference before giving its opinion to the Government.
Consideration of the representation by the Government has to be uninfluenced by the view of the Advisory Board.
The detenu 's right to have the representation considered by the Government under Article 22(5) of the Constitution is independent of the consideration of the detenu 's case and his representation by the Advisory Board.
[426G H] K.M. Abdulla Kunhi and B.L. Abdul Khader vs Union of India and Ors.
, State of Karnataka and Ors., JT ; relied on.
Any representation of the detenu against the order of his detention has to be considered and decided by the detaining authority, the requirement of its separate consideration by the Advisory Board being an additional requirement implied by reading together clauses (4) and (5) of Article 22, even though express mention in Article 22(5) is only of the detaining authority.
The order of detention is by the detaining authority and so also the order of its revocation of the representation is accepted, the Advisory Board 's role being merely advisory in nature without the power to make any order itself.
It is not as if there are two separate and distinct provisions for representation to two different authorities viz., the detaining authority and the Advisory Board, both having independent power to act on its own.
(427G H; 428A B] 423 3.
It being settled that this dual obligation flows from article 22(5) when only one representation is made and addressed to the detaining authority, there is no reason to hold that the detaining authority is relieved of this obligation merely because the representation is addressed to the Advisory Board instead of the detaining authority and submitted to the Advisory Board during pendency of the reference before it.
So long as there is a representation made by the detenu against the order of detention, the dual obligation under Article 22(5) arises irrespective of the fact whether the representation is addressed to the detaining authority or to the Advisory Board or to both.
The mode of address is only a matter of form which cannot whittle down the requirement of the Constitutional mandate in Article 22(5) enacted as one of the safeguards provided to the detenu in case of preventive detention.
[428B El 4.
In the instant case, there has been a breach by the Central Government of its duty under Article 22(5) of the Constitution to consider and decide the representation independently of the Advisory Board 's opinion.
The order of detention dated 25.1.1990 as well as the order dated 24.4.1990 of its confirmation passed by the Central Government are quashed.
[428F G]
