For the recruitment of 71 officers in the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) and Allied Services, the Punjab Public Service Commission, at the behest of the State of Punjab, held a competitive examination.
As per the requirement of the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, the applying candidates specified the posts in order of preference in their respective applications.
One such candidate, appellant V.M. Bansal, who had initially indicated his first preference for the post of Excise & Taxation Officer, intimated to the Commission, but undisputedly before the declaration of the result, that he wanted change of his preference so that his first preference was of Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch).
This change was allowed by the Commission.
Bansal 's father, who was a member of the Commission, did not participate in the deliberations of the Commission when Bansal was interviewed.
Of the 71 candidates declared successful, Bansal was declared successful for a post in the Punjab Civil Service, and appellant jaswant Singh Nerwal for the post of Tehsildar in the Allied Services.
Some of the unsuccessful candidates challenged the entire selection on various grounds before the Punjab and Haryana High Court by means of a writ petition.
On the other hand, Nerwal, through a separate writ petition, challenged the change of preference allowed by the Commission to Bansal which led to Bansal becoming a Punjab Civil Service Officer and Nerwal a Tehsildar, and claimed that he be declared successful to a post in the Punjab Civil Service in preference to Bansal.
The High Court by a common judgment rejected the claim of Nerwal and dismissed his writ petition, but allowed the writ petition preferred by the unsuccessful candidates in part inasmuch as the selection of Bansal as a Punjab Civil Service Officer and his consequential appointment was quashed.
The High Court however did not disturb the selection of the remaining 70 successful candidates but 412 required Bansal to compete again with the other unsuccessful candidates as per its direction extracted in the judgment.
The High Court in issuing the aforesaid direction applied the decision of this Court in A. K. Kraipak & Ors. etc.
V. Union of India & Ors., , to neutralise Bansal 's father being a member of the Commission.
And even though Bansal 's father had not participated in the deliberations of the Commission, when Bansal was interviewed, his brooding presence was held negatively to have influenced the selection and the possible ouster of a possibly successful candidate.
Hence these two appeals by special leave, one by Bansal and the other by Nerwal, against the judgment of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal of Bansal and dismissing the one filed by Nerwal, the Court, HELD: (1) Besides Bansal 's father, there were four other members of the Public Service Commission and who had functioned as a Commission.
There was a long list of as many 540 candidates to be interviewed and the interviews went on from 24.9.1973 uptil 30.10.1973.
[417G] (2) Bansal 's father did what was expected of him, in having declined to participate in the deliberations of the Commission when Bansal went for the viva voce test.
[418C] (3) No material has been shown to entertain the doubt that Bansal 's father being a member of the Public Service Commission, per se had the effect of other members keeping track of comparatives in order to single out Bansal as a successful candidate.
There is not a word of mala fide suggested against the other members of the Public Service Commission, of having shared the supposed animus of Bansal 's father.
There is therefore no reason to sustain the judgment of the High Court on this aspect of the case.
[418A B] A.K. Kraipak & Ors. etc.
vs Union of India & Ors., [19701 1 SCC 457, distinguished; Javid Rasool Bhat & Ors.
vs State of Jammu & Kashmir & Ors.
, ; , affirmed; B.N. Nagarajan & Ors.
vs State of Mysore & Ors.
, [ , referred to.
Ashok Kumar Yadav & Ors.
vs State of Haryana & Ors. etc.
, [1985] Supp.
SCR 657, relied upon.
(4) The manner in which the viva voce test is conducted, no single 413 member can possibly usurp to himself the total functioning of the Commission and jealous as human nature is, no other member can be expected to have abdicated his powers to another, at that level, and to oblige another.
These circumstances do not give rise to the likelihood of Bansal 's father espousing the cause of his son to the other four members of the Commission and monitor the performance of 540 candidates to be interviewed, the results of written examination of which, he was not alleged to be aware before hand.
In these circumstances, it is to uphold the view of the High Court requiring Bansal to be interviewed again so as to rub against the unsuccessful candidates and to suffer the consequence.
[418C H] In the instant case, the system of division of marks out of the allocated marks for the viva voce test amongst the actual number of members present and participating in the interview, was not however commended by the Court, nor did the Court approve the provision of 200 marks for the viva voce test because of the percentage now authoritatively fixed in Ashok Kumar Yadav 's case.
[418F] (5) Bansal has stayed put and working as an Officer in the Punjab Civil Service and his displacement at the present stage would otherwise be inequitous serving nobody 's purpose due to the time lag.
The unsuccessful candidates cannot possibly now, at this stage, due to age and other supervening factors be fit for the viva voce test, so as to elbow out Bansal.
The obedience of the directions of the High Court at this late stage would overly be counter productive and thus not worth sustaining.
[419A B] (6) Once it is established that the change of preference could be made and it was intimated and approved timely, the conclusion is inescapable that Bansal 's first preference to a post in the Punjab Civil Service ranked superior to Nerwal 's preference, because of their interse ranking in the examination results.
Thus the appeal of Nerwal has no substance and deserves rejection.
[419H 420A]
