The respondents in these appeals are diploma holder engineers employed in the various departments of the Government of West Bengal as Operator cum mechanics/Electricians etc.
in the pay scale of Rs.230 425.
Consequent upon the amendment of West Bengal Services (Revision of Pay and Allowances) Rules, 1970 the respondents filed writ petitions before the High Court claiming that by virtue of sub para (ii) of Para IV of the Notification dated 19.11.74 they are to be termed as Sub Assistant Engineers and given the benefit of that post and scale of pay of Rs.300 600, as they are diploma holders in engineers.
It was asserted by them that the benefit of the said Notification had been given to similarly situated persons in the other department of the State Government but they had been subjected to discriminatory treatment by denying to them those benefits.
The State Government contended before the High Court that sub para (ii) Para IV of the notification applied only to Overseers, Estimators and Sub Overseers already working in the pay scale of Rs.300 600 and not to Operator cum Mechanics/Electricians etc.
whose scale of pay was Rs.230 425.
According to the State, the said Notification was intended merely to change the designation of various technicians and engineers having identical scale of pay Rs.300 600 to secure uniformity of designation of those employees and since the recruitment qualification of the respondents was much less than the diploma in engineering, they were not entitled to be redesignated as Sub Assistant Engineers.
The learned single Judge of the High Court allowed the writ petitions holding that the case of the respondents fell within the purview of the November 1974 notification and they were entitled to be termed as Sub Assistant Engineers.
The State Government preferred an appeal against the said order before the Division Bench.
The Division Bench of the High Court, though held that sub para (ii) of para IV of the Notification dated 19.11.1974 could not be 518 construed to include the Operator cum Mechanics/Electricians, who were drawing the pay scale of Rs.230 425, dismissed the appeals with the observation that the respondents/writ petitioners should have been admitted to the benefit of the pay scale of Rs.300 600 long before others holding the same position as the writ petitioners had been granted the benefits.
The State Government has now filed these appeals after obtaining special leave.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: The reasons for amending the 1970 Rules by the Notifications dated 11.3.1974 and 19.11.1974 was the decision of the Government to remove the anomalies in the existing rule so as to attract men of quality and also with a view to remove frustration among those having specialised knowledge of a technical nature.[525C D] The persons brought under the category of `other diploma holder engineers ' can only be the persons like the Operator Cum Mechanic/Electrician with diploma in engineering and working in various departments in the Engineering Service.
[525F] Clause (iv) of Para IV of the Notification which states that Gazetted status is conferred on the members of the Subordinate Engineering Services and all sub Assistant Engineers also relates to these two categories, that is, the Overseers, Sub Overseers and Estimators who are already members of the Subordinate Engineering Service and the `other diploma holder engineers ' now termed as Sub Assistant Engineering.
[525G H] There is a concurrent finding that these respondents have been discriminated and the State Government had acted arbitrarily without any rational basis by conferring benefits of the Notification to 17 other employees in other departments while denying the said benefits to the said respondents in the Agriculture Department.[526E] Chief Secretary to Government of A.P. vs Cornelius, ; ; State of Punjab vs Joginder Singh, [1963] Supp.2 SCR 169, referred to.
