The appellants are high ranking officers in Rajasthan Administrative Service governed by the Rajasthan Administrative Service Rules, 1954.
Consequent upon the amendment caused to the said rules on July 17, 1987, they felt that the amendment had affected their further promotional chances.
They therefore filed writ petitions before the High court challenging the vires of the amendment dated 17.7.1987 contending that the creation of Super time scale did not have the automatic effect of creating highest post/posts to be filled by merit alone, and that the posts to which Super Time Scale was attracted remained `higher posts ' in contrast to `highest posts ' available to the members of the Rajasthan Administrative Service on the prescribed percentage of 50 per cent on merit and the remaining fifty per cent on seniority cum merit.
Their case was that section to the highest posts made under the amended rule solely on the basis of the merit was bad in law.
Before the High Court challenge to the vires of the amendment was abandoned and the High Court considered the question (i) whether the Super time scale is/are the highest post/posts in the service and (ii) if it is so, whether the post/posts is/are to be filled on the basis of seniority cum merit in the proportion of 50:50 or on merit alone in accordance with sub rule (7) of /Rule 28 B of the Rules: The High Court rejected the writ petitions opening that the Super Time Scale post/posts was/were the highest post/posts in the service and those are required to be filled on merit alone and not in the proportion of 50:50 on the basis of merit and seniority cum merit.
Hence these appeals by the appellants.
Dismissing the appeals this Court HELD: The terms `higher post ' and `highest post ' occurring in 580 Rules 28 B and 32 by all means are relative ones expected to be created in singular or plural terms under rule 6 whereunder the strength of posts in each grade was determinable by the government from time to time.
Sub rule (7) even before the amendment of 17.7.1987 postulated a highest post/post capable of being filled on the basis of merit alone.
[590 G H] Super Time Scale posts are the highest posts in the service and selection for promotion and appointment on that basis in the service has to be made on the basis of merit alone and not on the basis of seniority cum merit in the proportion of 50:50.[591 G] J.K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of U. P. and Ors. ; ; Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi etc.
vs Union of India and Ors.
