The lands belonging to the appellants were acquired and they were awarded compensation for their lands.
Being dissatisfied with the compensation they made an application for a reference to the Court under section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
The Collector made a reference to the Additional District Judge and in its statement under Section 19 the Collector included only those lands which were included by the appellants in their application for reference under section 18.
The appellants filed an application before the Additional District Judge under section 151 153 of the Code of Civil Procedure for a direction to the Collector to file a revised statement giving the details of the whole of their lands acquired for the purposes of claim of enhanced compensation.
The Additional District Judge directed the Collector to furnish a correct statement under section 19.
Against the order of the Additional District Judge the Union of India filed a revision petition before the High Court, which allowed the petition by holding that the power of the Collector to make a reference was restricted to what was stated by the appellants in their application for reference and only those Khasra Nos.
which were specifically mentioned in the Schedule annexed with the application under section 18 could be considered for the purposes of enhancement of the claim of compensation and not the entire land acquired.
Hence this appeal against the order of the High Court.
650 Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
Under Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 the only requirement for the person interested who has not accepted the award is to move a written application to the Collector requiring that the matter be referred for the determination of the Court.
One of the grounds for not accepting the award is the amount of compensation.
Once such application is moved it is the duty of the Collector to make a reference to the Court.
Under section 19 of the Act while making the reference the Collector is required to state for the information of the Court the particulars as mentioned in clause (a) to (d) of sub section (1) of Section 19 of the Act.
Thus it is the duty of the Collector to mention not only the situation and extent of land but even particulars of any trees, buildings or standing crops thereon.
The agriculturist whose land is acquired may not be fully conversant with the Khasra No. or area as entered in the Revenue records and the Union of India or the State acquiring such land cannot be allowed to take any advantage of such ignorance of the agriculturists.
Once an application is moved for making a reference under section 18 of the Act it becomes the duty of the Collector to send full information to the Court regarding the entire land acquired and it is thereafter the duty of the Court to decide the matter in accordance with law.
[657B E] 2.
From a perusal of the application filed under Section 18 of the Act along with the Schedule annexed therewith it is clear that the appellants were claiming an enhancement in the compensation in respect of the entire land acquired and there was no question of asking for a reference for a limited portion of land.
The appellants were not required to pay any Court fees ad valorem on a prayer for enhancement of compensation while moving an application to the Collector for making a reference to the Court under section 18 of the Act.
The High Court unnecessarily went into the question of some statement made by the learned counsel for the appellants before the Additional District Judge and examining its validity under Order X of the Code of Civil Procedure and thus committed an error in deciding the matter with a wrong approach and in a technical manner.
[655E, F G, 657F] Smt Jamilabai vs Shankarlal Gulabchand, ; ; cited.
