Bhavani Tea and Produce Co., a Public Ltd. Company is engaged mainly in plantations of Tea, Coffee, Cardamom, Rubber and some other plantions in the western ghats comprising R.S Nos 2,3, 3/1 and 5/1 in Sholyar village Mannarghat Taluk of Palghat District, Kerala known as Siruvani Group of Estate of four divisions namely, Siruvani, Varddymalai, Elamali and Halton with the total area in its possession being 3, 151.20 acres.
As the forest officials undertook survey over the Company 's plantations under the Kerala Private Forests (Vesting & Assignment) Act, 1971, which had come into force on 10.5.1971, to locate and determine the forest area in the estate that would vest in the State, the Company moved an application under section 8 of the Act before the Tribunal asserting that no portion of the land in the estate as shown in the schedule to the application was liable to vest in the state.
An advocate commissioner was appointed by the state as vested forests.
The Advocate Commissioner in his final report found an area of 1397.60 acres indentified as plots nos.
1 to 69 claimed by the State as vested forests.
551 The Company thereupon amended its application showing these 69 plots as schedule 'B ' to the application.
Out of the total 3,151.20 acres 1,753.60 acres are admitted not to have vested under the Act.
Of the remaining 1, 397.60 acres, 609.91 acres are admitted to be private forest on the periphery of the Estate and hence vested under the Act.
This covers plots Nos. 11, 18, 25, 28, 30 and 63.
Out of the remaining plots, the Tribunal allowed 33 plots totalling 206.06 acres and declared total area of 1, 184.68 acres as vested forests.
Both parties preferred appeals to the High Court which by its impugned judgment partly allowed the appeal of the company as well as of the State.
Both side have again preferred appeals by special leave to this court.
The result of the High Court 's judgment is that the dispute before this Court is now confined only to an area of 641.73 acres covered by plots nos.
12,13,14,15,16,26,27,29,33,36,37,38,39,40,41,44,46,50,51,55, 56,58,59,61,62,64, and 65.
On behalf of the company it has been argued that these disputed plots must be held to have been principally used for cultivation of tea, coffee, rubbers and cardamom etc.
and for purposes ancillary thereto; that if these plots are not exempted, the plantation will be broken down in unity, economy and contiguity and that the plantation must be taken as a whole and not piece by piece or plot by plot.
The argument on behalf of the State was to emphasise the objects and purposes of the vesting Act namely, to distribute agricultural land to landlords, agriculturists/labourers so as to reduce the scarcity of such land, and not to allow few individuals to remain in control.
It was also contended that vesting Act did not use the word 'plantation ' and therefore private forest has to be determined on the basis of land where upon forest stands irrespective of its size.
Keeping in view the detailed findings of the Tribunal as well as the High Court this Court comes to the conclusion that out of the plots which are in dispute now as pointed out above, plot nos.
33,39,40,44,46,50,51,55,58,59 and 61 also have to be treated as not to have vested in the state under the vesting Act.
As regards the existing roads falling within the vested areas these shall have such margins on either side of the road as required under the PWD rules of the state and shall be maintained and controlled by the company.
But no construction of new roads by the company in or through the vested areas shall be permissible.
Thus in partly allowing the rival appeals by modifying the judgment of the High Court to the extent indicated above, this Court, 552 HELD: If the land was not private forest but plantation under the Madras preservation of Private Forest Act and was similarly not private forest but plantation on 10.5.1971, it could not, without anything more, become private forest thereafter even though it was not under the same efficient or successful plantation as it was earlier.
Whether the plantation yielded any crop or not was not for the owners to decide and not by the authority under the Vesting Act, unless it did made specific provisions to cover such a situation.
We have not been shown any such provision or any provision as to such land reverting to nature.
Nature, according to Collins English Dictonary, means all natural phenomena and plant and animal life as distinct from man and his creations; a Wild primitive State untouched by man or Civilzation.
According to Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, natural vegitation means self sown or planted; land not cultivated; uncultivated or undomesticated plants or animals.
There is no finding as to prevalence of such a condition in these plots.[570F 571A] While, we are not inclined to agree that the entire estate of the Company was required to be taken as one whole, we find it difficult to agree that wherever some forest was found under the Company 's estate the Vesting Act would apply.
We find that M.P.P.F. Act, the Kerala Forest Act, the Kerala Reforms Act, considered the plantations as Units by providing that they would include the land used for ancillary purposes as well.
Therefore while applying the Vesting Act to such plantations the same principle would be applicable.
It is on record that the estate of the Company is divided into four divisions.
In conformity with the idea of plantations, it would be reasonable to take each division as a Unit, subject, of course, to natural and geographical factors.
[573 A C] Balmadies Plantation Ltd. & Anr.
vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; ; The Kannan Devan Hills Produce vs The State of Kerala and Anr., ; ; State of Kerala & Anr.
vs The Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg.
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd. etc.
; , ; V. Venugopala Verma Rajaa vs Controller of Estate Duty, Kerala, ; State of Kerala vs Anglo American Direct Tea Trading Co. Ltd., ; Malankara Rubber & Produce Co. & Ors. etc.
vs State of Kerala & Ors.
, ; ; State of Kerala & Anr.
vs Nilgiri Tea Estate Ltd., [1988] (Supp) SCC 79; State of Kerala & Anr.
vs K.C. Moosa Haji & Ors., and Gwalior Rayons Silk Mfg.
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd. vs The Custodian of Vested Forests, Palghat & Anr., ; , referred to.
