The State Transport Authority, Bihar invited application for grant of Stage Carriage permits for the route named, Bhukunda Chaibasa via Patratu Pithoria Kanke Ranchi Chakradharpur part of which, that is, Ranchi Chaibasa is covered under a notified Scheme dated 1.4.1960, duly in force, under the Act.
The Bihar State Road Transport Corporation, a State Undertaking, filed its objections claiming that no private operator could be permitted to operate the said route as part of the route being Ranchi Chaibasa was itself a notified route and grant of permits on the route in question would contravene the notified Scheme.
Taking the view that the over lapping Ranchi Chaibasa route was restrictedly notified for direct services only, the objections raised by the Corporation were rejected and permits for the route in question granted to respondents 3 and 4.
Corporation 's appeal to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal and thereafter Writ Petition before the Patna High Court being unsuccessful, it has come in appeal by special leave against the judgment of the High Court dismissing the Writ Petition in limine.
Allowing the appeal and quashing all the three orders, this Court.
HELD: In the light of the observations made in Constitution 668 Bench decision of this Court in Adarsh Travels ' case defining the word 'route ', the Ranchi Chibasa route is identified as the line of travel on which State Undertaking on nationalisation is allowed to run its vehicles.
The bracketed words 'direct service ' occuring in seriol No. 7 when contrasted with entries in serial nos.
1 to 6 reveal that the total route of Ranchi Chaibasa, without leaving any portion, stood nationalised signifying by its name that Ranchi Chaibsa route is a straight and direct line of travel which would be traversed by a vehicle by the State Transport Undertaking between two termini rendering all kinds of services.
Any further interpretation would frustrate the object of Chapter IV A whereunder the scheme is prepared.
[672G 673B] If the interpretation put by the Patna High Court in Marwari Motor Service 's case to the bracketed words 'direct service ' is to be kept valid, it would frustrate the very purpose of nationalisation, for any person in that event could operate on a nationalised route by adding thereto, or substracting therefrom, some kilometerage and keep one terminus as a point of start, or a point of ending, on an un notified route and put forward his willingness to submit himself to the discipline called 'corridor restictions ' which practice has been deprecated by this Court.
[673E F] M/s Marwari Motor Service vs Chotanagpur Regional Transport Authority and Others, AIR 1973 Patna (Vol. 60) 273, referred to.
Adarsh Travels Bus Service & Another vs Stat of U.P. & Others, [1985] (Suppl.) 3 SCR 661, followed.
