Appellant 's business and residential premises were raided by the Customs Department as a result whereof gold ingots with foreign marks, gold ornaments, silver bricks, coins and a cash of Rs.79,000 was seized.
The Assistant Collector of Customs filed two separate complaints relating to the said incident against the appellant before the Judicial magistrate, one for violating the provisions of and the other under the Gold Control Act, 1968.
In the trial, after the close of evidence by both sides, prosecution as also defence, arguments were advanced on behalf of the accused appellant.
The prosecution at that stage before commencing its arguments filed two applications in both the cases, under Section 540 of the Old Code (corresponding to section 311 of the new Code) requesting the trial court to recall one witness viz., the Seizing officer, and issue summons to two more witnesses for examination either as prosecution witnesses or as court witnesses.
The trial magistrate rejected both the application and the revision petitions preferred by the respondents against that order failed before the Sessions Judge.
The Union of India thereupon preferred two revision applications before the High Court.
The State of Gujarat also preferred separate revision applications before the High Court.
The High Court allowed the revision petitions and directed examination of the three witnesses sought to be summoned.
Being aggrieved the appellant has filed these appeals after obtaining special leave against the decision of the High Court, in the revision applications filed by the Union of India.
No appeal has been filed against the order passed by the High Court in the revision applications filed before it, by the State of Gujarat.
The main contention of the appellant is that the High Court erred in allowing the second revision application in view of the provisions of section 397(3) of the new Code thus permitting the prosecution to fill up the lacuna and plug the loopholes in its case which is prejudicial to the appellant.
713 Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: Though Section 540 (Section 311 of the new Code) is, in the widest possible terms and calls for no limitation, either with regard to the stage at which the powers of the court should be exercised, or with regard to the manner in which they should be exercised, that power is circumscribed by the principle that underlines section 540, namely, evidence to be obtained should appear to the court essential to a just decision of the case by getting at the truth by all lawful means.
The aid of the section should be invoked only with the object of discovering relevant facts or obtaining proper proof of such facts for a just decision of the case and it must be used judicially and not capricicously or arbitrarily.
Due care should be taken by the court while exercising power under this section and it must not be used for filling up the lacuna left by the prosecution or by the defence or to the disadvantage of the accused or to cause serious prejudice to the defence of the accused or to give an unfair advantage to the rival side and further the additional evidence should not be received as a disguise for a retrial or to change the nature of the case against either of the parties.
[721B E] Whenever any additional evidence is examined or fresh evidence is admitted against the accused, it is absolutely necessary in the interests of justice that the accused should be afforded a fair and reasonable opportunity to rebut that evidence brought on record against him.
[725E] The Criminal court has ample power to summon any person as a witness or recall and re examine any such person even if the evidence on both sides is closed and the jurisdiction of the court and must obviously be dictated by exigency of the situation, and fair play and good sense appear to be the only safe guides and that only the requirements of justice command the examination of any person which would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
[724C D] The facts and circumstances of the case require the examination of these three witnesses for a just decision of the case as held by the High Court.
[726G] Jamatraj Kewalji Govni vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Rameshwar Dayal vs State of U.P., ; ; State of West Bengal vs Tulsidas Mundhra, at 207; Masalti vs State of U.P., AIR 1965 S.C.202; Rajeshwar Prasad Misra vs State of West Bengal and Anr.
, ; R.B. Mithani vs 714 Maharashtra, AIR 1971 S.C. 1630; Channu Lal vs R., AIR 1949 All 692; Rengaswami Naicker vs Muruga Naicker, AIR 1954 Mad 169; Shugan Chand vs Emperor, AIR 1925 Lah 531 and The Queen vs Assanoolah, 13 SWR (Crl.) 15, referred to.
Mir Mohd. Omar and Others vs State of West Bengal, , distinguished.
