The respondent No. 1 sued the second respondent (defendant No. 1) and the appellants (defendant Nos. 2 and 3) for specific performance of a contract whereunder the second respondent had agreed to sell his lands to the first respondent for Rs. 5,000 out of which Rs.4,000 were paid, and the balance Rs.1,000 was to be paid within 5 years whereafter the second respondent was to execute a sale deed in favour of the first respondent.
The Munsif decreed the suit only for recovery of Rs,4,850 plus pendente lite and future interest on Rs.4,000 and this order was confirmed by the Civil Judge by dismissing the appeal of respondent No.1.
A second appeal was preferred to the High Court by respondent N. 1 contending that the transfers in favour of the appellants, by respondent No. 2 were void being in contravention of Section 168 A of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950.
The appellants contested the appeal contending that for a transfer being hit by Section 168 A of the Act should be in respect of a specific piece of land and not a share in a holding and that the transfers were of a portion of the shares of respondent No. 1 in the disputed plot.
The High Court allowed the appeal holding that the two transfers made were clearly hit by the provisions of Section 168 A(2) of the Act and that the benefit of Section 43 of the Transfer of property Act could not be availed of by the appellants as the sale deeds were void in the eye of law.
700 The appellant in their appeal to this Court contended that the sale made by respondent No. 2 to the 2nd appellant being hit by the provisions of Section 168 A of the Act, the subject matter of transfer got vested in the Government and the interest of respondent No. 2 in that part of the holding stood extinguished on the date of transfer and that the sale being void, he was left only with the subject matter of transfer, and that the respondent No. 2 having transferred that whole portion to the first appellant by sale deed such transfer being a transfer of the whole area it would be covered by the proviso under Section 168 A and as such, the sale would not be hit by the provisions of Section 168 A.
The first respondent contended that as the sale deeds in favour of the two appellants have been held to be void, the High Court rightly decreed the suit; that he having been in possession of the land and the second respondent 's fragmented sales having been found to be void, even if the land would vest in the State, the first respondent would not be divested automatically and the State has to seek possession in accordance with the law.
On the question as to what would be the effect of the two fragmented sales in favour of the appellants, setting aside the order of the High Court and remanding the matter, this Court, HELD: 1.
The U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act was passed as it was considered expedient to provide for the abolition of the Zamindari system which involved intermediaries between the tiller of the soil and the State in Uttar Pradesh and for the acquisition of their rights, title and interest and to reform the law relating to land tenure consequent upon such abolition and acquisition and to make provision for other matters connected therewith.
[705E F] 2.
The original Act did not define fragment.
The definition of 'fragment ' was added by Section 2 of the U.P. Act XVIII of 1956 with a view to prevent fragmentation and promote consolidation of holdings in order to avoid uneconomic units.
[705F G] 3.
The object of the section 168 A(1) was to prevent fragmentation of land situated in a conolidated area and transfers that would result in fragmentation or further fragmentation shall be void and to such transfers, Section 167 will mutatis mutandis be applicable, when a fragment situated in a consolidated area is transferred.
If transfer of a fragment is made in favour of tenure holder who has a plot contiguous to the fragment, the purpose of law is not defeated inasmuch as it will be 701 consolidated with the contiguous plot of the transferee.
When the land held by a person in a consolidated area is already a fragment then as was provided previous to the amendment in 1961 the whole of the plot to which the fragment pertained was to be transferred.
[708F 709A] 4.
After the amendment, the invalidity and applicability of Section 167 is limited to a case where the transfer is not in favour of any such tenure holder and to the whole or so much of the plot in which the person has bhumidhar rights which pertains to fragment is thereby transferred.
If the transferor has bhumidhari rights on the whole of the fragment the whole has to be transferred.
If the person has bhumidhari rights only in a part of the plot that part on which he has bhumidhari rights can be transferred.
The part on which the person has not bhumidhari rights is not covered by the provisions not because that would not result in further fragmentation but because he had transferable bhumidhari rights only on that portion and not on the other portion.
[709A C] 5.
The substitution of the words "bhumidhar with transferable rights" for the word "bhumidhar" would not make any difference when the bhumidhar had transferable rights but would make a difference where the bhumidhar had also lands with non transferable rights.
[710C D] 6.
Under the amended provisions the interest of a bhumidhar with transferable rights in his holding or in part thereof shall be extinguished when the holding or part thereof with bhumidhar rights has been transferred or let out in contravention of the provisions of the Act.
In other words, when he had bhumidhar rights on the entire holding and the same is transferred or let out in contravention of the provisions of the Act his interest shall be extinguished.
If he had bhumidhari rights only on a part thereof and it has been transferred or let out in contravention of the provisions of the Act his interest in bhumidhari rights in that part shall be extinguished.
The reason behind the provision to make fragmentation is the need to prevent further fragmentation if the bhumidhar with his bhumidhari rights over a fragment tries to transfer the fragment, his right over the fragment is extinguished.
[710D E] 7.
In the instant case, the bhumidhar respondent No. 2 's land measuring 10 bighas, 12 biswas and 10 biswansis was a fragment.
He entered into an agreement to sell the land on 5.4.1966 and the first respondent on payment of advance of Rs.4,000 is stated to have had possession of the land.
That sale would attract the provisions of Section 702 168 A, if it resulted in transfer of the fragment.
The sales to the appellant No. 1 was dated 2.9.1966 and to appellant No. 2 was dated 21.12.1966.
These two sales would be convered by the old provisions of sections 166 and 167, which section did not deal with the case of bhumidhar but only by sirdar or asami.
But section 168 A would be attracted and the provisions of Section 167 would mutatis mutandis be applicable.
[710G 711B] 8.
The High Court did not examine the facts of the case in light of the laws prevailing at the time.
Festination justiate est noverea informateeni.
Hasty justice is step mother of misfortune.
Injustuim est nisitota lege inspecta, de una aliqua ejus particula proposita judicare vel respondere.
It is unjust to decide or respond to any particular part of a law without examining the whole of the law.
[711B, 711D E]
