The appellant was elected on 18.8.1986 as one of the Directors of the District Central Co operative Bank, Chandrapur, Maharashtra from the Brehmapuri Agricultural Sales and Purchase Society.
On 8.1.1987 the District Deputy Registrar of the Co operative Societies, Chandrapur issued a notice to him under section 78(1) of the Act to show cause as to why he should not be removed from the Board of Directors of the Bank and from the Executive Committees of other Co operative Societies in the District for having remained in arrears of the loan instalments due from him on the date of filing of nomination papers for election to the post of Director of the Bank and thereafter till 21.10.1986 when he actually repaid the dues thereby incurring the disqualification as contemplated by section 73FF of the Act.
The appellant showed cause and by additional reply took the stand that he had not committed any default after the amended section 73FF came into existence.
This was rejected and by Order dated 7.12.1987 passed by the Assistant Registrar Co operative Societies, Chandrapur he was removed from the post of Director holding him to be a defaulter under section 73FF of the Act.
Appeal against that order was dismissed by the District Joint Registrar and his revision therefrom made under section 154 of the Act too met the same fate at the hands of the Cooperative & Textile Department, State of Maharashtra, Bombay Dismissing his Writ Petition filed thereafter, the High Court of Bombay held that when the appellant contested the election he was a defaulter and even though he had paid all the debts on 21.10.1986 yet he could not be absolved of the disqualification on the day he contested the election.
In the appeal before this Court it was argued on behalf of the appellant that the impugned order of the Assistant Registrar removing him from the Board of Directors was without jurisdiction in as much as 676 the Act prescribes separate procedure for calling in question the election and that procedure having not been followed the Assistant Registrar could not have acted under section 78(1) of the Act; that the entire loan having been repaid before the issue of notice under section 78(1) he was not a defaulter in presenti and lastly even assuming that the disqualification on the ground of default is common both for election and continuation as Director in the Committee, the special provision for calling in question an election mut prevail over section 78.
Rejecting the contentions and dismissing the appeal, the Court.
HELD: If the impugned order is found to have been passed by way of setting aside the election of the appellant, it would be bad as his election had not been called in question in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Act.
However, the notice has ex facie been issued under section 78 of the Act.
No doubt there is reference to his having been a defaulter and disqualified for being elected but it has been addressed to him as Director on the Board of Directors.
It also refers to his being disqualified "to be elected or to continue as Director or Executive Committee member of the Executive Committee" under section 73FF of the Act and about ceasing to be a Director by committing default.
From the above contents, there is no room for holding that the appellant 's election has been set aside by the impugned order.
On the other hand, the emphasis is on his being disqualified to continue as Director or ceasing to be Director on account of his having committed default.
[682F 683A] The day an instalment falls due on its due date, failure to pay results in default and this default continues day after day until it is repaid.
The appellant can be said to have made default on the first day of his directorship and on every subsequent day till instalments were paid.
The appellant was a defaulter immediately on the coming into force of section 73FF and so long that default continued he must be taken to have made default until repayment.
[683G 684A] Sub section (2) of Section 73FF says that a member who has incurred any disqualification under sub section (1) shall cease to be a member of the committee and his seat shall thereupon be deemed to be vacant.
Therefore, the moment the appellant after election continued to be in default and must be taken to have made default, stood disqualified and thereby ceased to be a member of the Committee and his seat deemed to have fallen vacant.
In this view of the matter the notice of the Deputy Registrar was in effect to say that the appellant had already ceased to be a director and his seat already fell vacant.
In Keshaorao 677 Narayanrao Patil vs District Deputy Registrar, reported in , Bombay High Court held that section 73FF(2) did not operate automatically and that passing of an order of removal was necessary.
This has to be interpreted in the context of the provisions in the section.
[684B D] Hundraj Kanayalal Sajnani vs Union of India, A.I.R. at 1121; Zaverbhai Amaidas vs The State of Bombay, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 799; Maharashtra State Board of Education vs Paritosh Sheoth, ; , distinguished.
Keshaorao Narayanrao Patil vs District Deputy Registrar, , approved.
