The appellant Board conducted secondary examinations in the month of March 1990.
During recounting of the marks obtained by the candidates it was found that moderators mark sheets relating to 283 examinees, which included the 53 respondents, had been tampered with.
The declaration of their results was withheld pending enquiry.
Several writ petitions were filed against non declaration of the results and the High Court directed the appellant to the expeditious action to declare the results.
The Board appointed seven enquiry officers to conduct the enquiry.
Show cause notices were issued to the students informing them of the nature of tampering, the subjects in which the marks were found tampered with, the marks initially obtained and the marks increased due to tampering, and also indicated the proposed punishment, if in the enquiry it would be found that marks were tampered with the knowledge or connivance or at the instance of the candidates or parents or guardians.
They were also informed that they would be at liberty to inspect the documents at the Divisional Board at Bombay; they were entitled to adduce documentary and oral evidence at the hearing; they would also be permitted to cross examine the witnesses of the Board, if any; they would not be entitled to appear through an advocate, and the parents or guardians would be permitted to accompany the students at the time of enquiry, but they would not be entitled to take part in the enquiry.
All the candidates admitted that the marks initially awarded by 773 the examiners had been tampered with in the moderators mark sheets; and due to tampering the marks were increased and the increase was to their advantage.
However, they denied that either they or their parents or guardians were privy to the tampering.
The Enquiry Officers submitted their reports holding that the moderators mark sheets had been fabricated and submitted the reports to the Board.
The Standing Committee constituted in this regard considered the records and the reports and resolved to withhold, as a measure of punishment, the declaration of the results of their examinations and to debar the students to appear in the supplementary examination.
The notification to that effect was published on 31.8.1990 and the report submitted to the High Court.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions.
One Hon 'ble Judge held that the Standing Committee was devoid of power, and because it did not obtain the approval of the Divisional Board, the impugned notification was without authority of law.
On merits, the learned Judge held that the Standing Committee did not apply its mind in the proper perspective to the material facts, and therefore, the finding that tampering was done at the instance of the examinees/parents/guardians was perverse.
The other Hon 'ble Judge held that the examinees were not guilty of the mal practices and their guilt had not been established.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the respondents that the Act empowered that Divisional Board to deal with the use of unfair means at the final examination, and the Standing Committee was an alien body to the divisional Board; the students were minors and neither the parents nor anybody like an advocate was permitted to assist the students; answers to the questionnaire were extracted from the students to confess their guilt: no adequate opportunity was given to the students at the enquiry; the evidence without subjecting it to cross examination was of no value; the Standing Committee did not apply its mind to the facts, nor recorded reasons in support of its conclusion that the examinee/parents/guardians were parties to the fabrication; the Board should establish the guilt of the examinees beyond all reasonable doubts; the standard of proof ought to be of a high degree akin to trial in a criminal case; the test of benefit to an examinee was preposterous; no evidence was placed on record, nor was it proved and hence the findings of the Standing Committee were clearly based on no evidence; the Enquiry Report contained only conclusions bereft of the statement of facts and reasons in support thereof; and the order ought to have been a speaking order preceded by a fair enquiry and the report must 774 be based on cogent evidence.
On behalf of the Board, it was inter alia contended that all the examinees admitted in answers to the questionnaire that tampering was done and it was to their advantage, and that in view of the admission, the need to examine any person from the concerned section was obviated.
Allowing the appeals, upholding the notification subject to modifications, this Court, HELD: (1) there is no manner of doubt that unfair means were used at the final Secondary Examination by fabricating the Moderators ' mark sheet of the examinees, in concerted manner, admittedly to benefit the students.
[782C] (2) The State Board is empowered to constitute the Divisional Boards and the Standing Committees.
The State Board is also empowered to make regulations to conduct examinations and also to deal with the use of unfair means at the final examination conducted by the Board.
The Divisional Board is empowered to conduct within its area the final examination on behalf of the State Board.
The Divisional Board is also empowered to deal with the cases of unfair means according to the procedure laid down by the State Board.
[783F G] (3) The Standing Committee is an executive arm of the Divisional Board for the efficient and expeditious functioning of the Board as adumberated under the Act itself.
It is not a foreign body.
When the Standing Education Committee takes the decision its decision is on behalf of the Divisional Board, and the decision of the Divisional Board in turn is on behalf of the State Board.
[786E F] (4) On a fair and harmonious reading of the relevant provisions of the Act and the Maharashtra Secondary and Higher Secondary Education Board, Regulation, 1977 the Examination Committee of the Divisional Board is itself a statutory body which acted on behalf of the Divisional Board and is not a delegate of the Divisional Board.
[786H] State of U.P. vs Batuk Deo Pati Tripathi & Anr., ; Kargram Panchayat Samiti & Anr.
vs State of West Bengal & Ors., [1987] 3 S.C.C. 82; Baradakanta Misra vs High Court of Orissa & Anr., and Tej Pal Singh (dead) through L.rs.
vs State of U.P. & Anr., , referred to.
775 (5) The Standing Committee is an integral part of the Divisional Board and its acts are for and no behalf of the Divisional Board.
Accordingly, the Board must be deemed to have passed the impugned notification as per the scheme of the provisions of the Act and the Regulations.
Therefore, the finding of the learned Judge that the Standing Committee had no power to take the impugned decision, etc.
without approval of the Divisional Board is clearly illegal and cannot be sustained.
[789B C,F] (6) While exercising the powers under Article 226 or Article 136 of the Constitution, the High Court or this Court, is not sitting as a Court of Appeal on the findings of facts recorded by the Standing Committee (Domestic Enquiry Board) nor have power to evaluate the evidence as an appellate Court and to come to its own conclusions.
If the conclusions reached by the Board can be fairly supported by the evidence on record then the High Court or this Court has to uphold the decision, though as appellate Court of facts, it may be inclined to take a different view.
[789C] (7) Fabrication cannot be done except to benefit the examinees.
The fabricator had done it for reward in concert with outside agencies.
Therefore, the inference from these facts drawn by the Standing Committee that the examinees/parents/guardians were responsible to fabricate the moderators ' mark sheets is based on evidence.
[790G] (8) It is not open to the High Court to evaluate the evidence to come to its own conclusions.
Thereby the High Court has committed manifest error of law warranting interference by this Court.
[791A] (9) The Writ Court would not interfere with an order of educational institution.
Therefore, what the writ Court needs to do is to find whether fair and reasonable opportunity has been given to the students in the given facts.
[792F] D.M.K. Public School vs Regional Joint Director of Hyderabad, A.I.R. 1986 A.P. 204; G.B.S. Omkar vs Shri Venkateswara University, A.I.R. 1981 A.P. 163.
(10) Assistance of an Advocate to the delinquent at a domestic enquiry is not a part of the principles of natural justice.
It depends on the nature of the inquiry and the peculiar circumstances and facts of a particular case.[792H] 776 (11) The regulations and the rules of enquiry specifically excluded the assistance of an advocate at the inquiry.
Therefore, the omission to provide the assistance of a counsel at the inquiry is not violative of the principles of natural justice.
[793A] (12) The procedure adopted at the inquiry was fair and just and it was not vitiated by any procedural irregularity nor was violative of the principles of natural justice.
The absence of opportunity to the parents or guardians, in this background, did not vitiate the legality or validity of the inquiry conducted or decision of the Committee.
[793G H] (13) Unless the rule expressly or by necessary implications, excluded recording of reasons, it is implicit that the principles of natural justice or fair play does require recording of reasons as a part of fair procedure.
In an administrative decision, its order/decision itself may not contain reasons.
It may not be the requirement of the rules, but at the least, the record should disclose reasons.
It may not be like a judgement.
But the reasons may be precise.
[794F] Union of India vs Mohan Lal Capoor & Ors. ; Gurdial Singh Fiji vs State of Punjab & Ors. ; and S.N. Mukherjee vs Union of India, J.T. , referred to.
(14) The omnipresence and omniscience of the principle of natural justice acts as deterrence to arrive at arbitrary decision in flagrant infraction of fair play.
But the applicability of the principles of natural justice is not a rule of thumb or a straight jacket formula as an abstract proposition of law.
It depends on the facts of the case, nature of the inquiry and the effect of the order decision on the rights of the person and attendant circumstances.
[795F] (15) In the instant case, since the facts are admitted, the need to their reiteration was obviated and so only conclusions have been stated in the reports.
The omission to record reasons is neither illegal, nor is violative of the principles of natural justice.
[795H 796A] Khardah Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, ; ; A.K. Roy etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
[1982] 1 S.C.C. 271; Pett vs Grehound Racing Association Ltd., [1968] 2 ALL Eng.
Reports 545; Union of India vs H.C. Goel, ; ; M/s. Bareilly Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. vs The Workmen & Ors. ; ; Shanti Prasad Jain vs The Director of Enforcement, ; Merla Ramanna vs Nallaparaju & Ors., ; 777 Kashinath Dikshita vs Union of India & Ors., [1986] 3 S.C.C. 229; Government Medical Store Depot, Karnal vs State of Haryana & Anr.
, ; ; M/s. Kesoram Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Gangadhar & Ors., ; ; State of Punjab vs Bhagat Ram, ; Gujarat Steel Tubesl Ltd. vs Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha,, ; ; Union of India & Ors.
vs Mohd. Ramzan Khan, J.T. ; Vishwa Nath vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, ; Olga Tellis & Ors.
vs Bombay Municipal Corporation, etc.; , , referred to.
(16) Court should be slow to interfere with the decisions of domestic tribunals appointed by the education bodies like universities.
[799F] (17) In dealing with the validity of the impugned order passed by a University under Article 226 the High Court is not sitting in an appeal over the decision on this question.
Its jurisdiction is limited and though it is true that if the impugned order is not supported by any evidence the High Court may be justified to quash the order but the conclusion that the impugned order is not supported by any evidence must be reached after considering the question as to whether the probabilities and circumstantial evidence do not justify the said conclusion.
The enquiry held by domestic tribunals in such cases must no doubt be fair and the students must be given adequate opportunity to defend themselves and holding such enquiries, the tribunal must follow the rules of natural justice.
[799F G] Board of High School and Intermediate Education U.P. vs Sagleshar Persad & Ors., and Bihar School Examination Board vs Subhas Chandra Sinha & Ors. ; referred to.
(18) The examination committee has jurisdiction to take decision in the matter of use of unfair means not only on direct evidence but also on probabilities and circumstantial evidence.
There is no scope for importing the principles of criminal trial while considering the probative value of probabilities and circumstantial evidence.
The Examination committed is not bound by technical rules of evidence and procedure as are applicable to Courts.
[801E F] Seth Gulabchand vs Seth Kudilal & Ors., [1966] 3 S.C.R. 623; Ghazanfer Rashid vs Board H.S. & I. Edn.
U.P., A.I.R. 1970 Allahabad 209; Miller vs Minister of Pensions, [1947] All.
E.L.R. 372; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Chet Ram & Ors., , referred to.
778 (19) There is an unmistakable subjective element in the evaluation of the degree of probability and the quantum of proof.
Forensic probability must, in the last analysis, rest on the robust common sense and, ultimately, on the trained institutions of the Judge.
[802D] (20) Strict rules of the Evidence Act, and the standard of proof envisaged therein do not apply to departmental proceedings of domestic tribunals.
It is open to the authorities to receive and place on record all the necessary, relevant, cogent and acceptable material facts though not proved strictly in conformity with the Evidence Act, the material must be germane and relevant to the facts in issue.
In grave cases like forgery, fraud, conspiracy, misappropriation, etc.
seldom direct evidence would be available.
Only the circumstantial evidence would furnish the proof.
Inference from the evidence and circumstances must be carefully distinguished from conjectures or speculation.
[805D E] State of U.P. vs Krishna Gopal & Anr.,, ; ; Hanumant vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, [1952] S.C.R. 1091; Reg.
vs Hodge, ; Bank of India vs J.A.H. Chinoy, A.I.R. 1950 P.C. 90; Khwaja vs Secretary of State, [1983] 1 All E.L.R. 765 (H.L.); Sodhi Transport Co. & Anr.
vs State of U.P. & Anr.
etc., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 939; Bhandari vs Advocates Committee, [1956] A.E.L.R. 742 (P.C.); Glynn vs Keale University & Anr.
; In Re: An Advocate; , ; Shri Krishan vs The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, A.I.R. and Shivajirao Nilangekar Patil vs Dr. Mahesh Madhav Gosavi & Ors. & Vice Versa, ; , referred to.
(21) The standard of proof is not beyond reasonable doubt "but" the preponderance of probabilities tending to draw and inference that the fact must be more probably.
Standard of proof cannot be put in a straight jacket formula.
No mathematical formula could be laid on degree of proof.
The probative value could be gauged on facts and circumstances in a given case.
The Standard of proof is the same both in civil cases and domestic enquiries.
[805H 806B] (22) The conclusion reached by the Education Standing Committee that the fabrication was done at the instance of either the examinees or their parents or guardians is amply borne out from the record.
The High Court over stepped its supervisory jurisdiction and trenched into the arena of appreciation of evidence to arrive its own conclusion on the specious plea of satisfying 'conscience of the Court '.
[806G]
