In the 1989 elections to the Lok Sabha, respondent No. 2 was declared elected from the Bombay South Central Constituency.
One of the defeated candidates (respondent No. 1) filed an election petition challenging the validity of the election of respondent No. 2 inter alia on the ground of corrupt practices under sub section (2),(3) and (3A) of section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
The High Court having reached the stage in the trial when it was prima facie of the opinion that the charges alleged in the petition, of corrupt practices falling under sections 123(3) and 123(A) had been proved to have been committed, it proceeded under section 99 to name the collaborators in such corrupt practices.
The High Court accordingly directed issuance of notices to three persons.
Aggrieved by this order, two of the person named therein approached his Court by way of two separate appeals.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (i) the consequences of naming a person on his being found guilty pursuant to such notices were grave; (ii) the proviso to sub section(1) of section 99 of the Act enjoined upon the Court to state precisely the charges and the evidence which the person summoned was called upon to meet; and (iii) the notices to the appellants to answer allegations of corrupt practices allegedly committed by them were vague.
Allowing the appeals and directing the High Court to issue proper notices to the appellants in the light of law, this Court, HELD: (1) It is clear from the provisions of sub clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 99, that at the time of deciding 760 the election petition the Court has to record a finding that a corrup practices is proved to have been committed and that it has been committed by a particular person.
The Court has not only to name the person but also the nature of the corrupt practice committed by him.[766F G)] (2) If the person is a party to the petition, it is not necessary to hear him separately before recording such finding.
However, when he is not a party to the petition, before such serious finding is recorded against him, he must have the same opportunity as the party to the petition, to meet the allegations against him.
In that respect, he stands on the same footing as the party to the petition against whom such a finding is to be recorded.
He cannot be discriminated against and made to suffer any disadvantage because he is not a party to the petition.
[766H 767] (3) Where a corrupt practice is alleged, the trial of an election petition on such charges is of a quasi criminal nature, and a heavy burden rests on the person alleging the corrupt practice to prove strictly all the ingredients of the charge.
This is as it should be since the naming of a person as having committed a corrupt practice has a serious consequence of disqualifying him from being chosen as or from being member of any House of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly or Council of a State for a period upto 6 years.
[769B C) D.P. Mishra vs Kamal Narain Sharma & Ors., [1971] 3 S.C.R. 257 and Rashim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed & Ors., [1975] I.S.C.R. 643, referred to.
(4) When the legislature requires that the election petition shall contain full particulars of each and every alleged corrupt practice including as fuller a statement as possible of the names of the parties and the date and place of commission of such practice, it would be contrary to the object of the said provisions to hold that when a notice is issued under Section 99 against a person who is not a party to the election petition for holding him guilty of any corrupt practice, the notice should not appraise him of the precise charge against him and give him the full particulars thereof.[769D E] (5) The impugned order directing the issuance of notice is extremely vague and defective to the point of being contrary to the provisions of law.
The notice is of an omnibus character.
Section 123(3) does not refer to one corrupt practice but a variety of them.
Yet the notice does not specify which particular corrupt practice is sought to be 761 brought home to each of the appellants, and does not state which of the portions of the petition, etc.
is being relied upon to sustain which of the charges and against which of the appellants.
[769F G, 770B] [Order dated December 1, 1988 in Special Leave petition No. 13163 of 1988 and the later non speaking order of January 23, 1989 in the matter overruled.] [771D]
