The appellant/petitioners joined the Army as Emergency Commissioned Officers in 1963 and were discharged during the year 1967 to 1970.
After their discharge they joined the Commercial Tax Service under the Respondent State on selection by the State Public Service Commission.
It was provided under R.35 of the Tamil Nadu State and Subordinate Service Rules that their seniority in the department would be fixed in the order of preference indicated by the Service Commission and not with reference to the service in the Armed Forces.
However, in respect of similar candidates who were appointed as Assistant Surgeons, the government order provided that their seniority would be fixed by allotting them the year in which they would have been appointed to the post at the first possible attempt after the date of joining military service/training.
Thus, the concession of seniority reckoned with reference to date of appointment in the Army, which has been extended to Asstt.
Surgeons was denied to similar candidates selected to other services categorised as non technical.
On a suggestion made by the Public Service Commission, the 846 Respondent State passed orders extending the benefit to the other services also.
The Respondent State further extended the benefit of fixation of seniority to all such candidates irrespective of their year of recruitment.
The appointing authorities were directed to take steps to refix the seniority of such officials after issuing notice to all the affected parties.
Accordingly notices were issued, and in response thereof representations were received by the Respondent State, which, after due to consideration decided not to implement the orders extending the benefits to other candidates in the non technical category.
Aggrieved by the said order issued on 3.8.1980 the affected persons filed Writ Petitions before the High Court.
A Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions holding that under orders dated November 16, 1976 and June 15, 1977, which were passed on the recommendations of the Public Service Commission,, the petitioners had acquired certain rights in the matter of seniority and promotion and since the Government order dated 3.31980 took away the said right of the petitioners, they should have been afforded an opportunity of hearing before passing the said order.
On appeal, the Division Bench set aside the judgement of the Single Judge.
In the appeal and special leave petitions preferred against the said judgment it was contended that it was permissible for the State Government to issue administrative instructions with regard to determination of the seniority and to remove the lacuna which was found in the existing rules, viz. discrimination between the Medical/Engineering service and other services.
Dismissing the matters, this Court, HELD: 1.
Although the Government cannot amend the statutory rules by Administrative instructions, if the rules are silent on any particular point, the Government can fill up the gaps and supplement the rules and issue instructions not inconsistent with the rules already framed.
In the instant case, it cannot be said that on the date of issue of orders dated November 16, 1976 and June 15, 1977, the rules were silent on the matter of fixation of seniority of persons recruited to the Tamil Nadu Commercial Tax Service.
[852E F] (Sant Ram Sharma) vs (State of Rajasthan & Anr.,) ; of India) vs (H.R. Patankar & Ors.,) [1985] 1 SCR 400 and (State of Gujarat) vs (Akhilesh C. Bhargav & Ors.) ; referred to.
847 2.
There was an express provision in the statutory rules viz. Rule 35 of the Tamil Nadu state and Subordinate Service Rules providing that seniority shall be fixed on the basis of the date of appointment.
By orders dated November 16, 1976 and June 15, 1977, the said principle for fixation of seniority contained in rule 35 was sought to be altered in respect of Emergency Commissioned Officers/Short Service Regular Commissioned Officers and the seniority was sought to be fixed on the basis of a different criterion, namely, by treating them as belonging to the year in which they would have been appointed to the posts in their first possible attempt after the date of joining military duty.
This was inconsistent with the principle for fixing the seniority contained in rule 35 and this could only be done by suitably amending the said rules not by issuing administrative instructions.
The directions contained in orders dated November 16, 1976 and June 15, 1977 were invalid being contrary to the provisions contained in Rule 35.
Since the said orders were invalid the appellant petitioners could not claim any right on the basis of the said orders and there was, therefore, no question of affording them an opportunity of a hearing before passing the order dated March 3, 1980.
In so far as appointments to Medical and Engineering Services are concerned suitable amendments were made in the relevant Service Rules relating to those services whereby the benefit of the Army service was given in the matter of fixation of seniority.
No similar amendment has been made in the rules governing the non technical services e.g., Commercial Tax Service to which the appellant petitioners were appointed.
[853C G] 3.
Emergency Commissioned Officers/Short Service Regular Commissioned Officers who have joined Medical and Engineering Services of the Respondent State were technically qualified in their fields and they had worked in the Army in the same field in which they are now employed in the State service.
The benefit of the experience gained by them during the period of their service in the Army on the post viz. Medical/Engineering held by them was a vailable to the State when they joined the Medical/Engineering Services of the Respondent State.
The nature of the duties discharged by the appellant/petitioners in the Army were different from the duties they are now required to perform as Commercial Tax Officers in the State service.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the Emergency Commissioned officers/Short Service Regular Commissioned Officers who have joined the medical and Engineering Service of the State and the appellant/petitioners who have joined the Commercial Tax Department of the State are persons similarly situated in the matter of determination of seniority and for counting their earlier Army Service for that purpose.
[854B D] 848 Union of India & Ors. etc.
vs Dr. section Krishna Murthy & Ors. etc., [1989] Supp. 1 SCR 275, distinguished.
