The petitioner, a Head Constable in the Central Reserve Police Force was charge sheeted for negligence in his duty, resulting in the escape of two undertrial prisoners, who were handed over to him for custody.
An enquiry was conducted against the petitioner, but later it was cancelled and a fresh enquiry was commenced on the charges that he allowed a Santry to leave the santry post without arranging proper relief resulting in the escape of 2 undertrial prisoners; that he did not take immediate action to report the matter to the Head Quarters; that he connived the escape of the two undertrial prisoners; that he dug up a tunnel to make it appear that the two undertrial prisoners escaped through the tunnel and that he did not hand over the guard duty roster thus preventing its production as evidence.
Statement of some witnesses and that of the Petitioner were recorded.
Only one defence witness was examined.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report recommending disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner.
On the basis of the Report , a dismissal order was passed against the petitioner.
The petitioner 's appeal against the dismissal order was dismissed by the appellate authority.
Revision Petition preferred by him also met the same fate.
In the present Writ Petition, challenging the dismissal order, the 895 petitioner contended that during the relevant time, there was absolute shortage of personnel, non supply of torch or candle or kerosene and absence of proper arrangements to keep custody of the undertrial prisoners.
It was also contended that all the defence witness cited by him were not examined and that the enquiry was mala fide since the earlier enquiry was dropped and he was exonerated.
The Respondents contended that no prejudice was caused to the petitioner since full opportunity was afforded to him, that the venue of the enquiry was shifted only to avoid unnecessary delay and the petitioner never objected to it during the enquiry.
As regards the first enquiry, it was contended that since the same was not completed and later cancelled, fresh enquiry was ordered and it did not mean that the petitioner was exonerated.
Dismissing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
It is necessary to examine the scope of Article 32 of the Constitution in this case.
Since the two undertrials were entrusted to the custody of the petitioner and they escaped, the responsibility was entirely on the petitioner.
No doubt, he pleaded that the arrangements were inadequate and the two undertrial prisoners took advantage, dug a tunnel through which they managed to escape.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police who visited the premises inspected the same and made a report in which he clearly observed that there was certainly some negligence in not noticing the activities of the undertrial prisoners and therefore an enquiry was necessary.
The Enquiry Officer, on the basis of the oral and documentary evidence, concluded that the petitioner committed an offence of neglect of duty and that he did not take immediate action to report the matter to the Circle Officer.
The statements of PWs 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9 to show that there was no tunnel at all when they reached the spot on hearing the alarm.
It is in the statement of PW 2 that he saw the petitioner digging the tunnel.
In view of these clear statements made by the PWs viz. the Constables who were on duty alongwith the petitioner when the two undertrial escaped, the Enquiry Officer was justified in recommending disciplinary action, and no prejudice was caused to the petitioner.[900D H, 901A B] Kavalappara Kottarathil Kochunni Moopil Nayar vs The State of Madras and Ors., [1959] (supp.) 2 SCR 316 and Smt.
Ujjam Bai vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1963]1 SCR 778, referred to. 2.
Whether there was non observance of any of the principles of 896 natural justice in a given case and whether the same has resulted in defecting the course of justice, and what principles of natural justice should be applied in a given case depends on the facts and circumstances of that case.
In the instance case, the petitioner has failed to prove that the enquiry is vitiated in any manner whatsoever.
[902H;903A B] Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. vs Its Workmen, [1964] 7Scr 555 ; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Om Prakash Gupta, ; State Bank of India vs R.K. Jain & Ors., [1972] 1 SCR 755; State of Andhara Pradesh & Ors.v.
Chitra Venkata Rao, [1976]1SCR 521; A.K. Kraipak and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, [1969] 2SCC 262; Capt.
Harish Uppal vs Union of India and Ors., ; and Khemchand vs Union of India, , referred to.
[Though the Petitioner 's challenge to the dismissal order was negatived by the Court, appreciating the mitigating circumstances such as the petitioner 's long service of 20 years in which he was performing his duties diligently and bagging medals therefore, and that no act of negligence or misconduct was attributed to him earlier, the Court observed that if the petitioner marks any representation, the authority concerned may consider the question of awarding a lesser sentence.]
