For the assessment year of 1968 69, the assessee appellant, a registered firm, returned a total income of Rs.3,94,483 and a provisional assessment was made.
Subsequently, the Income Tax Officer found that for the said assessment year, the assessee had made an income of Rs. 11,82,056 and deducting therefrom three figures viz., (i) unabsorbed depreciation: Rs.1,59,181; (ii) unabsorbed development rebate: Rs.2,79,150; and (iii) unabsorbed business loss: Rs.3,49,242, aggregating to Rs.7,87,573 and arrived at the net income of Rs.3,94,483, which had been returned and accepted.
The three figures were the figures carried over from the previous year for the assessment year 1967 68.
The Income Tax Officer allowed the unabsorbed development 910 rebate pertaining to the assessment year of 1967 68 to be carried for ward and set off in computing the total income for the assessment year of 1968 69, but he did not allow the amounts of unabsorbed depreciation and unabsorbed business loss.
He, therefore, added back the sum of Rs.5,08,423 (the aggregate of the amounts of unabsorbed depreciation and unabsorbed business loss) to the returned income for determining the total income for the assessment year of 1968 69.
The action of the Income Tax Officer was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioners (A.A.C.).
However, on further appeal, the Income tax Appellate Tribunal (A.T.) upheld the income tax Officer 's stand that the firm could not be allowed to carry forward and set off the business loss carried from the earlier year but, so far as the unabsorbed depreciation was concerned, it upheld the assessee 's contention.
On these two issues a reference to the High Court was made and the High Court answered them against the assessee.
For the assessment year 1967 68, the assessee filed a return on 30.6.67 showing a loss of Rs.7,87,515 but filed a revised return on 22.3.1972 showing a loss of Rs.5,46,351.
On 14.3.73 the I.T.O. completed the assessment determining a loss of Rs.4,85,250.
The assessee 's request that this loss should be carried forward to the subsequent assessment year was rejected by the I.T.O. This was confirmed by the A.A.C. On further appeal, the A.T. confirmed the order of the A.A.C., following the High Court 's decision for the assessment year 1968 69 which had by then been announced.
The High Court answered the (question "Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was justified in rejecting the claim for carry forward of business loss in the hands of the firm in view of the decision reported in 101I.T.R. 658? in the affirmative.
Hence the assessee 's the appeals one appeal for the assessment year of 1968 69 and the other for the assessment year of 1967 68 under certificates of fitness granted by the High Court.
On behalf of the assessee it was contended that the firm as well as the partners had been returning losses all along with the result that no part of the unabsorbed depreciation of the firm had been set off in the partner 's hands; that when there was an unabsorbed depreciation computed in the assessment of a registered firm for any year, for the 911 purpose of carry forward, it should be retained and carried forward by the firm only.
On the other hand, it was submitted for the Revenue that once the assessment was completed and the total income or loss of the firm ascertained, it had to be apportioned amongst the partners.
Thereafter there remained nothing in the assessment of the firm to be carried forward.
Only each of the partners can carry forward his share of the unabsorbed loss, which also included the unabsorbed depreciation, as there was no difference between unabsorbed loss and unabsorbed depreciation; and that the amendment to the proviso to section 10(2)(vib) in 1953 of depreciation was intended to negative the claim of carry forward, by the firm which was earlier being accepted on the strength of the earlier language resulting in a double advantage.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
"Depreciation" is one of the notional allowances which expression means a deduction in respect an outgoing which is not an item of actual expenditure or is one which cannot be treated as an outgoing of a revenue nature permitted by the statute to be deducted in the computation of the profits and gains of a business.
[921H 922B] 2.
Initially, the depreciation allowances has to be deducted from the profits and gains of the business to which the assets earning the depreciation relate but, if it remains unabsorbed by such profits, the allowance has to be set off against the other business income of the assessee and, where that is also insufficient, against the other taxable income of the assessee.
The carry forward of any depreciation as unabsorbed cannot arise until the stage of final assessment is reached and the total income of the assessee otherwise computed is insufficient to absorb the year 's depreciation allowance.
[928E G] 3.
An unabsorbed depreciation is a part of the "loss".
This is so because, in the first place, "depreciation" is a normal outgoing, though in a sense notional, which has to be debited in the computation of the profits of a business on commercial principles (quite apart from statute) and it is difficult to see why, when such deduction yields a negative figure of profits, it cannot be a "loss" as generally understood.
Where the depreciation allowance attributable to a particular business exceeds the profits otherwise computed for that business, the deduction of the depreciation allowance from such profits can only result in a "loss" from that business and a business loss has to be set off against income 912 from any other business, by way of intra head adjustment, under section 70 and the income under any other head, by way of intra head adjustment, under section 71.
This is implicit in the provision that the excessive depreciation of one business can be "given effect toll against the profits and gains of another business in the same year and has been recognised by decisions holding that it can be set off against income from other heads.
If unabsorbed depreciation is treated as a genus totally different from a "loss", there is no statutory provision that will permit its adjustment against other business income implicit in section 32(2) itself and against all other income of the assessee.
"Loss" and "unabsorbed depreciation" should not be treated as antithetical to, or mutually exclusive of, each other.
However, there is nothing anomalous or absurd in the statute providing for a dissection of the amount of loss for purposes of carry forward and providing for a special or different treatment to unabsorbed depreciation in this regard although it is a component element of the genus described as "loss" [931B C, 926C E, 93IC F] 4.
Unabsorbed losses and unabsorbed depreciation are to be carried forward to future years to be set off against future income.
There is, however, one important difference.
Unabsorbed losses can be carried forward only for a period of eight years whereas unabsorbed depreciation can be carried forward indefinitely.
[923G H] 5.
There is also difference between the two in the matter of their carry forward in the case of assessment of a registered firm.
In this case, the unabsorbed loss cannot be carried forward by the firm at all.
The statute clearly so provides.
So far as unabsorbed depreciation is concerned, three alternatives are possible to be urged: (i) It should be retained (without apportionment) and carried forward by the firm only.
(ii) It should be apportioned among the partners.
Thereafter, it can be dealt with even for carry forward purpose only in the assessment of each of the partners in respect of his aliquot share thereof.
(iii) It should be apportioned among the partners each of whom may set off his share thereof against his other income.
If, after this, any amount remains unabsorbed, it will revert to the firm.
The firm will carry it forward, set it off against its other income in the succeeding year.
This operation will be repeated every year indefinitely until the unabsorbed depreciation gets absorbed.
[924B E] 6.
The third alternative is the correct one: (a) The unabsorbed depreciation should be allocated among the partners and, like any other loss, will be available to the partners to the extent of his share therein for set off against his business income or other income in the same 913 assessment year.
In fact section 32(2), in so far as it talks of depreciation being given effect to in the partners ' assessments recognises that such unabsorbed depreciation should be allocated among the partners.
The question is what is to be done thereafter.
[932A B] (b) When there is nothing in the sub section or the Act specifically providing even for an apportionment of the depreciation among the partners, it is too contrived a construction to read into the sub section several words intended to provide for a number of partners, each carrying forward his share of the unabsorbed depreciation to successive assessment years.
It seems natural and reasonable to construe the section as envisaging the following steps where the assessee is a registered firm: (i) Excessive depreciation should be adjusted in the assessment of the assessee against other business income and against other heads of income; (ii) Depreciation, which remains unabsorbed under (i), will be apportioned to the partners and the share of each will be adjusted against the business and other income of each of the partners pro tanto; (iii) If full effect cannot be given to the depreciation allowance of the assessee by the above processes and some depreciation remains unadjusted, the assessee firm will carry it forward to the succeeding assessment year.
[934C G] (c) The sub section, before its 1953 amendment, permitted all assesses and this included registered firms as well to carry forward their unabsorbed depreciation so that though the registered firm paid no tax, it could, on the language claim a carry forward of the depreciation which had been apportioned among the partners.
This resulted in such carry forward being claimed even where the whole or a part of the unabsorbed depreciation of the firm had been set off in the assessment of individual partners.
The amendment only seeks to make it clear that such carry forward will not be permitted to the extent it has been given effect to in the partners ' assessments; by necessary implication, the carry forward, to the extent it has not been effectively allowed to the partner, continues to be available.
The amendment of 1953, therefore, does not help the case of the Revenue.
[935F 936A] (d) The objection to the above course is also based on a mental imagery of the firm and its partners as altogether different assesses 914 and of the impermissibility of "bringing back" to the firm 's "file" what has gone away to the* files of the partners.
This approach of viewing the two assessments in water tight compartments for all purposes is not correct.
In any event, any such theoretical dichotomy cannot prevail over the provisions of section 32(2).
[934G 935A] (e) The construction suggested does not result in any double advantage to the partners.
[936D] (f) It is true that the construction may result in a certain amount of imbalance in the quantum of relief available as among different partners.
But similar imbalance is inherent in the application of any of the three possible alternatives.
[936E F] 7.
The assessee appellant firm is entitled to carry forward the unabsorbed depreciation computed for the assessment year 1967 68 and have it set off in its assessment for the assessment year 1968 69.
The unabsorbed loss for the assessment year, 1967 68, however, cannot be carried forward by the firm to be set off in its assessment for the assessment year 1968 69.
[937A B] K. T. Wire Products vs Union of India, ; Garden Silk Weaving Factory, ; Garden Silk Weaving Factory, C. I. T. vs Ram Swarup Gupta, ; Raj Narayan Aggarwala vs C.I.T., [1979] 75 ITR I (Del.); Shankaranarayana Construction Co. vs C. I. T., ; Ballarpur Collieries Co. vs C.I.T., ; C. 1.
T. vs Nagpur Gas & Domestic Appliances, ; CIT vs Nagapattinam Import and Export Corp., ; CIT vs Madras Wire Products, ; CIT vs Madras Wire Products, ; CIT vs J. Patel & Co., ; CIT vs Shrinivas Sugar Co., ; CIT vs Singh Transport Co., ; Pearl Wollen Mills vs CIT, ; CIT vs Mahavir Steel Rolling Mills, & H) and CIT vs R. J. Trivedi & Sons, , referred to.
IT vs Jaipuria China Clay Mines (P.) Ltd., and Rajapalayam Mills Ltd. vs C. I. T., , followed.
