Landlord and Tenant Accommodation Agreed monthly rent New construction Enhancement of rent House Allotment Officer 's findings Power of the civil courts to interfere U. P. Templeton Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947 (U.P. 3 of 1947), SS.
2(a)(f) 3A, 5(4), 6.
In 1938 the respondent took on rent from the appellant the accommodation in dispute on a monthly rent of Rs. 21 4as.
On January 28, 1950, the appellant made an application to the House Allotment Officer under section 3A of the U.P. Temporary Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947, for an increase in rent, on the allegation that according to the instruction of the respondent lie had made a new construction in January, 1949.
The 734 Officer considered that the accommodation was not a newly constructed one as the respondent had been a tenant from 1938, but he increased the rent to Rs. 40 per mensem on the basis of the building that was added by the new construction.
The appellant thereupon instituted a suit under section 5(4) Of the Act for the enhancement of " reasonable annual rent ".
The respondent 's defence inter alia, was that the new construction was undertaken in order to put up another storey on the top of the old building, that so far as the accommodation in his possession was concerned there was no new construction of accommodation after June 30, 1946, and that, therefore, the suit was not maintainable.
The trial court found that as a result of the new construction the accommodation had increased and was of the opinion that the portion of the building which had been newly replaced must be treated as a new accommodation and hence the, court could determine its rent under section 5(4).
In revision, the High Court held that though the construction on the upper storey was a new construction, so far as the accommodation in the occupation of the respondent was concerned the construction could not be called a new one and therefore section 3A of the Act was not applicable.
Accordingly the revision petition was allowed and the suit was dismissed.
On appeal by special leave to the Supreme Court it was contended for the appellant that the House Allotment Officer having decided in his favour the question of the date of construction which section 3A of the Act authorised him to decide, the High Court could not in revision go into the correctness of the decision ; and, in any case, it was within the jurisdiction of the trial court to decide the question of the date of construction and in doing so it could decide rightly or wrongly, and as the matter was one of fact the High Court had no power to interfere under section 115 Of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Held:(1) that a wrong decision made by the House Allot ment Officer under section 3A of the Act or an order made by him in excess of his powers under that section could be rectified by a suit under section 5(4) of the Act; and (2)that the maintainability of the suit brought under section 3A of the Act depended on the determination of the jurisdictional fact i.e., date of construction of the accommodation, whether it was after June 30, 1946, and if the court wrongly decided that fact and thereby assumed jurisdiction not vested in it, the High Court had the power to interfere under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and once it had the power it could determine whether the question of the date of construction was rightly or wrongly decided.
Joy Chand Lal Babu vs Kamalaksha Chaudhury, (1949) L.R. 76 I.A. 131, relied on.
Queen vs Commissioner for Special Purposes of the Income Tax, ; Venkatagiri Ayyangar vs Hindu Religious Endowment Board, Madras, (1949) L.R. 76 I.A. 67 and Keshardeo Chamria vs Radha Kissen Chamria, [1953] S.C.R. 136, considered.
735 Rai Brij Raj Krishna vs section K. Shaw and Bros., [1951] S.C.R. 145, distinguished The relevant provisions of the Act are set out in the judg ment.
