The respondents were employed as drivers in the U.P.State Road Transport Corporation.
The Corporation has framed the U.P.State Road Transport Corporation Employees (other than Officers) Service Regulations, 1981, Regulations 17(2) inter alia requires the drivers to undergo medical test particularly vision test every year and under Regulation 17(3) services of those drivers who fail to pass the fitness test are to be dispensed with, with the proviso that such drivers may, in the discretion of the Corporation, be offered alternative jobs.
Pursuant to these Regulations, the Managing Director of the Corporation issued two circulars dated December 19, 1986 and March 12, 1987 directing the Regional Managers to terminate the Services of the drivers who are medically found unfit to drive the vehicles with the further direction that such drivers should be paid benefits like retrenchment compensation under Section 6(N) of the U.P.Industrial Disputes Act.
The respondents were subjected to medical examination and it was found that their eye sights were defective.
Consequently, the Corporation discharged the respondents with immediate effect by paying them one month salary in lieu of notice and also retrenchment compensation under the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act.
The respondents challenged their retrenchment by means of writ petitions before the High Court.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions directing the Corporation to offer alternative jobs to the respondents.
Being aggrieved, the Corporation has preferred these appeals to this Court.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, 275 HELD: 1.
Regulation 17(2) requires that the drivers have to undergo medical test particularly vision test every year, or at such intervals as may be prescribed by the General Manager of the Corporation.
Regulation 17(3) has two branches.
The first branch provides power to the Corporation to remove the driver from the service who fails to pass the medical test.
The second branch of Regulation 17(3) though styled as proviso is an independent and substantive provision providing discretion to the Corporation to offer an alternative job to the retrenched driver.
[278B D] 2.
The discretion conferred by Regulation 17(3) confers no vested right on the retrenched workmen to get an alternative job in the Corporation.
Like all other statutory discretion in the administrative law, Regulation 17(3) creates no legal right in favour of a person in respect of whom the discretion is required to be exercised other than a right to have his case honestly considered for an alternative job by the Corporation.
[279B] 3.
The High Court was in error in directing the Corporation to offer alternative jobs to the respondents because the Court cannot direct the statutory authority to exercise the discretion in a particular manner not expressly required by law and that it could only command the statutory authority by a writ of mandamus to perform its duty by exercising the discretion according to law.
The Court cannot command the Corporation to exercise discretion in a particular manner and in favour of a particular person.
That would be beyond the jurisdiction of the Court.
[279E] In the instant case, the Corporation has denied itself the discretion to offer an alternative job which the regulation requires it to exercise in individual cases of retrenchment.
Although it is open to an authority to which discretion has been entrusted to lay down the norms or rules to regulate exercise of discretion, it cannot however deny itself the discretion which the statute requires it to exercise in individual cases.
The concerned authority of the Corporation therefore are required to consider the cases of retrenched drivers for alternative jobs.[279F G;280A] 4.1 There are two aspects to be borne in mind in exercising the discretion.
Firstly, there are constraints with which the Corporation has to exercise its discretion and perform its task.
The Corporation is a public utility organisation where mediating motion is efficiency and effectiveness of public service.
Efficiency and effectiveness of public 276 service are the basic concepts which cannot be sacrificed in public administration by any statutory corporation.
The Corporation has to render this public service within the resource use and allocation.[280D] 4.2 The second aspect relates to the manner in which the statutory discretion is to be exercised.
Every discretion conferred by statute on a holder of public office must be exercised in furtherance of accomplishment of purpose of the power.
[280E G] Sharp vs Wakefield, at 179, referred to.
The Corporation therefore cannot act mechanically.
The discretion should not be exercised according to him, caprice and ritual.
The discretion should be exercised reasonably and rationally.
It should be exercised faithfully and impartially.
There should be proper value judgment with fairness and equity.
[280H] Therefore, it would not be improper if the discretion is exercised with greater concern for and sympathetic outlook to the disabled drivers subject of course to the paramount consideration of good and efficient administration.
[281A B]
