The States of Orissa, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh levied a cess which was based on the royalty derived from mining lands.
The cess was levied by these States under their respective statutes viz. Orissa Cess Act, 1962, Bengal Cess Act, 1880 (as applicable to the State of Bihar), Madhya Pradesh Upkar Adhiniyam 1981 and Madhya Pradesh Karadhan Adhiniyam, 1982.
The assesses challenged the constitutional validity of the cess by filing various petitions in the High Courts of Orissa declared the cess unconstitutional on the ground that it was beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislatures, but rejected the prayer of the assessees for a direction to the State to grant refund of the cess collected from the assessees.
Against the decision of the Orissa High Court the assessees have filed appeal in this Court whereas the State of Orissa has filed a cross appeal.
The High Court of Madhya Pradesh also declared the levy of cess unconstitutional on the ground that it was beyond the legislative competence of the State legislature.
Against the decision of the Madhya Pradesh High Court the State of Madhya Pradesh has filed an appeal in this Court.
On the other hand the High Court of Patna dismissed the writ petition of the assessee.
Against the decision of the Patna High Court the assessee has filed an appeal in this court.
In appeal to this court, it was contended on behalf of the State of Orissa; that (i) the levy of cess being referable to Entries 45, 49 and 50 of the State List of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution the impugned legislation was within the legislative competence of the State legislature; (ii) the limitations imposed in the statute on the modes of utilisation of cess supports a view that the cess is fee on which the State legislature is competent to legislate under Entry 23 read with Entry 66 of the State List; (iii) since the impugned Act was concerned with the raising of funds to enable panchayats and Samithis to discharge their responsibilities of local administration and take steps for proper development of the area under their jurisdiction, the impugned legislation was referable to Entry 5 of State List; and (iv) the enactment of the Central Legislation viz. has not denuded the State legislation of its competence to enact the impugned legislation since the scope and subject matter of the two legislations are entirely different and the impugned State Legislation does not encroach upon the field covered by the Central Legislation i.e. 1957 Act.
107 On behalf of the assessees it was contended inter alia that (i) all the State levies were ultra vires for the reasons given by this Court in the India Cement case; (ii) the State cannot seek to sustain the levy under the Bengal Cess Act 1880 by relying on Article 277 of the Constitution; and (iii) the levy being unconstitutional the Court should direct the States to refund the cess collected from the assessees because (a) a refund is the automatic and inevitable consequence of the declaration of invalidity of tax and (b) the States have given undertakings before this Court that they would refund the amount collected in case the levy is declared invalid by this Court.
Disposing of the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The levy of cess under sections 5 to 7 of the Orissa Cess Act, 1962 is beyond the competence of the State Legislature.
[169B] 1.1.
A royalty or the tax thereon cannot be equated to land revenue.
Therefore the cess cannot be brought under Entry 45 of List II.
[142D] India Cement & Ors.
vs State of Tamil Nadu & Ors., , followed.
1.2 A tax on royalties cannot be a tax on minerals and is outside the purview of Entry 50 of List II.
Even otherwise, the competence of the State Legislature under the said Entry is circumscribed by "any limitations imposed by Parliament by law relating to mineral development".
The is a law of Parliament relating to mineral development and Section 9 of the said Act empowers the Central Government to fix, alter, enhance or reduce the rates of royalty payable in respect of minerals removed from the land or consumed by the lessee, Sub Section (3) of Section 9 in terms States that the royalties payable under the Second Schedule to that Act shall not be enhanced more than once during a period of three years.
This is a clear bar on the State legislature taxing royalty so as, in effect, to amend the Second Schedule to the Central Act.
This is exactly what the impugned Act does.
Therefore the validity of the impugned Act cannot be upheld by reference to Entry 50 of List II.
And if the cess is taken as a tax falling under Entry 50 it will be ultra vires in view of the provisions of the Central ACt.
[144B, 153B D, 168D] India Cement & Ors.
vs State of Tamil Nadu & Ors.
, [1990] 1 S.C.C.12, followed.
108 Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs State of Orissa & Ors.
, [1961] 2 S.C.R.537, Justice Wanchoo 's dissent explained.
1.3 There is a difference in principle between a tax on royalties derived from land and a tax on land measured by reference to the income derived therefrom.
A tax on buildings does not cease to be such merely because it is quantified on the basis of the income it fetches.
But in the impugned legislation the levy is not measured by the income derived by the assessee from the land, as is the case with lands other than mineral lands.
The measure of the levy is the royalty paid, in respect of the land, by the assessee to his lessor which is quite a different thing.
The impugned statute only purports to levy a cess on the annual value of all land.
There is a clear distinction between tax on land and tax on income arising from land.
The former must be one directly imposed on land, levied on land as a unit and bearing a direct relationship to it.
A tax on royalty cannot be said to be a tax directly on land as a unit.
Hence the cess is outside the purview of Entry 49 List II.
[148H, 149A D] Ajay Kumar Mukherjea vs Local Board of Barpeta, [1965] 3 Ss.
C.R. 47; Ralla Ram vs The province of East Punjab, [1948] F.C.R.207; Buxa Dooars Tea Co. vs State, [1989] 3 S.C.R.211; Bhagwan Dass Jain vs Union of India, ; and R.R. Emgomeeromg Co. vs Zila Parishad, ; , referred to.
Union of India vs Bomnbay Tyre International, [1984] 1 S.C.R.347; Re: A reference under the Government of Ireland Act, 1920 and Section 3 of the Finance Act (Northern Ireland), 1934, (1963) 2 All E.R.III, cited.
If the levy in question cannot be described as a tax on land, it cannot be described as fee with regard to land either.
[169A] 2.1 Section 10 of the Orissa Cess Act, 1962 earmarks the purposes of utilisation of only fifty per cent of the proceeds of the cess and that, too, is limited to the cess collected in respect of "lands other than lands held for carrying on mining operations".
Therefore the levy cannot be correlated to any services rendered or to be rendered by the State to the class of persons from whom the levy is collected.
Accordingly the levy cannot be treated as a fee which the State legislature is competent to legislate for under entry 66 of the State List.
[153E F] 2.2 Even assuming that the levy is a fee, the State legislature can impose a fee only in respect of any of the matters in the State List.
The 109 entry relied upon for this purpose i.e. Entry 23 is itself "subject to the provisions of List I with respect to regulation and development" of mines and minerals under the control of the Union.
Under Entry 54 of List I, regulation of mines and mineral development is in the field of parliamentary legislation "to the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest".
Such a declaration is contained in Section 2 of the .
The validity of the impugned Act cannot be upheld by reference to Entry 23 List II.
[153G H, 154A, 168D] 3.
There is a difference between the 'object ' of the Act and its 'subject '.
The object of the levy may be to strengthen the finances of local bodies but the Act has nothing to do with municipal or local administration.
Accordingly State 's reliance on Entry 5 of List II is plainly too tenuous.
[164D] 4.
The answer to the question whether the State Legislature was denuded of its competence to enact the impugned legislation because of the Parliament having enacted the depends on a proper understanding of the scope of the Act and an assessment of the encroachment made by the impugned State legislation into the field covered by it.
[161D] 4.1 The mere declaration of a law of Parliament that it is expedient for an industry or the regulation and development of miners and minerals to be under the control of the Union under Entry 52 or entry 54 of List I does not denude the State legislatures of their legislative powers with respect to the fields covered by the several entries in List II or List III.
Particularly, in the case of a declaration under Entry 54, this legislative power is eroded only to the extent control is assumed by the Union pursuance to such declaration as spelt out by the legislative enactment which makes the declaration.
The measure of erosion turns upon the field of the enactment framed in pursuance of the declaration.
[161E F] 4.2 In assessing the field covered by the Act of Parliament in question, one should be guided not merely by the actual provisions of the Central Act or the rules made thereunder but should also take into account matters and aspect which can legitimately be brought within the scope of the said statute.
Viewed in this light and in the Light of the provisions of the Bihar Cess Act the conclusion seems irresistible that the State Act has trespassed into the field covered by the Central Act 110 viz. Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development)Act, 1957.[163F] 4.3 The impugned legislation which stands impaired by the Parliamentary declaration under Entry 54, can hardly be equated to the law for land acquistion or municipal adminstration which are traceable to different specific entries in List II or List III [163G H] Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs State of Orissa & Ors.
; ; State of Orissa vs M.A. Tulloch & Co., ; and Indian Cement & Ors vs State of Tamil Nadu & Ors., [1990]1 S.C.C. 12 followed.
State of Haryana vs Chanan Mal, ; ; Ishwari Khatan Sugar Mills (P) Ltd vs State of U.P. ; and Western Coalfields Ltd. vs Special Area Development Authority.
, [1982] 2 S.C.R.1,distinguished.
Indian tobacco Co. Ltd. vs Union, [1985] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 145; State of West Bengal vs Union [1964] 1.
S.C.R. 371; Central Coalfields vs State of M.P., A.I.R. (1986) M.P.33; M. Karunanidhi vs Union of India, ; ; State of Tamil Nadu vs Hind Stone etc.
; , ; I.T.C. vs State of Karnataka, ; Bharat Coking Coal vs State of Bihar, ; ; Kannan Dewan Hills Co. vs State of Kerala, [1973] 1.
S.C.R. 356; Baijnath Kedia vs State of Bihar ; ; H.R.S. Murthy vs Collection of Chittoor & Ors.
[1964] 6 S.C.R.; Ch.
Tika Ramji & Ors.
vs State of U.P.,[1956] S.C.R. 393; Laxmi Narayan Agarwala vs State, A.I.R. 919830 Ori.210; Bherulal vs State, A.I.R. (1965) Raj. 161; Sharma vs State A.I.R. (1969) P&H 79 and Saurashtra Cement & Chemical Industries Ltd. vs Union , referred to.
Trivedi & Sons vs State of Gujarat.
[1986] Suppl.
S.C.C. 20, cited.
Section 6 of the Bengal Cess Act, 1880 specifically enacts that the cess will be on royalty from mines and quarries and on the annual net profit of railways and tramways.
The further amendments to Section 6 have not changed this basic position.
Though the Section referees also to the value of the mineral bearing land, that furnishes only the maximum upto which the cess, based on royalty, could go.
Therefore, the cess is levied directly on royalties from mines and quarries.
The different notifications issued by the State of Bihar under section 6 111 of the Act determining the rate of cess on the amount of rayalty of all minerals of the State place the matter beyond all doubt.
The levy is a percentage or multiple of the royalty depending upon the kind of mineral and in the case of iron ore the method of extraction and nature of the process employed.
There are no clear indications in the statute that the amounts are collected by way of fee and not tax.
Section 9 indicates that only a small percentage goes to the district fund and the remaining forms part of the consolidated fund of the State " for the constrution and maintenance of other works of public utility".
However, the proviso does require at least ten percent to be spent for purposes relating to mineral development.
Even the assumption that the levy can be treated, in part, as a fee and, in part, as a tax will not advance the case of the respondents.
Therefore, the levy of cess sunder the Bengal Cess Act, 1880 is declared invalid.
[169C F,H,170A] Indian Cement & Ors.
vs State of Tamil Nadu & Ors., followed.
Central Coalfields Ltd. vs State (CWJC 2085/89 decided on 6.11.90 by Patna High Court, referred to.
5.1 The attempt to sustain the tax under the Bengal Cess Act 1880 on the basis of Article 277 cannot also succeed.[171C] Ramkrishna Ramanath vs Janpad Sabha, [1962]Suppl.
3.S.C.R. 70; Town Municipal Committee vs Ramachandra ; , referred to.
The levy of cess under section 11 of the Madhya Pradesh Upkar Adhiniyam, 1981 is not covered by Entry 49 or Entry 50 of List II and is therefore, ultra vires.
, [172B] M.P. Lime Manufacturers ' Association vs State, A.I.R. (1989) M.P. 264 referred to.
6.1 Under Section 9 of Madhya Pradesh Karadhan Adhiniyam, 1982 the proceeds of the cess are to be utilised only towards the general development of mineral bearing areas.
Although there is no provision for the constitution of a separate fund for this purpose as is found in relation to the cesses levied under Part II or Part III of the Act yet this consideration alone does not preclude the levy from being considered as a fee.
The clear ear marking of the levy for purposes connected with development of mineral areas was rightly considered by 112 the High Court, as sufficient to treat it as a fee.
The High Court was also right in holding that such a fee would be referable to item 23 but out of bounds for the State Legislature, after the enactment of the .
[171F H] Srinivasa Traders vs State, ; , referred to.
The grant of refund is not an automatic consequence of a declaration of illegality i.e. where the levy of taxes is found to be unconstitutional, the Court is not obliged to grant an order of refund.
Therefore a finding regarding the invalidity of a levy need not automatically result in direction for a refund of all collections thereof made made earlier.
The declaration regarding the invalidity of a provision and the determination of the relief that should be granted in consequence thereof are two deferent things and, in the latter sphere, the Court has, and must be held to have, a certain amount of discretion.
Once the principle that the Court has a discretion to grant or decline refund is recognised, the ground on which such discretion should be exercised is a matter of consideration for the Court having regard to all the circumstances of the case.
The Court can grant, would or restrict the relief in a manner most appropriate to the situation before it is such a way as to advance the interests of justice.
The Court is entitled to refuse the prayer for good and valid reasons.
Laches or undue delay or intervention of third party rights would clearly be one of those reasons.
Unjust enrichment of the refundee may or may not be another.
Also there is no reason why the vital interest of the State should not be a relevant criterion for deciding that a refund should not be granted.
[185H, 186A C, D & E 181D E] 7.1 In the instant case though the levy of the cess is unconstitutional, yet there shall be no direction to refund to the assessees of any amounts of cess collected until the date on which the levy in question has been declared unconstitutional.
This, in regard to the Bihar cases, will be the date of this judgment i.e. 4.4.1991.
In respect of Orissa and Madhya Pradesh cases the relevant date will be the date on which the concerned High Court has declared the levy unconstitutional i.e.22.12.1989 in case of Orissa and 28.3.1986 in case of Madhya Pradesh.
The dates of the judgments of the appropriate High Court, may not constitute a declaration of law within the scope of Article 141 of the Constitution, but it cannot be gainsaid that the State cannot, on any ground of equity, be permitted to retain the cess collected on and after the date of the High Court 's judgment.
Accordingly the State should refund the amounts of cess collected after the relevant dates to assesses directly or in the Coalfields from whom they were collected, with 113 interest at the rate directed by this Court or mentioned in the undertaking from the date of the relevant judgment to the actual date of repayment.
The Coalfields, when they get the refunds, should pass on the same to their customers, the assessees.
[186F G, 187B C] India Cement & Ors.
State of Tamil Nadu & Ors, [1990] 1 S.C.C.12, followed.
Linkletter, 14 L Ed.
(2d) 601; Sunburst.
77 L.Ed.310; Mahabir Kishore & Ors.
vs Stte of Madhya Pradesh, [1989] 4 S.C.C. 1; Chhotabhai Jethabhai Patel & Co. vs Union of India, ; ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhailal Bhai & Ors., ; ; Tilok Chand Motichand vs Munshi, [1969] 2 S.C.R> 824; Ramchandra Shankar Deodhar vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Shri Vallabh Glass Works Ltd. vs Union of India, [1984] 3 S.C.R> 180; State of M.P. vs Nandlal Jaiswal, [1986] 4 S.C.C.566 ' D. Cawasji & Co. vs State of Mysore, [1975] 2 S.C.R.511; Salonah Tea Co. Ltd. vs Superintendent of Taxes, ; and Lakshmi Narain Agarwala vs State, A.I.R. (1983_ Orissa 210, referred to.
Behram Khursheed Pesikaka vs State of Bombay, [1955] 1 S.C.R.613; R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala vs Union of India, ; ; M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.
, ; ; West Ramnad Electric Distribution Co. vs State of Madras, ; ; M.L.Jain vs State of U.P., [1963] suppl. ; K.T. Moopil Nayar vs State of Kerala & Anr., [1961] 3 S.C.R.77; Balaji vs I.T.O. Special Investigation Circle, ; ; Raja Jagannath Bakshi Singh vs State of U.P., ; ; Prem Chand Garg vs Excise Commissioner, U.P. Allahabad, [1963] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 885 and I.C. Golaknath & Ors.v.
State of Punjab & Ors.
,[1967] 2 S.C.R. 762, cited.
The undertaking given by the parties or interim directions given by the Court cannot be understood in such a manner as to conflict with the Court 's final decision.
