The case of the prosecution was that at about 9.00 p.m. on June 4,1984, A 1 and A 3 came to the liquor shop of D 3 wherein PW 3, D 1, D 2 and PW 4 were also present and were vending the liquor.
They sold one bottle ofliquor to A 1 and A 3 on credit.
After its consumption A 1 and A 3 demanded another bottle to which D 3 refused to sell on credit.
There on A 1 and A 3 abused them and a quarrel ensued.
Both left the shop in anger.
D 1 and D 2 slept on wooden takthposh in front of the liquor shop.
PW 3 and PW 4 climbed the roof of the shop and slept there.
During past mid night of June 4 5, 1984 at about 12.30 a.m., PW 3 and PW 4 heard gun shot fire and got up and saw with the visibility of electric light emanating from the house of one Gurbax Singh, the father of DW 2 that A 1 was firing with rifle at D 1 to D 4 and A 2 and A 3 hitting them with Gandasas (sharp edged weapons).
Seeing PW 3 and PW 4 on the terrace A 1 fired at them but they escaped uninjured and they jumped down.
PW 3 jumped towards back side of the shop and ran towards the village and hid in the school.
PW 4 jumped to the front side and ran towards .
the village A 1 fired at PW 4 257 and A 2 hit him.
He received seven bullet injuries fired by A 1 on the backside, of right leg, thigh and left side of the abdomen while he was running.
A 2 hit him on the right shoulder and had incised injury.
He ran to the house of PW 3 with bleeding injuries, knocked the door and fell down unconscious.
On June 5, 1984 at about 9.00 a.m. the Chowkidar of the village reached Kotli Police Station and reported to PW 5, H.O.who reduced F.I.R. into writing.
In the F.I.R. the chowkidar stated that he had heard gun shot firing from the side of the liquor shop.
Due to fear and the prevailing tense situation he did not come out.
Next day morning he saw several people collected at the liquor shop and saw the dead bodies of D 1 to D 4 and PW 4 was lying unconscious in the house of DW 3 and he was asked to report the matter accordingly.
The defence consented to mark F.I.R., the affidavits of the panch witnesses and constables, the fire arms licence of A 1 under Ex.p 17 and also the reports of the ballistic expert and chemical examination reports without oral evidence.
The lower court believed the direct evidence of PW 3 and PW 4 and the prosecution case that A 1 fired at the deceased with MO 11 rifle, A 2 and A 3 also participated in the attack.
The first accused was convicted under s.302 read with s.34, I.P.C. for causing the deaths of D 1, D 2, D 3 and D 4 and sentenced to death subject to confirmation by this Court.
He was also further convicted under s.307 read with s.34, I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 5 years for attempt to murder PW 4.
A 2 and A 3 were convicted under s.302 read with s.34, I.P.C. for causing deaths of D 1 to D 4 and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life.
A 2 and A 3 were convicted under s.307 read with s.34 I.P.C. for attempt to murder of PW 4 and were sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 5 years, all the sentences to run concurrently, against which the accused filed appeal u/s.14(1) of the Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Court) Act, 1984.
The appellants contended that the evidence of PW 4 was highly artificial, unbelievable and untrustworthy; that barring their evidence, there was no other evidence to connect the appellants with the commission of the crime; that the omission of the names of the accused in the case diary and memos would belie the theory of witnesses; that the appellants were implicated by suspicion and the prosecution had not 258 established the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt; that the conviction and sentence by the special court was on the same day, which contravened the mandatory provision of s.235 of the Code.
Partly allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The First Information Report is not substantive evidence.
It can be used only to contradict the maker thereof or for corroborating his evidence and also to show that the implication of the accused was not an after thought.
[266B C] 2.
Since the examination of first information was dispensed with by consent F.I.R. became part of the prosecution evidence.
[266B C] 3.
Ocular defence evidence, if it is not subjected to critical cross examination, is entitled to the same weight as prosecution evidence.
But merely because the prosecution, as usual, made insipid cross examination, the defence evidence is not to be believed automatically.
[267A B] 4.
Witnesses may be prone to speak lies but circumstances will not.
So even though the burden of the defence is not as heavy as of the prosecution, the oral evidence tendered by the defence must also be subjected to critical scrutiny and be considered in the light of the given facts and attending circumstances of the case and human probabilities.
[267A C] 5.
Corroboration is not a rule of law, but one of caution as an assurance.
The conviction could be made on the basis of the testimony of a solitary witness.
The occasion for the presence at the time of occurrence, opportunity to witness crime the normal conduct of the witness after the incident, the nearness of the witness to the victim, his pre disposition towards the accused, are some of the circumstances to be kept in view to weigh and accept the ocular evidence of a witness.
It is not the quantum of the evidence but its quality and credibility of the witness that lends assurance to the court for acceptance.
[267H 268B] 6.
The case diary is only a record of day to day investigation of the Investigating Officer to ascertain the statement of circumstances ascertained through the investigation.
Under Section 172(2) the Court is entitled at the trial or inquiry to use the diary not as evidence in the case, but as aid to it in the inquiry or trial.
Neither the accused, nor his agent, by operation of sub section
(3), shall be entitled to call the diary, nor shall he be entitled to use it as evidence merely because the Court 259 referred to it.
Only right given thereunder is that if the police officer who made the entries in the diary uses it to refresh his memory or if the Court uses it for the purpose of contradicting such witness, by operation of s.161 of the Code and s.145 of the Evidence Act, it shall be used for the purpose of contradicting the witness, i.e., Investigation Officer or to explain it in re examination by the prosecution, with permission of the Court.
It is, therefore, clear that unless the investigating officer or the court uses it either to refresh the memory or contradicting the investigating officer as previous statement under s.161 that too after drawing his attention thereto as is enjoined under s.145 of the Evidence Act.
The entries cannot be used by the accused as evidence.
[269C G] 7.
The memos sent to the Medical Officer are not evidence except as record of investigation.
It is not a rule of law that the memo should bear names with cause title of accused.
It is enough if the name of the injured is mentioned in the memo.
[269H 270A] 8.
Section 174 of the Code empowers a police officer to investigate in the presence of two or more respectable witnesses and report only the cause of death and the person if known, that has committed the offence.
Section 175 empowers him to summon any person who appears to be acquainted with the facts of the case and every person so summoned shall be bound to attend the inquest and answer truely all the questions other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.
The statement made by such a person is a "previous statement" within the meaning of section 162 and it shall not be signed.
So the statement made by such a person to police officer is in the course of the investigation, and when reduced to writing, it shall be used only by the accused to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the Evidence Act or with the permission of the court the prosecution could use it for re examination only to explain the matter referred to in his cross examination.[270B E] 9.
S.162 was conceived to protect an accused creating an absolute bar against the previous statement made before the police officer being used for any purpose whatsoever.
The obvious reason is that the previous statement under the circumstances was not made inspiring confidence.
It enables the accused to rely thereon only to contradict the witnesses in the manner provided by s.145 drawing attention of the witness of that part of the statement intended to be used for contradiction.
It cannot be used for corroboration of a prosecution or defence witness or even a court witness, nor can it be used contradicting a 260 defence or a court witness.
The investigating officer is enjoined to forward the inquest report to the Magistrate alongwith the statement recorded at the inquest, so that the court would see the record, at the earliest of the circumstances leading to the cause of the death of the deceased and the witness examined during the inquest.
[270E G] 10.
The statement of witness PW 3 recorded during inquest is not evidence.
It is a previous statement reduced to writing under s.162 of the Code and enclosed to the inquest report and cannot be used by the prosecution for any purpose including to show the names of the accused except to contradict the maker thereof, or to explain the same by prosecution.
[270G H] 11.
On finding that the accused committed the charged offence, s.235(2) of the Code empowers the Judge that he shall pass sentence on him according to law on hearing him.
Hearing contemplated is not confined merely to oral hearing but also intended to afford an opportunity to the prosecution as well as the accused to place before the Court facts and material relating to various factors on the question of sentence and if interested by either side to have evidence adduced to show mitigating circumstances to impose a lesser sentence or aggravating grounds to impose death penalty.
Therefore, sufficient time must be given to the accused or the prosecution on the question of sentence to show the grounds on which the prosecution may plead or the accused may show that the maximum sentence of death may be the appropriate sentence or the minimum sentence of life imprisonment may be awarded, as the case may be.
If the accused declines to adduce oral evidence, it does not prevent to show the grounds to impose lessor sentence on.
[273A D] 12.
The sentence awarded on the same day of finding guilt is not in accordance with the law.[273C D] Allauddin vs State of M.P., J.T.(1989) 2 SC 171 and Anguswamy vs State of Tamilnadu, J.T.(1989) 2 SC 184, referred to.
