The appellant was tried for rape and murder of a girl aged five years.
The entire evidence against him was circumstantial: (a) the accused and the deceased were last seen together; (b) false explanation given by the accused regarding the whereabouts of the deceased; (c) alleged recovery of the dead body of the deceased at the instance of the accused and (d) presence of abrasions on the genital of the accused as well as blood stains on his wearing apparels and nail clippings.
Relying on the circumstantial evidence the Trial Court convicted him under Sections 302 and 376 and sentenced him to death for the offence of murder and seven years rigorous imprisonment for the offence of rape.
The High Court confirmed the conviction and the sentence awarded by the Trial Court.
In appeal to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the circumstantial evidence is wholly insufficient to bring home the guilt of the accused.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The circumstantial evidence in order to sustain the conviction must satisfy three conditions; (1) the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to be drawn, must be cogently and firmly established; (ii) those circumstances should be of a definite tendency nerringly pointing towards the guilt of the accused; (iii) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should form a chain so complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability the crime was committed by the accused and none else, and it should also be incapable of explanation on any other hypothesis than that of the guilt of the accused [303E F].
299 Hanumant and Anr.v.
The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; Reg vs Hodfe, [1838] 2 Lew.227; Dharam Das Wadhwani vs State of Uttar Pradesh, and Jagta vs State of Haryana, ; , referred to.
2.In cases depending largely upon circumstantial evidence there is always a danger that the conjecture or suspicion may take the place of legal proof and such suspicion however so strong cannot be allowed to take the place of proof.
The Court has to be watchful and ensure that conjectures and suspicions do not take the place of legal proof for sometimes unconsciously it may happen to be a short step between moral certainty and the legal proof.
At times it can be case of 'may be true.
But there is a long mental distance between 'may be true ' and 'must be true ' and the same divides conjectures from sure conclusions.
The Court must satisfy itself that the various circumstances in the chain of evidence should be established clearly and that the completed chain must be such as to rule out a reasonable likelihood of the innocence of the accused.
[304 G, 309E F] 3.In the instant case the circumstance that the deceased was last seen in the company of the accused is not established beyond reasonable doubt.
This circumstance was not mentioned in the Inquest Report prepared by the Investigating Officer.
Further the statement of the parents of the deceased that the accused took the deceased girl by itself is not enough to conclude that the deceased was last seen in the company of accused because even according to them on being inquired the accused told them that he had sent the girl back in a truck.
[308C, 305F] 3.1 The prosecution has not conclusively proved the crucial circumstance of the recovery of the dead body of the deceased girl at the instance of the accused.
No Panchnama was prepared for such a discovery under Section 27 of the Evidence Act and there is no mention in the Inquest Report as to how the body was discovered.
On the other hand there is any amount of doubt and suspicion about the accused having shown the place of occurrence.
Once it is held that the crucial circumstances namely the discovery of the body at the instance of the accused is not established, than the other circumstance are hardly sufficient to establish the guilt of the accused.
[308B C D, 306B, 307C] 3.2 The explanation given by the accused that he sent the girl back to the village in a truck cannot be held to be not plausible and therefore false because it is not uncommon in villages for children to go about the fields and walk short distance while coming back to the village.
[308E] 300 3.3 The prosecution has also not established that the accused had an intercourse on the day of the occurrence.
When the doctor who examined the accused stated that he could not find any sign of sexual intercourse atleast within one hour of his examination then it is only a matter of conjectures as to when the accused had any intercourse.
The presence of blood in the nail clippings and on the underpant does not also incriminate and do not connect the accused in any manner with the alleged offences.
The accused also had given an explanation namely that his gums were bleeding and in wiping out the same he got these blood stains.
Even otherwise this circumstance coupled with the circumstance of last seen in the company of the accused would ;not amount to legal proof of the guilt particularly when the crucial circumstance namely that the accused showed the dead body is held to be not established.
When such a main link goes, the chain gets snapped and the other circumstances cannot in any manner establish the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubts.
Therefore there is a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused and the benefit of the same should go to him.
Accordingly the conviction and sentence of the accused is set aside.
[309B C, F G]
