The respondent, a Section Officer in the office of the Chief Controller of Import and Exports, was communicated adverse remarks for the year 1984.
He made a representation against the adverse remarks but the same was rejected by the Ministry of Commerce by its order dated 6.1.1986.
Thereafter he made a Memorial to the President and the Government by its order dated 14.8.86 partially expunged the adverse remarks.
The respondent filed a petition before the Central Administrative Trubunal challenging the order rejecting his representation on the ground that it did not contain any reasons.
The Tribunal by its order dated 27.7.87 quashed both the order dated 6.1.86 as well as 14.8.86 by holding that the orders were vitiated in law in the absence of reasons.
In appeal to this Court by the Union of India, it was contended on behalf of the respondent that the principles of natural justice require the superior authority to records reasons in rejecting the Government servant 's representation made against the adverse remarks as the order of rejection affected the respondent 's right.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The superior authority while considering the represen 452 tation of a Government servant against adverse remarks, is not required by law to act judicially, it is under no legal obligation to record or communicate reasons for its decision to the Government servant.
There is no rule or administrative order for recording reasons in reacting such a representation.
In the absence of any statutory rule or statutory instructions requiring the competent authority to record reasons in rejecting a representation made by a Government servant against the adverse entries the competent authority is not under any obligation to record reasons.
The decision, rejecting such a representation does not adversely affect any vested right of the Government servant nor does it visit him with any civil consequences.
It does not mean that the competent authority has licence to act arbitrarily, he must act in a fair and just manner.
He is required to consider the questions raised by the Government servant and examine the same, in the light of the comments made by the officer awarding the adverse entries and the officer counter signing the Confidential Reports.
If the representation is rejected after its consideration in a fair and just manner, the order of rejection would not be rendered illegal merely on the ground of absence of reason.
In many cases having regard to infinite variations of circumstances it may not be possible to disclose reasons, for the opinion formed about the work and conduct or character of the Government servant.
However, it does not mean that the administrative authority is at liberty to pass orders without there being any reasons for the same.
In Governmental functioning before any orde is issued the matter is generally considered at various levels and the reasons and opinions are contained in the notes on the file.
The reasons contained in the file enable the competent authority to formulate its ipinion.
If the order as communicated to the Government servant rejecting the representation does not contain any reasons the order cannot be held to be bad in law.
If such an order is challenged in a court of law it is always open to the competent authority to place the reasons before the Court which may have led to the rejection of the representation.
It is always open to an administrative authority to produce evidence ali unde before the court to justify its action.
[459G H, 460A, E F H, 461A B] Gurdial Singh Fijji vs State of Punjab & Ors., , referred to. 2 The President was under no legal obligation to record reasons in rejecting the respondent 's representation against the adverse remarks.
Consequently, the order of the President was not vitiated in law.
The Central Administrative Tribunal committed error in quashing the order of the President as well as the order of the Ministry of Com 453 merce dated 6.1.1986.
Accordingly, the Tribunal 's order dated 27.7.1987 is set aside.
[461C E] 3.
The purpose of the rules of natural justice is to prevent miscarriage of justice and the principles of natural justice are applicable to administrative orders if such orders affect the right of a citizen.
Arriving at the just decision is the aim of both quasi judicial as well as administrative enquiry, an unjust decision in an administrative enquiry may have more far reaching effect than decision in a quasijudicial enquiry.
Generally, principles of natural justice require that opportunity of hearing should be given to the person against whom an administrative order is passed.
The application of principles of natural justice, and its sweep depend upon the nature of the right involved, having regard to the setting and context of the statutory provisions.
Where a vested right is adversely affected by an administrative order, or where civil consequences ensue, principles of natural justice apply even if the statutory provisions do not make any express provision for the same, and the person concerned must be afforded opportunity of hearing before the order is passed.
But principles of natural justice do not require the administrative authority to record reasons for its decision as there is no general rule that reasons must be given for administrative decision.
Order of an administrative authority which has no statutory or implied duty to state reasons or the grounds of its decision is not rendered illegal merely on account of absence of reasons.
It has never been a principle of natural justice that reasons should be given for decisions.
[458H, 459A D] State of Orissa vs Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei & Ors., ; ; Mohinder Singh Gill & Ors.
vs The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi & Ors., ; A. K. Kraipak & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors., and Regina vs Gaming Board for Great Britain ex.
p. Benaim and Khaida, ; , referred to.
Though the principles of natural justice do not require reasons for decision, there is necessity for giving reasons in view of the expanding law of judicial review to enable the citizens to discover the reasoning behind the decision.
Right to reasons is an indispensable part of a sound system of judicial review.
Under our Constitution an administrative decision is subject to judicial review if it affects the right of a citizen, it is therefor desirable that reasons should be stated.
[459F] 4.
Ordinarily, Courts and Tribunals, adjudicating rights of parties, are required to act judicially and to record reasons.
Where an 454 administrative authority is required to act judicially it is also under an obligation to record reasons.
But every administrative authority is not under any legal obligation to record reasons for its decision, although, it is always desirable to record reasons to avoid any suspicion.
Where a statute requires an authority though acting administratively to record reasons, it is mandatory for the authority to pass speaking orders and in the absence of reasons the order would be rendered illegal.
But in the absence of any statutory or administrative requirement to record reasons, the order of the administrative authority is not rendered illegal for absence of reasons.
If any challenge is made to the validity of an order on the ground of it being arbitrary or mala fide it is always open to the authority concerned to place reasons before the Court which may have persuaded it to pass the orders.
Such reasons must already exist on records as it is not permissible to the authority to support the order by communicated to the Government servant.
If the statutory rules require communication of reasons, the same must be communicated but in the absence of any such provision absence of communication of reasons do not affect the validity of the order.
[457H, 458A C]
