Under the taxing power contained in the several Motor Vehicles Tax Acts in vogue in the Respondent States, provision has been made for taxation as also for levy of additional tax.
The petitioners who hold All India Tourist Permits challenged the constitution validity of the additional tax, on the ground that it was neither compensatory nor regulatory, and therefore was violative of Articles 19(1) (g) and 301 of the Constitution.
In respect of the State of Punjab and Haryana which have a common Act, an additional contention was raised to the effect that Rule 8(v) of the Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation Rules 1925, provides total exemption from liability of tax if the vehicle was brought into the State and kept for use within the State for a period not exceeding 30 days in a year, and since the vehicles registered outside Punjab and Haryana States are not kept within the State for more than 30 days in a year, the demand of tax in the face of Rule 8(v) is contrary to law.
Disposing of the Writ Petitions, this Court, HELD : 1.
Law is settled that to uphold levy of tax as in the present case, what is necessary is existence of a nexus between the subject and 525 the object of the levy and it is not necessary to show that the whole or a substantial part of the tax collected is utilised.
Hence the demand of tax is not open to challenge and the plea raised against the levy, whether of tax or additional tax, is not justified.
Under the taxing provision a statutory outer limit has been provided and the actual amount is left to be determined by the State Government by notification.
Obviously, discretion is left with the State Government to demand at rate which in a given situation would be justified .
Once it is held that the tax is either conmpensatory or regulatory that forms the guideline for the State Government to keep in view to determine the rate at which within the upper limit fixed by law the demand has to be made.
{525E H} Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. vs The State of Rajasthan and Ors , {1963} 1 SCR 491; M/s. International Tourist Corporation and Ors.
vs State of Haryana and Ors.
,[1981] 2 SCC 318 and B.A. Jayaram and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, [1984] SCC 168., relied on.
The word 'kept ' has not been defined in the Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1924.
It must , therefore, be interpreted in its ordinary popular sense consistent with the context.
The ordinary dictionary meaning of the word 'keep ' is 'to retain ', ' to maintain ' or 'cause to stay or remain in a place ' or 'to detain ' or 'to stay or continue in a specified condition , position etc.
, It is something different from a mere state of transit or a course of journey through the State .
it is something more than a mere stoppage or halt for rest, food or refreshment, etc.
in the course of transit through the territory of the State.
That being the position, rule 8 (v) which uses the term 'kept for use ' may not cover a case of bare transit and in terms of the rule exemption is available for vehicles kept upto 30 days in a year.
In that view of the matter tourist vehicles registered outside the State of Punjab and Haryana when brought into these two States for regular use and not by way of transit and when used for more than 30 days in a year would attract taxability; otherwise the exemption provision in rule 8(v) would be available [530C F] M/s. International Tourist Corporation and Ors.
vs State of Haryana and Ors.
, [ 1981] 2SCC 318 and State of Mysore and Ors.
vs M/s. T.V. Sundaram Iyengar & Sons (P) Ltd., ; , referred to.
The question of exigibility of tax in the State of Punjab and Haryana with reference to rule 8(v) of the Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation Rules, 1925 is left to be determined in individual cases as and when raised.
[530G].
