One R, the wife of S, disappeared from her husband 's house.
She was traced to the house of the appellants, A and his brother B.
When S went there and asked A to let his wife go with him A told him that he had married her and B threatened S and asked him to go away.
The appellants were charged under section 498 Indian Penal Code for detaining R when they knew or had reason to believe that she was the wedded wife of S, with intent to have illict intercourse with her.
The appellants pleaded that R was not validly married to S and that she had not been detained by them inasmuch as she was tired of living with S and had voluntarily and of her free will come to stay with them.
The Magistrate found the appellants guilty, convicted them and sentenced them to undergo simple imprisonment for two months each.
On appeal the Sessions Judge confirmed the conviction but reduced the sentence to a fine of Rs. 50/ each.
The appellants filed a revision before the High Court.
The High Court issued a notice of enhancement and after hearing the appellants dismissed the revision and enhanced the sentence to rigorous imprisonment for six months each.
Held, that detention in section 498 means keeping back a wife from her husband or any other person having the care of her on behalf of her husband.
Such keeping back may be by force; but it need not be by force.
It can be the result of persuasion, allurement or blandishments which may have either caused the willingness of the woman, or may have encouraged, or co operated with, her initial inclination to leave her husband.
The object of the section is to protect the rights of the husband and it cannot be any defence to the charge to say that, though the husband has been deprived of his rights, the wife is willing to injure the said rights and so the person who is responsible for the willingness has not detained her.
A was rightly convicted as the charge of detention was proved against him on the findings of the Courts below that he had offered to marry R and had thereby either persuaded or encouraged her to leave her husband 's house.
But the charge was not made out against B as it was not proved that he had offered any inducement, blandishment or allurement to R for leaving the protection of her husband and for refusing to return to him.
465 Sundara Dass Teva, (1868) IV Mad. H. C. R. 20; Ramaswamy Udayar vs Raju Udayar, A. 1.
R. ; Emperor vs Jan Mohomed, (1902) IV Bom.
L.R. 435; Broomfield, J., in Emperor vs
Mahiji Fula, Bom.
88, Emperor vs Ram Narayan Baburao Kapur, ; Mahadeo Rama vs Emperor, A.I.R. (1943) Bom.
179; Prithi Missir vs Harak Nath Singh, I.L.R. ; Bipad Bhanjan Sarkar vs Emperor, I.L.R. ; Banarsi Raut vs Emperor, A.I.R. (1938) Pat.
432 and Bansi Lal vs The Crown, (19I3) Punj.
L.R. 1066, approved.
Divatia, J., in Emperor vs Mahiji Fula, Bom.
88, Mabarak Sheikh vs Ahmed Newaz, and Harnam Singh vs Emperor, A.I.R. (1939) Lah.
295, disapproved.
Held further, that the High Court was not justified in en hancing the sentence to six months rigorous imprisonment, and it should have only restored the sentence passed by the trial Court.
The question of sentence is normally in the discretion of the trial Court and the High Court can enhance the sentence only if it is satisfied that the sentence imposed by the trial Court is unduly lenient, or, that in passing the order of sentence, the trial Court had manifestly failed to consider the relevant facts.
The sentence of two months simple imprisonment imposed by the trial Court was not so unduly or manifestly lenient as not to meet the ends of justice.
