On 30.4.1986, a Notification was issued by the Government of India amending the scheme under the in conformity with Section 24 of the Cine Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981, with retrospective effect from 1.10.1984.
The effect of the amendment was to extend the benefit of the Provident Funds Act and the Scheme thereunder to the Cine Workers and Cinema theatre workers.
The appellants challenged the validity of the Notification before the High Court by way of writ Petitions, contending that the said Notification was ultra vires the provisions of the Provident Fund Act since the Central Government could not extent the scheme to an establishment which is neither an industry nor a notified establishment under Section 3(b) of the Act and there was no liability under the scheme to make contribution towards Provident Fund in respect of the employees who ceased to be Cinema workers before 30.4.1986.
It was further contended that calling upon the employers to contribute arrears from the date the scheme was made applicable led to hardship and injustice and hence violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The Writ Petitions were dismissed by the High Court.
In their appeals to this Court, the appellants contended that so long as the Notification as required by the proviso to Section 1(3)(b) of the Provident Funds Act has not been issued, the Act cannot be made applicable to them and even assuming that Section 24 of the Cinema Theatre Workers Act takes the place of the required Notification, an express notification under Section 5 would be required.
It was also contended 478 that under Section 6 of the Provident Funds Act the liability is fixed only for employers 'share of contribution and not the employees 'share, and since paragraph 30 of the Provident Fund Scheme was not made applicable, there arose no liability of the employers to pay employees 'share and as the appellants were being asked to pay the contribution of the employees ' share retrospectively without the corresponding right of employer to recover it from the wages of employees, it was harsh and unjust.
On behalf of the Respondents, it was contended that it might be possible for the appellants to make deduction from subsequent wages of workmen with the consent of the Inspector as required under the third proviso to para 32(1) of the Provident Fund Scheme.
Partly allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
Section 24 of the Cine Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981 has fulfilled the purpose of the Notification which the Central Government could have issued under Section 1(3)(b) of the Provident Funds Act read with the proviso.
Therefore, no further Notification as contemplated by Section 1(3)(b) of the Provident Funds Act was necessary.
Section 24 has taken the place of the Notification contemplated by Section 1(3)(b) of the Provident Funds Act read with the proviso thereto.
Therfore, the Provident Funds Act became applicable to the theatres who employ five or more workers with effect from 1st October, 1984.
Again in view of Section 6 of the Provident Funds Act, the employers became liable to pay their contribution to the fund as soon as the Act came into force i.e.w.e.f.1st October, 1984.
[488B D] M/s. Orissa Cement Ltd. vs union of India, [1962] (Suppl) 3 SCR 837 and M/s. Lohia Machines Ltd.v.
Union of India and Ors., , distinguished.
It is only by the Notification dated 30.4.1986 that the Provident Funds Scheme was amended so as to be made applicable in respect of the cinema theatres employing five or more persons.
Without such a Notification the Scheme has been made applicable to the cinema theatres covered by the Notification with effect from 1st October, 1984.
This could be done in view of not only the provisions of Section 5(2) of the Provident Funds Act but also in view of Section 7(1) of the Provident Funds Act.
Both these provisions confer express powers of making the 479 Scheme applicable retrospectively.[488E G] 3.
It is obvious from paras 30 and 32 of the Provident Funds Scheme that the employer has to pay the contribution of the employee 's share, but he has a right to recover that payment by deducting the same from the wages due and payable to the employees.
It is significant to note that the deduction is not from the wages payable for any period but only from the wages for the period in respect of which the contribution is payable and no deduction could be made from any other wages payable to the employees.
In other words, the payment of employees 'contribution by the employer with the corresponding right to deduct the same from the wages of the employees could be only for the current period during which the employer has also to pay his contribution.
[489A E] 4.
In the instant case, for the period from 1st October, 1984 up to the date of the Notification i.e.30th April 1986 the employer has paid the full wages to the employees since during that period, there was no scheme applicable to his establishment.
By retrospectively applying the scheme, he could not be asked to pay the employees ' contribution for the period antecedent to the notification.
The Act and the Scheme neither permit any such payment nor deduction .
The employer cannot be saddled with the liability to pay the employees ' contribution for the retrospective period, since he has no right to deduct the same from the future wages payable to the employees.
[489F G] 5.
The third proviso to paragraph 32(1)of the Provident Funds Scheme could be taken advantage of by the employer only where no deduction has been made from the wages of the employees due to accidental mistake or clerical error when the scheme is operative.
Such deduction which has not been made by accidental mistake or clerical error, could be made from the subsequent wages with the consent in writing of the Inspector concerned.
The present case is not covered by the third proviso.
The employer could not have made the deduction prior to the notification dated 30th April, 1986 since the Scheme was not applicable then.
The Scheme has been given retrospective effect w.e.f.
1st October, 1984.
The employer, therefore, cannot take the benefit of the third proviso to para 32(1) for deducting the employees 'contribution in their wages payable in future.[489H;490A C]
