The petitioner was convicted of murder and was sentenced to death by the Sessions Court on 13.12.1978.
His appeal to the High Court and Special Leave petition to this Court were dismissed.
His mercy petitions to the Government and to the President of India were also rejected.
The execution of the sentence remained stayed till it stood vacated on 11.10.1988 on dismissal of a writ petition** under Article 32 of the Constitution filed by his brother for conversion of the death sentence into one of life imprisonment on the ground of delay in its execution.
On 18.11.1988 the petitioner again filed a mercy petition before the Governor and his execution was once more stayed, and since then he was awaiting the final outcome of his petition.
meanwhile, on 24.12.1990, a prisoner sent a letter praying for release of the petitioner, which was treated as a writ petition on behalf of the convict under Article 32 of the Constitution.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that the death sentence awarded to him should be quashed as there had been inexcusable delay in executing the same.
On consideration on nature and effect of the delay in execution of the sentence after the petitioner filed mercy petition on 18.11.1988, in the light of the principles laid down in Triveniben 's case**.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Once a petition for conversion of death sentence into one of life imprisonment is rejected, the plea raised in the petition so 463 rejected, cannot be permitted to be raised by repeated petitions.
But this does not deprive the convict of his right to renew the prayer on fresh circumstances arising later and, therefore, not considered.
[465B C] 2.
In the instant case, the petitioner could not succeed on the basis of the delay prior to October, 1988 as it had been considered in the earlier petition which was dismissed; but the fact that the petitioner had been continuously detained in prison since 1972 was not rendered completely irrelevant and should be considered merely as a circumstance assuming significance as a result of the relevant circumstance, arising subsequent to the judgment rendered in October, 1988.
[465E F, 467C D] 3.
The initial reason for the further delay has been a fresh mercy petition filed by the petitioner.
Althought the stay of the execution was certainly appropriate in the event of not rejecting the prayer at once, yet the matter should have been disposed of expeditiously and not kept in abeyance as was done.
If the concerned officers had bestowed the necessary attention to the matter and devoted the time its urgency needed, undoubtedly, the entire process of the consideration of the questions referred would have been completed within a reasonable period without leaving any yawning or "embarrassing gap".
There had been an avoidable delay considerable in the totality of circumstances, for which the petitioner was in no way responsible.
[466D E; 467A B] 4.
The only relief a convict awaiting execution of death sentence can get from this Court on the ground of delay is conversion of the sentence into that of life imprisonment.
[467F] 5.
In view of all the circumstances of the case, the petitioner 's death sentence is substituted by imprisonment for life and he would be governed and dealt with as a life convict for all purposes.
[476E, G] **Smt.
Tribeniben vs State of Gujarat, [1989] 1 S.C.C. 678, followed.
