On the basis of the results of the combined Civil Services Examination held by the Union Public Service Commission for appointment to several Services and the position in the combined merit list for the Indian Police Service and Police Services, Group `B ' the appellant was appointed to the Delhi Andaman and Nicobar Police Service,also Known as DANIP.
Subsequently when certain vacancies arose in the Indian Police Service, due to selected candidates not joining the Service, and only the reserved category vacancies were filled up by the candidates, who had been earlier appointed in DANIP Service, the appellant who came to occupy top position, represented to the authorities for filling the general vacancies also, but his request was turned down .Hence the appellant filed writ application before the High Court, which was dismissed in limine .
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appellant it was contended that since ultimately several vacancies in the general category of the IPS remained unfilled, he was entitled to be appointed in one of them, that since 54 vacancies were notified for general category and he was found qualified for the appointment, the respondent could not refuse to fill up the vacancies, and there was no justification to refuse to follow the procedure adopted in similar situation with respect to the reserved category, in regard to the general category vacancies also and that in view of the relevant statutory rules, the authorities were under a duty to continue with the process of filling up the vacancies until nonremained vacant, and by keeping the posts unfilled, they had acted arbitrarily.
568 On behalf of the respondent Union of India it was contended that the tentative service allocation for IPS was completed before the commencement of the foundational course for the IPS, and the process of final service allocation was closed after filling up certain vacancies, which had arisen, since the process for recruitment for the next year had already started, and hence the additional vacancies arising later remained unfilled, that the process followed in connection with the reserved category, was not followed in regard to the general category vacancies on account of vital differences obtaining in the relevant conditions in the two categories, and hence there was no discrimination or arbitrariness, in keeping the general category vacancies unfilled.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: 1.1 Even if vacancies are notified for appointment and adequate number of candidates are found fit, the successful candidates do not acquire an indefeasible right to be appointed.
Ordinarily, the notification merely amounts to an invitation to qualified candidates to apply for recruitment and on their selection they do not acquire any right to the post.
Unless the relevant recruitment rules so indicate, the State is under no legal duty to fill up all or any of the vacancies.
However, it does not mean that the State has the licence of acting in an arbitrary manner.
The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons.
And if the vacancies or any of them are filled up, the State is bound to respect the comparative merit of the candidates, as reflected at the recruitment test, and no discrimination can be permitted.
[572A C] State of Haryana vs Subhash Chander Marwaha and Others,[1974] 1 SCR 165; Miss Neelima Shangla vs State of Haryana and Others, ; and Jitendra Kumar and Others vs State of Punjab and others, , referred to.
1.2 The appellant had not acquired a right to be appointed against the vacancy arising later on the basis of any of the rules, namely, Rule 4 of the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954, Rules 3,4,6 and 7 of the Indian Police Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1954 and Regulations 2(1)(a) and (c), 8 and 13 of the Indian Police Service (Appointment by Competitive Examination) Regulations, 1955.These Provisions do not indicate that all the notified vacancies are to be filled up.[573G,574B] 1.3 From the materials placed before the Court it is fully estab 569 lished that there has not been any arbitrariness whatsoever on the part of the respondent in filling up the vacancies in question or other vacancies.
The process of final selection had to be closed at some stage as was actually done.
A decision in this regard was accordingly taken and the process for further allotment to any vacancy arising later was closed.
It is not material if in pursuance of a decision already taken before closing the process of final selection, the formal appointments were concluded later.
What is relevant is to see as to when the process of final selection was closed.
Mere completing the formalities dose not give any right to appointment.
[574E G] 1.4 The decision to adopt a different policy with respect to filling up of the reserved vacancies is justified on account of the special circumstances.
The decision to depart from the confirmed policy was taken after consideration by the authorities of the position in regard to unavailability of qualified candidates from year to year adversely affecting the desired strength of the reserved candidates in the services and cannot be condemned on the grounds of arbitrariness and illegal discrimination.
[575B]
