The appellant was a Manager in one of the branches of the Respondent Bank.
In 1985, there was a departmental enquiry against him on the charges that he discounted a cheque for Rs.50,000 drawn in the name of some other person to accommodate one of his colleagues and when the cheque returned unpaid, he retained the same for about two months without taking action for realisation of the amount.
An enquiry was conducted by the Commissioner for Vigilance Inquiry from the Central Vigilance Commission, following the procedure prescribed by the Syndicate Bank Officer Employees ' (Disciplinary & Appeal) Regulations.
The Inquiry Officer submitted his report holding that the charges were proved against the appellant.
The Respondent Bank referred the matter to the Central Vigilance Commission for advice and the Commission recommended the punishment of compulsory retirement.
After considering the Inquiry Report and after affording opportunity to the appellant, the Disciplinary Authority imposed on him the 577 penalty of compulsory retirement.
On appeal, the appellate authority concurred with the findings recorded and the punishment imposed.
The appellant filed a Writ Petition before the High Court challenging the order of his compulsory retirement.
The High Court declined to interfere with the order.
Hence the present appeal, by special leave.
The appellant also filed a Writ Petition before this Court challenging the validity of the direction dated 21.7.1984 issued by the Finance Ministry, following which the Respondent Bank has imposed on him the penalty of compulsory retirement.
On behalf of the appellant/petitioner it was contended that the advice given by the Central Vigilance Commission was blindly followed by the Respondent Bank as it was made binding on it by virtue of the directions dated 21.7.84 issued by the Ministry of Finance and in that process the merits of the case and the statutory regulations governing departmental inquiries were ignored.
It was also contended that the subject matter of the inquiry was only regarding irregularities in banking practice and since the interest of the Bank was not affected as he had the money recovered and credited to the Bank with interest thereon, the alleged misdemeanour did not warrant any major penalty like compulsory retirement, which even according to the Respondent Bank, was too harsh.
On behalf of the Respondent Bank it was contended that it had independently considered the material on record notwithstanding the advice given by the Central Vigilance Commission and since the orders did not refer to the circulars or to the advice of Central Vigilance Commission, the punishment imposed on the appellant/petitioner was not vitiated by extraneous influences.
Allowing the matters, this Court HELD: 1.
The Respondent Bank itself felt that the compulsory retirement recommended by the Central Vigilance Commission was too harsh and excessive on the appellant/petitioner in view of his excellent performance and unblemished antecedent service.
The Bank made two representations, one in 1986 and another in 1987 to the Central Vigilance Commission for taking a lenient view of the matter and to advise lesser punishment.
Apparently, those representations were not accepted by the Commission.
The disciplinary authority and the appellate authority therefore had no choice in the matter.
They had to impose the punishment of compulsory retirement as advised by the Central Vigi 578 lance Commission.
The advice was binding on the authorities in view of the directive of the Ministry of Finance issued on 21.7.1984, followed by two circulars issued by the successive Chief Executives of the Bank.
The disciplinary and appellate authorities might not have referred to the directive of the Ministry of Finance or the Bank circulars.
They might not have stated in their orders that they were bound by the punishment proposed by the Central Vigilance Commission.
But it is reasonably foreseeable and needs no elaboration that they could not have ignored the advice of the Commission.
They could not have imposed a lesser punishment without the concurrence of the Commission.
Indeed, they could have ignored the advice of the Commission and imposed a lesser punishment only at their peril.
[586F H; 587 A C] 2.1 But for the Finance Ministry 's directive dated 21.7.1984, the advice tendered by the Central Vigilance Commission is not binding on the Bank or the punishment authority; it is not obligatory upon the punishing authority to accept the advice of the Central Vigilance Commission.
[588C] 2.2 The Ministry of Finance has no jurisdiction to issue such a directive to Banking institutions.
The Government may regulate the Banking institutions within the power located under the .
Even though Section 8 thereof empowers the Government to issue directions in regard to matters of policy, there cannot be any uniform policy with regard to different disciplinary matters and much less there could be any policy in awarding punishment to the delinquent officers in different cases.
The punishment to be imposed depends upon the nature of every case and the gravity of the misconduct proved.
The authorities have to exercise their judicial discretion having regard to the facts and circumstances of each case.
They cannot act under the dictation of the Central Vigilance Commission or of the Central Government in the exercise of their power and the imposition of punishment on the delinquent officer.
Therefore the directive of the Ministry of Finance is wholly without jurisdiction and contrary to the statutory Regulations governing disciplinary matters and is quashed.
[588D H; 589A] A.N.D 'silva vs Union of India, [1962] Suppl.
S.C.R. 968, relied on.
De Smith 's Judicial Review of Administrative Action, 4th Edn.
p. 309, referred to.
579 3.
the Chairman of the Respondent Bank is directed to withdraw the circular letters dated 27.7.1984 and 8.9.1986 issued in furtherance of the Finance Ministry 's directive dated 21.7.1984.
[589C] [Setting aside the orders of the disciplinary authority and the appellate authority, this Court directed the disciplinary authority to dispose of the case in accordance with law and observations made in the judgment.]
