A Hindu widow executed a gift deed in 1954 of the entire estate inherited by her from her husband in favour of the appellant, one of her daughters.
This led to the filling of two cross suits one by the appellant for permanent injunction basing her claim on the gift deed and the other by the respondent, another daughter of the widow 's for declaration and partition assailing the validity of the gift deed and claiming reversioners ' right after death of the mother in 1968.
The trial court decreed appellant 's suit on adverse possession and estoppel, but not on section 14 of the , as in its view the widow who executed the gift deed in 1954, was incompetent to alienate widow 's estate by gift permanently.
The appellate court affirmed the finding of the trial court on section 14 of the Act, but opined that the appellant could not acquire any right by `estoppel under section 41 of Transfer of Property Act, against the reversioners by reasons of the widow 's conduct '.
It allowed the appeal of the respondent and dismissed the suit of the appellant holding that adverse 600 possession against the widow was not adverse against reversioners, and the next reversioner was entitled to recover the possession of the property or his share in it within 12 years from the date of the death of the widow.
In second appeal the High Court, treating the finding of the trial court on adverse possession as a finding of fact, held that possession of the appellant must be deemed to be on behalf of the other co sharers in the absence of any evidence before ouster of the other sister.
Aggrieved, the appellant filed the appeals by special leave to this Court.
On the questions whether: (1) a Hindu widow could alienate by gift the entire estate inherited by her from her husband in favour of one of the female reversioners prior to enforcement of Act 30 of 1956, and if so, what was the nature of right that the donee got under law? and (2) the donee became an owner of the widow 's estate, a limited owner, an owner with some right or title so as to acquire rights of absolute ownership under section 14 of the Act or a trespasser and acquired rights for adverse possession by perfecting her rights against the doner only or it was essential to prescribe rights against reversioners as well? Dismissing the appeals, this Court HELD: 1.1 Prior to the coming into force of Act 30 of 1956 a Hindu widow succeeding or inheriting any property from her husband or as widow of predeceased son, held limited interest known as Hindu women 's estate, under the Hindu Women 's Right to Property Act, 1937.
However, she had the right to enjoy or even destroy or dispose of the property or alienate it but such destruction or alienation should have been impressed with legal necessity or for religious or charitable purposes or for spiritual welfare of the husband.
Necessary consequences that flowed from an alienation for legal necessity was that the property vested in the transferee or alienee, and the reversioners were precluded from assailing its validity.
Since such an estate could not be alienated under Hindu Law except in certain circumstances and for specific purpose, the holder or the estate was known as limited owner.
{613C D;614F G] 1.2 The expression `limited owner ' could not be understood except as it was interpreted and understood in Hindu Law.
The term commonly means, a person with restricted rights as opposed to full owner with absolute rights.
In relation to property, absolute or complete or full ownership comprises various constituents such as the right to 601 possess, actual or constructive, power to enjoy, that is, to determine manner of use extending even to destroying, right to alienate, transfer or dispose of etc.
Any restriction or limitation on exercise of these rights may result in limited or qualified ownership.
For instance restriction on enjoyment of property or its alienation.
Such restriction or limitation may arise by operation of law or by deed or instrument.
The limited ownership of female Hindu in Hindu law arose as a matter of law.
A Hindu widow, according to different schools, Benaras, Bengal or Mithila and even in Bombay inherited or succeeded to property whether of male or female as a limited owner and held a limited estate only.
[613D; 614B D] Janaki Ammal vs Karayanaswami, [1916] p. 43 I.A. p. 207 and Jaisri vs Raj Diwan Dubey,, [1961] 2SCR 559, referred to.
1.3 Prior to 1956, any alienation made by a Hindu widow or widow 's estate prohibited by law or being beyond permissible limits could utmost create in the alienee temporary and transitory ownership precarious in nature and vulnerable in character open to challenge if any attempt was made to cloud reversioners ' interest.
The alienee 's possession may be good against the world and her right in property may not be impeachable by the widow, but her interest qua the reversioner was to continue in possession at the maximum till the lifetime of her donor or transferor.
It was life interest, loosely, as the duration of interest created under invalid transfer came to an end not on death of donee or transferee but donor or transferor.
Such transfer stripped the widow of her rights and she could not acquire any rights under section 14, and being voidable, and not void, could be avoided by reversioners including government taking by escheat; but the widow was bounded by it.
[615A, E F] Kamala Devi vs Bachu Lal Gupta, ; Collector of Masuli Patam vs Cavoly Venoata, [1861] 8 M.I.A. 529; Natwalal Punjabhai & Anr.
vs Dadubhai Manubhai & Ors., ; and Radhey Krishan Singh & Ors.
vs Shiv Shankar Singh & Ors., , referred to.
2.1 An alienee from a Hindu widow prior to 1956 did not acquire limited estate or widow 's estate, nor was she a limited owner who could get any benefit under section 14 of the Act.
It was not even a life estate except loosely, as the right to continue in possession was not related with her span of life but of the transferor that is the Hindu widow.
[616G H;617A] Smt.
Chinti vs Smt.
Daultu, AIR 1968 Delhi 264, disapproved.
602 Sulochana Kuer, vs Doomati Kuer, AIR 1970 Patna 352; Anath Bandhu vs Chanchala Bala, AIR 1976 Calcutta 303; Parmeshwari vs Santokhi, AIR 1977 Punjab 141; Gaddam Vankayama vs Gaddam Veerayya, AIR 1957 AP 230 and Marudakkal vs Arumugha., AIR 1958 Madras, referred to.
Badri Pershad vs Smt.
Kanso Devi, ; held inapplicable.
2.2 In the instant case the alienation by gift of entire widow 's estate being contrary to law did not bind the reversioner who could file a suit after the death of the widow.
The appellant could not claim to have acquired title to the property under the gift deed.
Nor had she become a limited owner under Hindu Law which could mature into full ownership when the Act came into force.
In fact such possession was not backed by any title as against reversioner which could preclude her from bringing the suit for declaration.
[616B] 3.
As regards the adverse possession, the High Court was not justified in concluding that it was a question of fact.
Possession under a gift deed which was found to be invalid as it was not permitted under Hindu Law was on general principle contrary to law and as such could be adverse.
The appellant could not acquire any right by adverse posession against reversioner during life time of her mother.
Her claim was rightly negatived by the first appellate court.
Even assuming that the alienee had perfected adverse possession against the donor, it was not sufficient to clothe her with right or title in the property so as to deprive the reversioners of their right to claim the property after the death of the widow, inasmuch as in the case of an alienation by Hindu widow without legal necessity, the reversioners were not bound to institute a declaratory suit during the lifetime of the widow.
They could wait till her death and then sue the alienee for possession of the alienated property treating the alienation as a nullity.
[617F H;618A B] Radha Rani vs Hanuman Prasad, AIR 1966 SC 216, relied on.
4.1 Being retrospective in operation section 14(1) deals with rights of female Hindus both before and after the Act came into force, and the meaning of female Hindu prior to 1956 has to be understood in the light of Hindu Law as it prevailed then.
The section enlarged the estate of those female Hindus who would otherwise have limited owners.
This result flows by reading the first part with the last which uses the expression `held by her as full owner thereof and not as a limited 603 owner '.
A limited owner became a full owner provided she was a female Hindu who was possessed of any property acquired before the commencement of the Act.
Therefore, mere being female Hindus was not sufficient.
She should have been of that class of female Hindus who could on existence of other circumstances were capable of becoming full owners.
Female Hindu could become absolute owner of property possessed by her on the date the Act came into force only if she was a limited owner whereas she would become absolute owner 1956 of the property of which she would otherwise have been a limited owner.
[609B E;611F] Bai Vijia vs Thakorbhai Chelabhai, ; , relied on.
4.2 On a reading of section 14(1) the conclusion is irrisistible that a limited owner became a full owner provided she was in possession of the property on the date of enactment of the Act.
Effect of Explanation appended to the section was that a female Hindu became absolute owner not only in respect of inherited property but even of property received by way of gift or on partition or in lieu of maintenance etc.
provided she was a limited owner.
And not that it enlarged the estate of even those who were not limited owner.
Any other construction would militate against the otherwise clear meaning of sub section (1).
[608G H;609F H] 5.
did not obliterate Hindu Law.
What has ceased to be operative after coming into force of the Act under section 4 is text or rule etc.
for which provision is the Act.
And under section 4(2) any law in force immediately before the commencement of the Act ceased to have effect if it was inconsistent with any provision of the Act.
Therefore, except to the extent provision has been made in section 14, that is, enlargement of the estate of limited owner, the Hindu Law in other regards remains operative.
There is no provision in the Act which deprives reversioners of their rights except to the extent mentioned in section 14.[617C D] 6.
Marginal note is usually not resorted to for construing meaning of a section, particularly, when the language is plain and simple.
A section has to be read in its entirety as one composite unit without bifurcating or ignoring any part of it.
[608D E] V. Tulsamma vs Shesha Reddy, ; , referred to.
Eramma vs Verrupana, ; Gummalapura Taggina 604 Matada Kotturuswami vs Setra Veeravva & Ors., [1959] Supp ; 1 SCR 968, ; Mangal Singh vs Smt.
Rattno, ; Munna Lal vs Raj Kumar., AIR 1962 SC 1495 Sukhram vs Gauri Shankar, ; ; Kuldeep Singh vs Surain Singh, [1988] Andhra Law Times, Gulwant Kaur vs Mohinder Singh; , ; Maharaja Pillai Lakshmi Ammal vs Maharaja Pillai T. Pillai, ; and Jagannathan Pillai vs Kunjithapadam Pillai.
, ; , referred to.
Mulla 's Hindu Law, 16th Edn.
para 174, and Mayne 's Hindu Law, 12th Edn. para 671, referred to.
