The Diesel Locomotive Works, Indian Railway, invited tenders for disposal of one lot of Ferrous scrap.
One of the conditions mentioned in the tender notice was that the earnest money should be deposited by cash or by demand draft drawn of the State Bank of India.
The appellant, one of the intending purchasers, submitted his tender accompanied by a cheque of Union Bank of India drawn on its own branch.
The tender of the appellant, being the highest, was accepted and tenders of respondent No. 1 and some others were rejected.
The Tender Committee had verified from Union Bank of India the bona fide of appellant 's cheque and then only decided to accept its tender.
Respondent No. 1 filed writ petition in the High Court challenging the rejection of its tender, and acceptance of appellant 's tender on the ground that the latter did not comply with the necessary condition for payment of earnest money with the tender.
The appellant contended that it had substantially complied with the requirement by sending with its tender a banker 's cheque marked and certified by the Union Bank of India as good for payment.
The High Court opined that respondent 's tender was rightly for failure to deposit the earnest money, but allowed the writ petition holding that the appellant also did not satisfy the condition regarding payment of the earnest money since the cheque sent was from a bank other than the State Bank of India as stipulated, and as such the authorities had no power to accept appellant 's tender.
Aggrieved, the appellant preferred the appeal by special leave to this Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court 697 HELD: 1.
As a matter of general proposition it cannot be laid down that an authority inviting tenders in bound to give effect to every term mentioned in the notice in meticulous detail, and is not entitled to waive even a technical irregularity of little or no significance.
The requirement in a tender notice can be classified into two categories those which lay down the essential conditions of eligibility, and the other which are merely ancilliary or subsidiary with the main object to be achieved by the condition.
In the first case the authority issuing the tender may be required to enforce them rigidly.
In the other case it must be open to the authority to deviate from and not to insist upon the strict literal compliance of the condition in appropriate case.
[699E G] 2.
In the instant case, in submitting the cheque drawn on the Union Bank of India and not on the State Bank of India, the relevant condition of the tender notice was not obeyed literally; but the said cheque must be treated as sufficient for the purpose of achieving the object of the condition and the Tender Committee took the abundant caution by a further verification from the bank.
In the situation it could not be said that the Diesel Locomotive Works had no authority to waive the technical literal compliance of the clause, regarding manner of payment of earnest money especially when it was in its interest not to reject the said bid which was the highest.
[699D E; 700F G] GJ Fernandez vs State of Karnataka & Ors., ; and Sita Ram Jhunjhunwala vs Bombay bullion Association Ltd. & Anr., , relied on.
Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs International Airport Authority of India & Ors., ; ; Spargo 's Case, ; M/s B.D Yadav and M.R. Meshram vs Administrator of the City of Nagpur, and T.V. Subharda Amma vs Kerala Board of Revenue and Others, , referred to.
