The partners of the assays firm were members of a HUF, which was carrying on business with borrowed capital.
Consequent on partial partition in the family and partition of the family business, the members formed the assays firm.
There was a debit balance in the capital account of the family which was transferred to the personal accounts of the partners of the firm.
The firm, which continued the family business and took over the business assets and the liabilities of the HUF, claimed that the interest paid on the debit balance was an allowable deduction in the computation of income since it had taken over the debit balance in consideration of the goodwill of the business.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner held that the HUF business had no goodwill.
On appeal, the Tribunal held that the HUF had a very long standing and flourishing business, and hence the firm could be deemed to have taken over the liability in consideration of the sale of goodwill and the interest paid thereon was an allowable deduction.
On a reference made by the Tribunal the High Court held that the goodwill of the HUF business was never sold or purchased, and that the partners of the firm were bound to take over the HUF 's liability, since it was that of the family of which they were members, and became liable to discharge their share of the debt.
Allowing the appeals preferred by the assessee, this Court HELD: 1.1 Clause (iii) of Section 36(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1922 applies only where capital has been borrowed for the purposes of the business or profession.
The amount of interest paid on the borrowed capital is an allowable deduction.
It cannot be disputed that if the goodwill is purchased out of the borrowed capital, the interest paid on the borrowed capital is an allowable deduction.
[923B] 921 1.2 In the instant case, there was only a partial partition in the family, particularly with regard to HUF business and it was not necessary for the firm to have taken over the debit balance of the HUF, since the HUF had other properties.
[923D] 1.3 The Tribunal has correlated the debit balance to the purchase of goodwill since the firm had taken over the business.
The High Court has held that there was no sale of goodwill by the HUF to the firm in view of the absence of related entries in the books of account of HUF.
The conclusion of the High Court is as much an inference as that the Tribunal on the same set of facts and circumstances.
The Tribunal was right in holding that the firm had taken over the debit balance in consideration of the sale of the goodwill and this conclusion is neither unreasonable or unwarranted, nor arbitrary or unjust.
The High Court ought not to interfere with such conclusion even if another view is possible.
Besides, the relevant point to be considered is the rights of the assessee and not the liability of the individual members of the HUF.
The claim of the assessee for allowable deduction of the interest paid cannot be defeated by the existence of personal liability of the members of HUF.
[923C, E, F]
