The petitioner was convicted for murder and sentenced to life imprisonment, which was confirmed by the High Court.
Later he filed a Writ Petition before the High Court for premature release on the plea that he was entitled to be considered for release under the Rajasthan Prisons (Shortening of Sentences) Rules, 1958 notwithstanding the insertion of Section 433A in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 with effect from 18.12.1978, just two days before his conviction.
It was contended that Section 433A Cr. P.C. which places an embargo of 14 years imprisonment before premature release could not curtail the constitutional power vested in the Governor by virtue of Article 161 of the Constitution.
The High Court, dismissed the Writ Petition on the ground that the petitioner 's representations to the Government and State Home Minister were pending consideration.
However, the High Court directed that the two representations of the petitioner should be disposed of within one month.
Unable to secure his release from the High Court as also from the State Government, the petitioner filed the present Write Petition before this Court, contending that the insertion of Section 433A in the Code of Criminal Procedure was invalid; that in the absence of guidelines under articles 72/161 of Constitution, Section 433A Cr.
P.C. could not apply to life convicts; that the Rajasthan Prisons (Shortening of Sentences) Rules, 1958 would prevail over Section 433A Cr.
P.C., and that the constitutional guarantee under Articles 14 and 21 was violated.
Dismissing the Writ Petition, this Court HELD: 1.1.
It is only when a legislature which has no power to legislate frames a legislation so camouflaging it as to appear to be within its competence when it knows it is not, it can be said that the legislation so enacted is colourable legislation.
If in pith and substance the legislation does not belong to the subject falling within the limits of its power but is outside it, the mere form of the legislation will not be determinate of the legislative competence.
[871C; 872C] 1.2.
It is not a case of legislative incompetence to enact section 433A.
No such contention was raised.
Besides the question of vires of section 433A of the Code has been determined by the Constitution Bench of this Court in Maru Ram 's case.
This Court Repelled all the thrusts aimed at challenging the constitutional validity of section 433A. [871A] 860 1.3.
It is no body 's contention that Parliament was not competent to amend the Criminal Procedure Code by which section 433A was inserted.
Whether or not the connecting Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill ought to have cleared or not was matter left to the wisdom of the Lok Sabha.
Merely because the Criminal Procedure Bill was made law and the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill was passed by the Rajya Sabha did not obligate the Lok Sabha to clear it.
The Lok Sabha could have its own views on the proposed Indian Penal Code amendments.
It may agree with the executive 's policy reflected in the Bill, with or without modifications, or not at all.
Merely because in the subsequent instructions issued by the letter of July 10, 1979 and the accompanying note, the Joint Secretary had interlinked the two Bills, the Lok Sabha was under no obligation to adopt the measure as such representation could not operate as estoppel against it.
It is obvious that no question of mala fides on the part of the legislature was involved in the enactment of one legislation and failure to enact another.
There is no question of `legislative fraud ' or `colourbale legislation ' involved in the backdrop of the legislative history of section 433A of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[872D H; 873A] 1.4.
In the present case if both the Bills had become law, then in understanding or construing one legislation or the other, the scheme common to both would be kept in view and be permitted to interact.
But where the linkage does not exist on account of the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill not having become law, section 433A cannot be read down to apply to only those classes of capital offences to which it would have applied had the said Bill been passed by the Lok Sabha in the terms in which it was approved by the Rajya Sabha.
The language of section 433A is clear and unambiguous and does not call for extrinsic aid for its interpretation.
To read down or interpret section 433A of the Code with the aid of the changes proposed by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill would tantamount to treating the said Bills forming part of the Indian Penal Code, which is clearly impermissible.
To put such an interpretation with the aid of such extrinsic material would result in violence to the plain language of section 433A of the Code.
[873D F] Maru Ram vs Union of India, ; , followed.
K.C. Gajapati Narayan Deo vs State of Orissa, ; and Sonapur Tea Co. Ltd. vs Must Mariruznessa, ; , relied on.
861 State of Himachal Pradesh vs A Parent of a student of Medical College, Simla, [1985] 3 SCC 169 and W.R. Moram vs Deputy Commissioner of Taxation for N.S.W., , referred to.
The law governing suspension, remission and commutation of sentence is both statutory and constitutional.
The stage for the exercise of this power generally speaking is post judicial, i.e., after the judicial process has come to an end.
The duty to judge and to award appropriate punishment to the guilty is a judicial function which culminates by a judgment pronounced in accordance with law.
After the judicial function thus ends the executive function of giving effect to the judicial verdict commences.
[873G H; 874A] 2.2.
One who could have been visited with the extreme punishment of death but on account of the sentencing court 's generosity was sentenced to the lesser punishment of imprisonment for life and another who actually was sentenced to death but on account of executive generosity his sentence was commuted under section 433(a) for imprisonment for life have been treated under section 433A as belonging to that class of prisoners who do not deserve to be released unless they have completed 14 Years of actual incarceration.
Thus, the effect of section 433A is to restrict the exercise of power under sections 432 and 433 by the stipulation that the power will not be so exercised as would enable the two categories of convicts referred to in section 433A to freedom before they have completed 14 years of actual imprisonment.
This is the legislative policy which is clearly discernible from the plain language of section 433A of the Code.
Such prisoners constitute a single class and have, therefore, been subjected to the uniform requirement of suffering atleast 14 years of internment.
[874G H; 875A C] 3.
The expression `life imprisonment ' must be read in the context of section 45 IPC.
Read so, it would ordinarily mean imprisonment for the full or complete span of life.
Section 65, 116, 120 and 511 of the Indian Penal Code fix the term of imprisonment thereunder as a fraction of the maximum fixed for the principal offence.
It is for the purpose of working out this fraction that it became necessary to provide under section 57 that imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as equivalent to imprisonment for 20 years.
If such a provision had not been made it would have been impossible to work out the fraction of an indefinite term.
In order to work out the fraction of terms of punishment provided in the above sections it was imperative to lay down the equivalent term for life imprisonment.
[875G; 876C E] 862 Gopal Goads vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; affirmed.
4.1 Unless the sentence for life imprisonment is commuted or remitted by the appropriate authority under the provisions of the relevant law, a convict is bound in law to serve the entire life term in prison; the rules framed under the Prisons Act or life statute may enable such a convict to earn remissions but such remissions will not entitle him to release before he has completed 14 years of incarceration in view of section 433A of the Code unless of course power has been exercised under Article 72/161 of the Constitution.
Where a person has been sentenced to imprisonment for life the remissions earned by him during his internment in prison under the relevant remission rules have a limited scope and must be confined to the scope and ambit of the said rules and do not acquire significance until the sentence is remitted under section 432, in which case the remission would be subject to limitation of section 433A of the Code, or constitutional power has been exercised under Articles 72/161 of the Constitution.
[878D E] 4.2.
Articles 72 and 161 confer the clemency power of pardon, etc., on the President and the State Governors, respectively.
This constitutional power would override the statutory power contained in sections 432 and 433 and the limitation of section 433A of the Code as well as the power conferred by sections 54 and 55 IPC.
No doubt, this power has to be exercised by the President/Governor on the advice of his Council of Ministers.
[880A B] 4.3.
Though in Maru Ram 's case, this Court recommended the framing of guidelines for the exercise of power under Articles 72/161 of the Constitution of India, it had no binding effect on the Constitution Bench which decided Kehar Singh 's case.
Nor has this Court said anything in Kehar Singh 's case with regard to using the provisions of extent Remission Rules as guidelines for the exercise of clemency powers.
[881H; 882A] Maru Ram vs Union of India, ; ; Kehar Singh vs Union of India, ; ; Bhagirath vs Delhi Administration; , and Gopal Godse vs State of Maharashtra; , , affirmed.
It is true that Articles 72/161 make use of two expressions `remissions ' with regard to punishment and `remit ' in relation to sentence but it is not proper to express any opinion as to the content and amplitude of these two expressions in the abstract, in the absence of a fact situation.
[882B] 863 6.1 The hypothetical question whether it was permissible in law to grant conditional premature release to a life convict even before completion of 14 years of actual imprisonment, which release would tantamount to the prisoner serving time for the purpose of section 433A Cr.
P.C., need not be answered without being fully aware of the conditions imposed for release.
In each case, the question whether the grant of conditional premature release answers the test laid down by this Court in Maru Ram 's case, would depend on the nature of the conditions imposed and the circumstances in which the order is passed and is to be executed.
No general observation can be made.
[882C H] Maru Ram vs Union of India, ; ; referred to.
In the instant case, petitioner has not completed 14 years of actual incarceration and as such he cannot invoke sections 43 and 433 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
His continued detention is consistent with section 433A of the Code and there is nothing on record to show that it is otherwise illegal and void.
The outcome of his clemency application under the Constitution is not put in issue in the present proceedings if it has been rejected, and if the same is pending despite the directive of the High Court it would be open to the petitioner to approach the High Court for the compliance of its order.
[883E F]
