The petitioner was appointed as Excise Sub Inspector in February 1964 in the State of U.P. and was later promoted as Excise Inspector on ad hoc basis on February 24, 1972.
He was confirmed as Excise Sub Inspector w.e.f. April 1, 1967.
Though promoted on ad hoc basis, the petitioner has continuously been working as Excise Inspector since February 24, 1972.
Raghubir Singh and Ram Dhan, respondents are direct recruits to the post of Excise Inspector and they had joined the cadre later in point of time than the petitioner i.e. after 24.2.1972.
They were promoted to the post of Excise Superintendent on 29.9.1983 and the petitioner was ignored.
Being aggrieved the petitioner has filed this petition under Article 32 of the Constitution.
According to the State and other respondents, the petitioner 's promotion to the post of Excise Inspector being on ad hoc basis was against the 1967 rules, he continues to be an ad hoc appointed and as such is not a member of the Excise Inspectors service constituted under the rules.
His name has not been shown in the seniority list of Excise Inspectors.
According to them his case has rightly not been considered for further promotion.
On the other hand, it is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the 1967 Rules in as much as they confine the channel of promotion to Tari Inspectors and Clerks were wholly arbitrary and as such violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It is submitted on his behalf that the petitioner is, in any case, entitled to be promoted substantively to the cadre of excise Inspectors under 1983 rules and he is also entitled to fixation of seniority by counting his entire service as Excise Inspector from 1972 onwards.
Respondents concede that the petitioner can be appointed under 1983 rules, but contend that he is not entitled to the benefit of past service for purposes of seniority.
885 Allowing the writ petition this Court HELD: When the 1967 rules were enforced on May 24, 1967 there was in existence a permanent cadre of Excise Sub Inspectors.
The nature of duties of both the cadres were similar.
The Excise Inspectors, on molasses duty of the ranges, used to supervise the work of excise Sub Inspectors under them.
The Excise Sub Inspectors were thus natural contenders for the post of Inspectors.
There was no justification whatsoever with the framers of the 1967 rules to have kept the Excise Sub Inspectors out of the channel of promotion to the post of Excise Inspectors.
Prime facie there is no escape from the conclusion that the Excise Sub Inspectors were dealt with in an arbitrary manner by the framers of 1967 rules.
[890H 891B] It is not disputed that under the 1983 rules, the petitioner is eligible to be promoted and appointed as Excise Inspector.
[891C D] The 1983 rules came into force on March 24, 1983.
There is nothing on the record to show as to why the petitioner was not considered for promotion under the 1983 rules till today.
Inaction on the part of the State Government is wholly unjustified.
The petitioner has been made to suffer for no fault of his.
He has been serving the State Government as Excise Inspector since February 24, 1972 satisfactorily.
[891E] Rule 21(i) of the 1983 rules specifically permits substantive appointment to the cadre of Excise Inspectors with back date.
In all probability the provision of back date appointment was made in the 1983 rules to do justice to persons like the petitioner.
The petitioner is eligible under the rules to be appointed as Excise Inspector by way of promotion.
Accordingly the Court directed that the petitioner shall be deemed to be appointed by way of promotion as substantive Excise Inspector under the 1983 rules with effect from February 24, 1972.
The petitioner shall be entitled to the benefit of his entire period of service as Excise Inspector from February 24, 1972 towards fixation of his seniority in the cadre of Excise Inspector.
The petitioner shall be considered for promotion to the post of Excise Superintendent from a date earlier than the date when respondents Ram Dhan and Raghubir Singh were promoted to the said post.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to be considered to the post of Assistant Excise Commissioner in accordance with the rules from a date earlier than the date when any of his juniors were promoted to the said post.
[891G, 892B E] None of the respondents who have already been promoted to the 886 higher rank of Excise Superintendents or Assistant Excise Commissioners be reverted to accommodate the petitioner or any other person similarly situated.
The State Government shall create additional posts in the cadre of Excise Superintendents and Assistant Excise Commissioners to accommodate the petitioner and other similar persons, if necessary.
[892F] Masood Akhtar Khan & Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; Direct recruits Class II Engineering Officers Association vs State of Maharashtra & Ors., ; ; P. Mahendran & Ors, etc.
vs State of Karnataka Singh & Ors.
, ; ; Krishena Kumar & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; A.K. Bhatnagar & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Baleshwar Dass & Ors. etc.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
, [1981] 1 S.C.C. 449; Narender Chadha & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; and Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi etc.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
, , referred to.
