One Govind Rao Harshe mortgaged some agricultural land and a house to Lakshmi Chand and Duli Chand Modi.
The mortgagees filed a suit and obtained a preliminary decree and later a final decree for sale of the property for realisation of Rs. 5001/13/6 on 26.3.1938, and applied for execution of the said decree, which was stayed ' because the mortgagor applied for relief under the C.P. and Berar Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1939, to save the property from being sold at auction.
Consequent upon his failure to comply with the conditions of the order passed in those proceedings, the decree holders alleging default again applied for the revival of the execution proceedings and prayed for sale of the house property in dispute.
The judgment debtor did not appear before the Executing Court and the said Court held that the decree holders were entitled to execute the decree for the recovery of the debt.
Thereupon the judgment debtor submitted an application for setting aside the ex parte order, which was dismissed and an appeal filed against the said order was also dismissed by the District Judge.
In the meantime the house was put to auction and the highest bid of Rs. 6905 was knocked down in favour of one Gopal Rao Mutatkar on 20.8.1942 and the sale was confirmed vide order dt.
10.4.1943.
Applications filed by the judgment debtor and his adult sons seeking to set aside sale were dismissed and the appeals failed even upto the High Court.
In the meantime the appellant, a registered educational institution, through its Secretary, moved an application for granting a sale certificate stating that the house in question was auctioned by the Court and was purchased by Gopal Rao Mutatkar a member of the appellant institution, on 20.8.1942, for Mahila Vidyalaya, which sale was confirmed on 10.4.43.
The appellant prayed that the certificate be granted in its favour.
A stamp requisite for the purpose was also supplied.
The execution court on 26.2.1944, ordered that the sale certificate will issue in the name of Mahila Vidyalaya, Sagar, through Secretary, G.R. Wakhle and 907 accordingly the sale certificate was issued in favour of the appellant on 8.4.1944.
The four sons of the mortgagor filed a suit impleading the auction purchaser, G.R. Wakhle, Secretary, mortgagees and their father mortgagor, as defendants, praying that the execution sale was not binding on their interest.
The auction purchaser and the former Secretary of the appellant institution objected to their being impleaded as parties to the suit, as according to them they had ceased to be the functionaries of the appellant and the suit should have been filed against the appellant itself and not against its office bearers.
Thereafter the plaintiffs impleaded the appellant as party.
This suit by the sons of the mortgagor was dismissed.
The appellant thereupon as auction purchaser applied for the delivery of possession, which was granted.
Some portion of the property was in occupation of the widowed sister, Radhabai, of the original mortgagor and other portions were in the possession of tenants.
The Secretary of the appellant agreed to the request of the tenants that they will not be ousted as they were willing to execute rent notes.
The appellant later required the premises and moved the Rent Controller for permission to serve notices on the tenants to vacate the premises.
All the tenants except Radhabai and the original mortgagor who had also started living with his sister, vacated the premises.
The appellant then instituted a suit against them.
The trial court dismissed the suit for ejectment but passed a decree for arrears of rent.
The appeal filed by the appellant against that order was allowed by the District Judge.
The original mortgagor 's appeal failed before the High Court whereupon the appellant filed a execution application for ejectment of the occupants which is still pending as a result of stay order passed in a subsequent suit filed by Govind Rao Harshe, original mortgagor, against the appellant for a declaration, possession and permanent injunction.
This suit giving rise to the present appeal was dismissed by the Trial Court.
An appeal preferred against that order by the legal representatives of the deceased plaintiff, was allowed by the District Judge granting the declaration, delivery of possession of the house together with a mandatory injunction directing demolition of some new constructions made by the appellant.
The appellant filed a second appeal before the High Court which was dismissed by the impugned special leave.
The High Court held that as Goapl Rao Mutatkar was the auction purchaser, no sale certificate could be issued by the executing court in favour of the appellant, his bid being in his personal capacity and not one for and on behalf of the appellant.
It was also held by High Court that Gopal Rao Mutatkar could transfer his proprietary right by sale or a gift which he did not do.
According to the High Court the act of the executing court was clearly without jurisdic 908 tion and the sale certificate being void and inoperative, conferred no right or title upon the appellant over the suit property.
Allowing the appeal, this Court HELD: Once an order is made under Order XXI rule 92, confirming the sale, the title of the auction purchaser related back to the date of sale as provided under Section 65, C.P.C. The title in the property thereafter vests in the auction purchaser and not in the judgment debtor.
The issue of sale certificate under order XXI, rule 94, C.P.C. in favour of the auction purchaser though mandatory but the granting of certificate is a ministerial act and not judicial.
[917H 918B] The sale of the property in question was perfectly valid and as soon as the sale was confirmed in favour of Gopal Rao Mutatkar under Order XXI Rule 92, C.P.C. Govind Rao Harshe had no right or title in the property and Gopal Rao Mutatkar became the owner of the property.
[918G] The High Court did not consider the case in a proper perspective and took a wholly erroneous view in holding that the appellant was a trespasser and Govind Rao Harshe could have filed a suit for possession.
The plaintiff Govind Rao Harshe himself had come forward with a plea that the execution proceedings and the sale was null and void and unless he was able to succeed in this regard, which he did not in the present case, no decree for possession could at all have been passed in his favour.
[919C D]
