Respondent No. 1 's wife setting herself and her three children ablaze, died at her husband 's house on 7.6.1983.
The marriage had taken place seven or eight years before the incident.
The deceased wife was working as a teacher while her husband was a clerk.
Soon after the marriage there were disputes between them on the question of dowry.
The demand for extra dowry strained the relations between them them and the husband began to ill treat the deceased wife.
The deceased had written a letter to the Deputy Superintendent of Police on 12.10.1977 complaining about the ill treatment meted out to her and apprehending danger to her life and the lives of her children.
When the police came to inquire into the matter there was some understanding, as a result of which she had informed the police that no further action be taken for the present but her application may be kept pending.
Later, a divorce deed was executed but not acted upon.
The situation did not improved.
On 7.6.1983, the very morning of incident, the deceased wife wrote a letter addressed to Deputy Commissioner of Police, wherein she narrated how she and her children were ill treated by her husband, narrated how she and and her children were ill treated by her husband, mother in law and sister in law for dowry and why she took the decision to put an end to her life and the lives of her children.
Another letter 791 of even date was addressed to her mother stating the reasons for her such act.
A First Information Report was lodged against the Respondent No. 1 by the mother of the deceased.
After investigation the Respondent No. 1, his mother and sister were put up for trial.
The Trial Court on an examination of the prosecution evidence convicted all the three accused persons under Section 306, IPC and sentenced the husband to rigorous imprisonment for seven years and a fine of Rs.5,000, in default, rigorous imprisonment for one year and sentenced the two others to rigorous imprisonment for three years and a fine of Rs.1,000 each, in default, rigorous imprisonment for three months, against which order, accused persons preferred an appeal before the High Court.
The High Court on a reappreciation of the evidence and having regard to the language of Section 306, IPC came to the conclusion that there was no evidence to show that any of the accused was guilty of abetment and allowed the appeal.
The State has, therefore, approached this Court by way of special leave.
In the meantime the Respondent No. 1 's mother had passed away.
The appeal was, therefore, limited to the Respondent No. 1 and his sister.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. `Abetment ' as defined by Section 107 comprises (i) instigation to do that thing which is an offence, (ii) engaging in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing and (iii) intentionally aiding by any act or illegal omission the doing of that thing.
An abettor is a person who abets an offence or who abets either the commission of an offence of the commission of an act which would be an offence.
[798C D] 2.
The word `instigate ' in the literary sense means to incite, set or urge on, stir up, goad, foment, stimulate, provoke, etc.
The dictionary meaning of the word, "aid" is to give assistance, help, tec.
[798D E] 3.
Where the death of a woman is caused by burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and evidence reveals that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any of his relative for or in connection with any demand for dowry, such death is described as dowry under Section 304 B for which the 792 punishment extends to imprisonment for life, but not less than imprisonment for seven years.
By Section 113B, Evidence Act, the court has to raise a presumption of dowry death, if the same has taken place within seven years of marriage and there is evidence of the women having been subjected to cruelty and/or harassment.
[800A C] 4.
The legislative intent is clearly to curb the menance of dowry deaths, etc., with a firm hand.
Court must keep in mind this legislative intent.
It must be remembered that since such crimes are generally committed in the privacy of residential homes and in secrecy, independent and direct evidence is not easy to get.
That is why the legislature has by introducing sections 113A and 113B in the Evidence Act tried to strengthen the prosecution 's hands by permitting a presumption to be raised if certain foundational facts are established and the unfortunate event has taken place within seven years of marriage.
This period of seven years is considered to be the turbulent one after which the legislature assumes that the couple would have settled down in life.
[800D E] 5.
If a married woman is subjected to cruelty of harassment by her husband or his family members section 498 A, IPC would be attracted.
If such cruelty or harassment was inflicted by the husband or his relative for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry immediately preceding death by burns and bodily injury or in abnormal circumstances within seven years of marriage, such husband or relative is deemed to have caused her death and is liable to be punished under section 304B IPC.
[800E F] 6.
When the question at issue is whether a person is guilty of dowry death of a woman and the evidence discloses that immediately before her death she was subjected by such person to cruelty and/or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, section 113B Evidence Act provides that the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
[800F G] 7.
In the present case section 113A or 113B, Evidence Act cannot be invoked as the prosecution has not brought the exact date of marriage on record.
Yet where the husband or his relative by his wilful conduct creates a situation which he knows will drive the woman to commit suicide and she actually does so, the case would squarely fall within the ambit of section 306, IPC.
In such a case the conduct of the person would tantamount to inciting or provoking or virtually pushing the woman into a desperate act.
In this case it would seem from past events that it was a carefully chalked out strategy to provoke the woman into killing herself.
[800H 801A, 801E] 793 8.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, the trial court had rightly convicted the husband under section 306 IPC.
The High Court committed an error in reversing the conviction.
The plea for reduction of his sentence cannot be countenanced.
[801F G]
