Appellant No. 1 was found exhibiting and offering for sale tea dust.
P.W. 1, the Food Inspector purchased tea dust in the requisite quantity for test.
Appellant No. 1 told P.W. 1 that the shop which was being run by him was a part nership concern of the three brothersappellant No. 1 to 3.
On receipt of Public Analyst 's report, prosecution was lanuched against the appellants under section 7 read with section 16 of the .
Before the trial Magistrate the facts regarding sale by appellant no.1 of the food article and the same being adul terated as reported by the Public Analyst were not disputed.
The appellants however, argued that the Public Analyst did not send the report within the period prescribed under r. 7(3) Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 and the Local Health Authority did not forward the copy of the result of the analysis to the appellants 'immediately ' after institution of the prosecution as envisaged by r. 9A.
Since there was a delay of nearly a month on that count, the trial Magistrate viewed this lapse as fatal to the prosecution.
He also held that in the covering letter while sending the report, it was not mentioned that the appellants had a right to have analysed the second sample by the Central Food Laboratory in terms of section 13(2) of the 96 97 Act.
He, therefore, acquitted the appellants.
On appeal by the State, the High Court reversed the order of acquittal.
It convicted the appellants and sen tenced each of them to six months ' rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.5000 each.
Aggrieved the appellants preferred the appeal by special leave to this Court.
On consideration of evidence regarding guilt of all the appellants and requirements of section 13(2) of the and rr.
7(3) and 9A of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955, Disposing of the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In the instant case, there was no basis to sustain the conviction of appellants No. 2 and 3.
There was no evidence worth the name to conclusively prove their complicity beyond reasonable doubt.
The only case set up by the prosecution against these appeliants was that appellant No. 1 was alleged to have told the Food Inspector that the shop was being run in partnership by him with his these two brothers.
Appellant No. 1 alone made the sale in question to the Food Inspector.
Burden was on the prosecution to prove the existence of partnership.
Even if the Food Inspector is believed that appellant No. 1 told him that the shop was being run in partnership, that per he was not enough to inculpate the remaining two appellants without further evidence.
There is an area of doubt in this sphere and extending the same to appellants No. 2 and 3, they are acquitted.
[100G H; 101A B] The case of first appellant stood singled out.
His conviction was well deserved, which should be maintained and the sentence confirmed.
However, fine was to be reduced to Rs.1,000.
[101C] 2.
The expression 'immediately ' in r. 9A of the Preven tion of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955, is intended to convey a sense of continuity rather than urgency.
What must be done is to forward the report at the earliest opportunity, so as to facilitate the exercise of the statutory right under section 13(2) in good and sufficient time before the prosecution commences leading evidence.
Non compliance with r. 9 A is not fatal.
It is a question of prejudice.
The word 'immedi ately ' was to be interpreted to convey 'reasonable despatch and promptitude ' intending to convey a sense of continuity rather than urgency.
The High Court was right in holding that failure to send instantly a copy of the analysis 98 report to the appellants was of no consequence.
[100A F] Tulsiram vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , relied on.
On the question of compliance of r. 7(3) in regard to the period of submission of the report by Public Analyst to the Local Health Authority, the High Court 's conclusion, reached by it after recomputing the period, that such duty was performed within the prescribed period was a finding of fact and nothing was addressed before this Court in that regard.
[99G H; 100A]
