The appellants and the deceased Harnam Singh, were neighbours and had strained relations on account of passage of sullage water and elections.
According to the prosecution, they had quarrelled over the passage of sullage water a few months before the incident; the appellants had diverted their sullage water towards the house of the deceased and the latter had protested and frustrated their effort, with the result the water collected in a pool near the house of the appellants which infuriated them.
The appellants attacked and murdered Harnam Singh on the night between 6th and 7th June, while he was sleeping at his tubewell alongwith P.Ws 2 and 3 and one Narain Singh (not examined); P. Ws 2 and 3 were sleeping at a distance of about 15 karams while Narain Singh was sleeping near the deceased.
The prosecution alleged that Gurmej Singh fired a shot from close range at the deceased while he was asleep; Gian Singh struck a Gandasi blow on the chest and Bur Singh gave a Dang blow on the arm.
After making sure that the victim had died, the appellants fled away.
P. Ws 2 and 3 did not raise any alarm as they were threatened by the appellants that they would be killed in case they made any hue and cry.
P. W. 2 lodged the F.I.R. and disclosed therein the names of the appellants only as assailants.
Two other persons Sucha Singh and Santokh Singh were also shown as arrested for the commission of this crime though their names did not figure in the F.I.R.
According to the prosecution witnesses, these persons were falsely implicated by P.W. 8 Sub Inspector.
The appellants alongwith these two persons were put up for trial.
The trial Judge acquitted these persons as having been falsely involved and no appeal against their acquittal was preferred.
However the Trial Court relying on the evidence of P.Ws, convicted Gurmej Singh under Section 302, I.P.C. and the other two under Section 302/34 I.P.C. and sentenced all 967 the three to imprisonment for life and also imposed token fines.
The appellants appealed against their conviction before the High Court but the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed their appeal.
They have now filed this appeal against their conviction and sentence, after obtaining special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: It is true that Narain Singh was sleeping near the deceased when the latter was shot at Narain Singh was indeed a witness to the occurrence and ordinarily we would have expected the prosecution to examine him.
Dropping a witness on the specious plea that he was won over without laying the foundation therefor is generally to be frowned upon.
[973E] The defence at no point of time questioned the prosecution statement that Narain Singh was won over.
The courts below accepted the prosecution statement in this behalf.
The judgment of both the courts reveal that no submission was made before them regarding the non examination of this witness.
If an objection was raised at the earliest point of time, the prosecution may have called him to the witness stand.
His presence was not required to unfold the prosecution story.
That had been done by P.Ws. 2 and 3.
Therefore, the non examination of Narain Singh cannot reflect on the credibility of P.Ws. 2 and 3.
[973G 974A] Both the courts were right in coming to the conclusion that the contradictions brought on record from the statement of PWs 2 and 3 can have no evidentiary value.
[977B] There is no substance in the criticism levelled by the learned Counsel for the appellants that the prosecution had shifted its case at the trial from the one narrated to the police in the course of investigation.
The prosecution version is that immediately after the incident PW2 went to the residence of his father P.W. 4 and informed him about the incident.
This conduct of P.W. 2 is quite natural.
The evidence of P.W. 2 stands corroborated by the evidence of P.W. 4 P.W. 2 therefore hired a tempo and left for the police station and promptly lodged the first information report.
It must be realised that P.W. 2 had no time for manipulation as he had reached the Police Station, which was at a distance of 12 Km.
before 8.30 a.m. He would not have named the assailants if he had not seen them.
There was no reason for him to falsely implicate the appellants since he bore no grudge against them; it was just the reverse.
A copy of this report had reached the concerned 968 Magistrate by about 11.15.
a.m. This first information report also lends corroboration to his testimony.
The medical evidence tendered by P.W. 1 also corroborates the version of P.Ws. 2 and 3.
There is, therefore, no infirmity in the approach of the two courts below in convicting the appellants.
[977D G] Sahaj Ram vs State of U.P., ; Hallu Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab, ; Kartarey vs State of U.P., ; Ishwar Singh vs State of U.P., ; A.N. Rao vs Public Prosecutor, Andhra Pradesh, and State of U.P. vs Hari Prasad & Ors., {1974} 3 S.C.C. 673, referred to.
