The Regional Director, State Employees Corporation the appellant in the instant case claimed for covering the factories of the respondents M/s. High Land Coffee Works of P.F.X. Sakdanha & Sons under the provisions of the .
Section 1(4) of the Act excludes "seasonal factory" from the scope of the Act.
The seasonal factory is defined under section 2(12)of the Act.
The factories of the respondents were excluded from the operation of the Act since they were declared to be seasonal factories within the meaning of the definition of section 2(12) of the Act.
By amending Act 44 of 1966 which came into force from 28th January, 1966,the definition of 'seasonal factory ' has been amended and accordingly the seasonal factory means a factory which exclusively engaged in one or more of the manufacturing processes detailed in the definition and includes a factory which is engaged for a period not exceed ing seven months in a year.
The expressions manufacturing process & power shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the .
So after the amendment the Corporation called upon the respondents to pay the contributions payable under the Act and threatened to take coercive steps to recover the arrears under the Revenue Recovery Act and prosecute them.
The respondents challenged the demand made by the appel lants in the Employees Insurance Court contending that even the amending of 1966 has not altered the definition of seasonal factory, would still excludes such factory from the opera tion of the Act.
The Employees Insurance Court accepted the plea of the respondents and even the Karnataka High Court agreed to the view of aforesaid Court.
So the Corporation appealed to this Court.
The sole question before the Court for consideration is whether the respondents ' factories in view of the amendment to the definition of seasonal factory have lost the benefit of exclusion from the Act.
Dismissing the appeals and the special leave petition the Court, HELD: That in the instant case the High Court observa tion that the purpose of the definition by the amending act was to enlarge and not to restrict the Statutory concept of seasonal factory so the position of the respondents estab lishments as seasonal factories remain unaltered.
This view seems to be justified because the objects reasons of the Bill of the amending Act clearly indicates that the proposed amendment was to 'bring within the scope of the definition of seasonal factory ' a factory which works for a period of not exceeding seven months in a year a) in any process of blending, packing or repacking of tea or coffee b) in such other manufacturing processes as the Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazettee specify.
Thus amendment is clearly in favour of widening the definition of seasonal factory ' because the word 'include ' in the Statutory definition is generally used to enlarge the mean ing of the preceeding words.
This is well accepted statutory construction that in interpretation clauses in order to enlarge the words or phrases occuring in the body of the statute the word include is very generally used.
[310F 311C] Stroud 's Dictionary, 5th Edn.
3 page 1263.
C.I.T. Andhra Pradesh vs M/s. Taj Mahal Hotel, Secun derabad, 971 ] 3 SCC 550 and State of Bombay vs The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha Ors., [1960] 2 SCR p. 666 at 875, referred to.
