The appellant pursuant to contracts entered into with the Railway Administration fabricated and delivered to the Railways wagon bodies mounted on "wheel sets" supplied by the Railways.
The appellant 's invoices, reflected only the price of the wagonbodies without including the value of the "wheel sets" on which the wagon bodies were mounted.
The goods were cleared for purposes of Excise duties on such invoice value.
The Revenue raised demand for recovery of short levy and sought to recover the unpaid duty on the value of the "wheel sets" also.
The claim for recovery of the short levy having been adjudicated against the appellant, appeals were filed before the Tribunal, by the appellant contending that the goods manufactured by the appellant were only the wagon bodies mounted on the "wheel sets" supplied by the Railway Adminis tration; and therefore, the assessable value could only be the value of the wagon bodies excluding the "wheel sets" supplied by the Railways; and that at all events the value in excess of the 'invoice value ' which represented the price of the wagon bodies was exempt from levy of duty under the Exemption Notification No. 120/75CE dated 30th April, 1975 issued under Rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944.
The Tribunal dismissed the appeals, against which, the present appeals were filed before this Court.
The appellant contended that the Tribunal misdirected itself in law in its construction of the exemption Notifica tion and in its reasoning that there was something in Clause (iv) of the Notification which detracted from the permissi bility of its benefit in the present case; that 324 it was erroneous to read the condition as requiring the 'invoice value ' to be the full commercial price of the goods including therein the value of the "wheel sets"; that the very purpose of the exemption was to relieve the manufactur er from bearing the burden of the duty on such part of the assessable value as did not reflect the value of his supply and services but represented the value of the "wheel sets" supplied by the Railway Administration itself free of charge.
The Revenue Respondent contended that Clause (iv) of the Notification signified and imported the idea of full value of the manufactured goods being required to be reflected in the invoice and that the reasoning of, and the conclusion reached by, the Tribunal was correct.
This Court allowing the appeals, HELD. 1.
The Notification posits and predicates the possibility that the invoice value ' could be lesser than the "assessable value" and, taking into account the need to mitigate the hardship on the manufacturer of being called upon to pay duty on the value in excess of the invoice value, seeks to exempt the manufacturer from payment of duty "inexcess of the duty" calculated on the basis of the 'i nvoiceprice '.
[328G H] 2.
The way in which the Tribunal looked at the Notifica tion is neither good sense nor good law.
Such construction would make the Notification and the exemption contemplated thereunder meaningless.
The need for the exemption arose in view of the fact that "assessablevalue" was higher than the 'invoice value '.
Requiring the former and the latter to be the same as something compelled by Clause (iv) is really to construe the Notification against itself.
[329B C] 3.
In this case, there is no dispute that the invoice price represented the value of the wagons, less the value of the "wheel sets" supplied by the Railways.
The invoice price could not be required to include the value of the "wheel sets".
But the "assessable value" would take into account the full commercial value including that of the "wheel sets".
1t is in order to mitigate the hardship that may arise by requiring the manufacturer to pay duty on this difference in such cases that the Notification No. 120/75 came to be promulgated.
[328H 329B] 4.
There is nothing in Clause (iv) which enjoins upon the appellant to include the value of the "wheel sets".
The contract between the parties does not also require this.
[329B] 325 M/s. Burn Standard Company Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India
