Unable to secure an ad interim stay in favour of his client, the appellant, a practising Advocate, uttered cer tain words imputing motives to the Sub Judge in refusing to grant the stay.
The sub Judge submitted a report to the District and Sessions Judge setting out the words uttered by the appellant, for taking necessary action against him.
The District and Sessions Judge in turn submitted a report to the High Court, and proceedings for contempt were initiated by the High Court.
In the contempt proceedings the appellant denied having uttered the words mentioned in the report of the Sub Judge and also offered unqualified apology.
The High Court held that the appellant was guilty of contempt of Court, under Section 2(c)(i) of the , as he had attacked the integrity of the Sub Judge by equating him with a Contractor of the Municipal Committee and by charging that he was in collusion with the Deputy Commissioner and was under his influence.
The High Court further held that the attack on the SubJudge, dispar aging in character and derogatory to his dignity, would vitally shake the confidence of the public in him.
The High Court did not accept the apology tendered by the appellant because the appellant 313 was addicted to using contemptuous language and making scurrilous attacks on the Judges, and had in an earlier contempt proceeding too tendered an unqualified apology on the basis of which the rule against him was discharged.
Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, the petitioner preferred the present appeal before this Court.
It was contended by him that he did not utter the words, as would be revealed by the statements of the three Advocates exam ined before the High Court, who had stated that the appel lant did not use any discourteous, unparliamentary or impo lite language against the Sub Judge.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (Per Agrawal, J.) 1.1.
The appellant had made an attack on the learned Subordinate Judge which was disparaging in character and derogatory to his dignity and would vitally shake the confi dence of the public in him and that the aspersions made by the appellant had the effect of scandalising the Court in such a way as to create distrust in the people 's mind and impair confidence of the prople in Court.
The appellant has, therefore, been rightly held guilty of having committed the contempt of court under section 2(c)(i) of the Act.
[319E G] 1.2.
The High Court, in its appreciation of evidence, has rightly placed reliance on the testimony of the Sub Judge corroborated by the evidence of the Reader in his Court, in preference to the testimony of the three Advo cates.
[321C] 2.
It is well settled that an apology is not a weapon of defence to purge the guilty of their offence; nor is it intended to operate as a universal panacea, but it is in tended to be evidence of real contriteness.
The apology that was tendered by the appellant before the High Court was so concluded as to be taken into consideration in the event of the High Court finding the appellant guilty of having com mitted contempt of court.
Moreover this was not the first occasion in which proceedings for contempt of court had been initiated against the appellant and on an earlier occasion also proceedings for contempt of court had been initiated against him in pursuance of a report of the then Chief Judicial Magistrate, and in those proceedings the rule issued against the appellant was discharged on his tendering unqualified apology before the High Court.
In those proceed ings also the appellant is said to have made 314 disparaging remarks against the Judge.
Keeping in view the said circumstance, the High Court has found that the appel lant was addicted to using contemptuous language and making scurrilous attacks on Judges.
Having regard to the fact that incidents of insubordination and use of improper language towards the Judges are on the increase, it could not be said that the High Court was not justified in taking the view that the appellant could not be allowed to get away by simply feeling sorry by way of apology as the easiest way.
The apology tendered by the appellant could not, therefore, be accepted.
[321G H; 322A B] M.Y. Shareef & Anr.
vs The Hon 'ble Judges of the High Court of Nagpur & Ors., ; , relied on.
Per Ahmadi, J. (Concurring): 1.
The exact words uttered by the appellant, leave no doubt that the intention of the appellant was to cast aspersions on the integrity of the Judge and to lower him in the esteem of others by creating doubts regarding his honesty, judicial impartiality and independence.
The tendency of maligning the reputation of Judicial Officers by disgruntled elements who fail to secure the desired order is ever on the increase and it is high time it is nipped in the bud.
And, when a member of the profession resorts to such cheap gimmicks with a view to browbeating the Judge into submission, it is all the more painful.
When there is a deliberate attempt to scandalise which would shake the confidence of the litigating public in the system, the damage caused is not only to the reputation of the concerned Judge but also to the fair name of the judiciary.
Veiled threats, abrasive behaviour, use of disre spectful language and at times blatant condemnatory attacks like the present one are often designedly employed with a view to taming a Judge into submission to secure a desired order.
Such cases raise larger issues touching the independ ence of not only the concerned Judge but the entire institu tion.
The foundation of our system which is based on the independence and impartiality of those who man it will be shaken if disparaging and derogatory remarks are made against the Presiding Judicial Officers with impunity.
The much cherished judicial independence which is of vital importance to any free Society, has to be protected not only from the executive or the legislature but also from those who are an integral part of the system.
[315H; 316A E] 2.
In the instant case, the appellant repeated his performance presumably because he was let off lightly on the first occasion.
Softjustice is not the answer.
The appellant cannot be let off on an apology which is far from sincere.
His apology was hollow, there was no remorse no regret it was only a device to escape the rigour of the 315 law.
The High Court rightly did not accept it.
[316G H; 317A B] L.D. Jaikwal vs State of U.P., ; , relied on.
When a member of the Bar is required to be punished for use of contemptuous language it is highly painful it pleases none but painful duties have to be performed to uphold the honour and dignity of individual Judge and his office and the prestige of the institution.
Courts are generally slow in using their contempt jurisdiction against erring members of the profession in the hope that the con cerned Bar Council will chasten its members for failure to maintain proper ethical norms.
If timely action is taken by Bar Councils, the decline in the ethical values can be easily arrested.
[317G]
