The appellant company was ordered to be wound up in 1949.
In the course of its winding up the liquidator sold certain assets of the company and invested the sale proceeds thereof in fixed deposits with certain banks.
The liquidator incurred certain expenditures on salaries, legal fees, travelling expenses, postage and stationery.
The assessee company claimed a deduction of the said expenses from the interest income.
The I.T.O. did not allow it, and assessed the entire interest income as taxable u/s 56 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 under the head "Income from other sources".
The assessment orders were confirmed by the Appellate As sistant Commissioner and by the Income Tax Appellate Tribu nal in appeal.
On a reference by the Tribunal the High Court held that the income from fixed deposit was income from other sources; and it disallowed deduction of the expenditure section 57(iii) on the ground that the expenses claimed were not related to the earning of the interest income.
Aggrieved the assessee companY preferred appeal by special leave to this Court.
On the questions whether: (1) in effecting the sale and realisation of the assets of the Company in liquidation and investing the same in fixed deposits the liquidator was engaged in the business of the company and the interest income was a business income taxable u/s 28 of the Act and not under section 56 under the head "Income from other sources", and (2) the expenses incurred by the liquidator were in curred solely for the 384 purpose of earning the interest income so as to claim deduc tion section 57(iii).
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Liquidator in merely realising the assets of the Company could not be considered as carrying on any business of the Company.
[387G] 2.
In the instant case, the company before its liquida tion was engaged in the manufacture of sugar.
The records did not disclose that the liquidator was carrying on the business of manufacture of sugar or ' any trading activity for the purpose of facilitating the winding up.
The only accepted fact was that the interest income was derived from fixed deposits purchased out of the proceeds of sale of assets during winding up.
The assessee, could not be said to have carried on any business to bring the interest income within the meaning of section 28 of the Act and, therefore, the interest income was liable to be assessed only under the head "Income from other sources".
The Tribunal was, there fore, right in holding that the interest income in the instant case was not governed by section 28 but fell to be con sidered under section 56.
[387F; 388B C; 389A B] Vijay Laxmi Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi Central, All., affirmed.
Morvi Mercantile Bank Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat., Guj., approved.
3.1 In computing the income chargeable under the head "Income from other sources", requirement under section 57(iii) of the Act is that the expenditure should have been incurred "for the purpose of making or earning such income" and the deduction is to be made in respect of expenditure laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of making or earning such income.
[389C D & G] 3.2 It is true that the connection between the expendi ture and the earning of income need not be direct and it may be indirect.
But since the expenditure must have been in curred for purpose of earning that income, there should be some nexus between the expenditure and the earning of the income.
[389D E] 3.3 The interest accrues sui generis.
The interest is payable by the bank whether it is claimed or not and whether there is any establishment or not.
[389E F] 385 3.4 In the instant case there could be no doubt that the expendidure incurred by the liquidator can by no stretch be said to have been incurred with the object or for the pur pose of earning the interest income.
It could not be said that the expenditure incurred was to preserve or acquire the asset.
Nor could it be said that the expenses were incurred, for the purpose of maintenance of the source.
The Tribunal was, therefore, right in holding that the expenses claimed were not related to the interest income and was not a de ductable expenditure under section 57.
[390A B; 389G]
