On 30th June, 1969, State Government issued a notifica tion under Section 8A of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957, providing a package of reliefs and incentives including one concerning relief from payment of sales tax.
A further notification dated 11th August, 1975 was issued, envisaging certain modified procedures for effectu ating the reliefs contemplated by the exemption notification of 30th June, 1969.
For the assessment year 1976 77, the appellant made an application to the Respondent No. 1 on 10th November, 1976 for adjustment of the refunds against sales tax due and permission was granted with retrospective effect from 1st May, 1976 validating the adjustments, which the appellant had made during the interregnum.
For the three subsequent years, viz., 1977 78, 1978 79 and 197980, similar applications, which were made on 29th March 1977, 20th March 1978 and 8th March 1979 respectively, remained undisposed of.
In anticipation of the permission, appellant adjusted the refund against tax payable for these years and filed its monthly returns setting out adjustments so effected.
337 There was no dispute that the appellant was entitled to the benefit of the notification dated 30th June, 1969 and that the refunds were eligible to be adjusted against sales tax payable for respective years.
The respondent No. 1 in his letter dated 27.3.1979 informed the appellant that the orders on appellant 's appli cation for permission would be passed only on receipt of the clarification from the Government on the matters.
On 9th January, 1980, the appellant was issued three demand notices by the Commercial Tax Officer demanding payment of the sales tax, stating that as prior permission to adjust sales tax had not been considered by the respond ent No. 1, he was obliged to proceed to recover the taxes.
Steps for recovery of the penalties were also initiated.
The appellant moved the High Court for issue of writ of mandamus to quash the demand notices and the proceedings initiated for recovery of penalty under section 13 of the Act.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition, against which the present appeal was filed.
The appellant urged that indisputably the permission for the three years had been sought well before the commencement of the respective years but had been withheld for reasons, which were demonstrably extraneous; that the basic eligibil ity was conditioned by the notification of 30th June, 1969, which required a certificate from the Department of Indus tries and Commerce; that the requirement of the annual permission for adjustment envisaged by the notification of 11th August; 1975 was merely procedural, as clause 3 of the notification stipulated; and that if the conditions were satisfied, it was deemed that permission was given.
The respondents contended that it was not as if the right to the refund was denied or defeated by the inaction of the Deputy Commissioner but only one mode of the refund by adjustment became unavailable; that the benefit envis aged by the notification of 11th August, 1975 was in the nature of a concession and that the appellant in order to avail itself of its benefit had to show strict compliance with conditions subject to which it was available; that where exemptions were concerned, the conditions thereof ought to be strictly construed and strict compliance with them exacted before a person could lay claim to the 338 benefit of the exemptions; and that if, in the meanwhile, the period itself expired, no relief was possible as quite obviously, the requirements of 'prior permission ' became impossible of compliance.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The main exemption is under the 1969 notifica tion.
The subsequent notification which contains condition of prior permission clearly envisages a procedure to give effect to the exemption.
[347E F] 2.
Clause 3 of the notification leaves no discretion to the Deputy Commissioner to refuse the permission, if the conditions are satisfied.
The words are that he "will grant".
There is no dispute that appellant had satisfied the conditions.
Yet the permission was withheld not for any valid and substantial reason, but owing to certain extrane ous things concerning some interdepartmental issues.
Appel lant had nothing to do with those issues.
[347F H] 3.
There was no other disentitling circumstance which would justify the refusal of the permission.
Appellant did not have prior permission, because it was withheld by the Revenue without any justification.
The High Court took the view that after the period to which the adjustment related had expired no permission could at all be granted.
A permis sion of this nature was a technical requirement and could be issued making it operative from the time it was applied for.
[349C D] 4.
A distinction between the provisions of statute which are of substantive character and were built in with certain specific objectives of policy on the one hand and those which are merely procedural and technical in their nature on the other must be kept clearly distinguished.
[347E G] 5.
The choice between a strict and a liberal construc tion arises only in case of doubt in regard to the intention of the Legislature manifest on the statutory language.
Indeed, the need to resort to any interpretative process arises only where the meaning is not manifest on the plain words of the statute.
If the words are plain and clear and directly convey the meaning, there is no need for any inter pretation.
[348F G] Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes (Asstt.), Dharwar & Ors.
vs Dharmendra Trading Co. & Ors., ; ; Wells vs Minister of Housing and Local Government, at 1007 339 and Union of India & Ors.
vs M/s. Wood Papers Ltd. & Ors., [1991] JT (1) 151 at 155, referred to.
Kedarnath Jute Manufacturing Co. vs Commercial Tax Officer, Calcutta & Ors., ; at 630 and Col lector of Central Excise, Bombay and Anr.
vs Messrs Parle Exports (P) Ltd., ; , distinguished.
Francis Bennion: "Statutory Interpretation", 1984 edi tion at page 683, referred to.
