The assesses in these appeals have made payments in cash exceeding a sum of Rs.2500 for some of the purchases of stock in trade.
So while computing the income of the asses sees under the head "profits and gains of business" the assessing authority disallowed deduction on account of such payments held to be in contravention of the terms of section 40A(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 read with the Rule 6DD of the Income Tax Rules, 1962.
The assessees have challenged the same.
So in the in stant case the question under consideration before this Court is (i) the validity of section 40A(3) of the Act (ii) the applicability of section 40A(3) to payments made for acquiring stock in trade.
Originally section 40A(3) required payments in respect of expenditure which exceeded Rs.2500 to be made by a crossed cheque or crossed bank draft and by the Amending Act 1987 to remove hardships to smaller assessees the said amount has been raised to Rs. I0,000, Section 40A(3) begins with a non obstante clause so the legislature has made it clear that the provisions of section 40A(3) are overriding and operate inspite of any thing to the contrary contained in any other provisions of the Act relating to the computa tion of income under the head "profits and gains of business or profession".
Sub section (3) empowers the assessing authority to disallow as deduction of any expenditure in respect of which payment is made in cash exceeding Rs. 10,000 otherwise than by a crossed cheque or crossed bank draft.
Rule 6DD of Income Tax Rules, 1962 provides for cases and circumstances in which payment of a sum exceeding Rs. 10,000 may be made otherwise than by crossed cheque or by a crossed demand draft.
The assessees challenged on the ground that provisions of section 406 40A(3) intend to restrict the business activities.
Dismissing the appeals and Special Leave Petition, the Court, HELD: That section 40A(3) must not be read in isolation or to the exclusion of Rule 6DD.
This section must be read along with the Rule 6DD and if read together it is clear that the provisions of the section are not intended to restrict the business activities.
It only empowers the assessing officer to disallow the deductions claimed as expenditure in respect of which payment is not made by crossed cheque or crossed bank draft.
The same is insisted only to enable the assessing authority to ascertain whether it was out of the income from disclosed sources and even the terms of section 40A(3) are not absolute.
Considerations of business expediency and other relevant factors are not excluded, since it is open to the assessee to furnish the circumstances under which the payment was not practicable or would have caused genuine difficulty to the payee.
Rule 6DD provides that an assessee can be exempted from the require ment of payment by a crossed cheque or crossed bank draft in the circumstances specified under the rule.
Thus section 40A(3) and Rule 6DD are intended to regulate the business transactions and to prevent the use of unaccounted money or reduce the chance to use black money for business transac tions.
Moreover while interpreting a taxing statute the Court cannot be oblivious of the proliferation of black money which is in circulation in our country Thus any restraint intended to use or create black should not be regarded as curtailing the freedom of trade or business.
[409G 410E] The term expenditure as per section 40A(3), means all outgoings including the expenditure incurred for purchasing the stock in trade.
Since to determine the gross profits the value of the stock in trade has to be taken into account.
So payments can be disallowed if they are made in cash in the sums exceeding the amount specified under section 40A(3) and also not provided for exemption under Rule 6DD.
Thus section 40A(3) is attracted to payments made for acquiring stock intrade and other materials.
[410G 411A] Sajowanlal Jaiswal vs CIT, Orissa; U.P. Hardware Store vs CIT, ; Allahabad; Ratan Udyog vs ITO, Allahabad; P.R. Textiles vs CIT Kerala, Kerala; CIT vs Kishan Chand Maheswari Dass, P & H; Kanti Lal purshottam & Co. vs CIT, Raj; CIT vs New Light Tin Mfg. Co., P & H; Fakri Automobiles vs CIT, Raj; 407 Venkata Satayanarayana Timber Depot vs ITR, AP.
and Akash Films vs CIT, Karnataka, approved.
CIT vs Hardware Exchange, , reversed.
