Under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 a notification was issued by the petitioners proposing to acquire the land of the respondents for construction of houses by the Tamil Nadu Housing Board, constituted under section 3 of the Madras State Housing Board Act, 1961.
The respondents challenged the impugned notification in a writ petition, which was allowed by the Single Judge of the High Court holding that the public purpose mentioned in the notification was too vague in absence of details relat ing to the scheme for which the acquisition was sought to be made, and consequently the land owners could not effectively avail of the benefits under section 5A of the Land Acquisi tion Act by filing objection.
This order was affirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
The State the petitioners filed this Special Leave Petition contending that the notification had adequately described the nature of the public purpose by mentioning the proposed construction of residential buildings and the respondents ought to have filed their objections under section 5 A instead of filing the writ petition; that the procedure in regard to the preparation of the scheme has to await the conclusion of the land acquisition proceeding; that the land acquisition proceeding should not be condemned as pre mature on the ground that the scheme has not been framed.
The respondents contended that in view of the provi sions of the Housing Board Act a proceeding for land acqui sition can be commenced only after a scheme under the Act is framed, which has not been done in the present case.
The land acquisition proceeding, being pre mature has been rightly quashed.
376 On the question whether the acquisition proceeding could De initiated only after the framing, of the proposed scheme and not earlier, dismissing the Special Leave Peti tion of the State, this Court, HELD: 1.01.
The procedure prescribed for preparation of a scheme indicates that before it can be finalised, full publicity has to be given inviting objections; and in case of objections, the same have to be duly considered before granting sanction.
Further, if anybody is still aggrieved, he has a right of appeal to the State Government.
It is only after this stage is over that the scheme becomes final and enforceable.
[378F] 1.02.
Section 39 of the Madras State Housing Act, 1961 while enumerating the matters to be included in the scheme, specifically mentions acquisition of land in clause (a).
If the acquisition is contemplated as a subject matter of the scheme itself, it follows that it must await the preparation of the scheme wherein it will be included.
[379F] 1.03.
The acquisition of the land is a part of the execution of the scheme itself.
Since the acquisition is included in the scheme the process of execution of the scheme starts immediately when steps for acquisition are taken.
[381A B] 1.04.
If the notification under section 4 under the Land Acquisition Act is published without waiting for the scheme, it will not be possible for the land owners to object to the proposed acquisition on the ground that the land is not suitable for the scheme at all, and therefore does not serve any public purpose, or that another piece of land in the area concerned, is far more suitable, leading to the possi ble conclusion that the proposed acquisition is mala fide.
The provisions of the Housing Board Act also suggest the same.
[381 DF] 1.05.
It will be practical and consistent with common sense to have the scheme finalised before starting an acqui sition proceeding.
A proceeding ' under the Land Acquisition Act read with section 70 of the Madras Housing Board Act, can be commenced only after framing the scheme for which the land is required.
The notification issued under section 4 hi the present case must, therefore, be held to be pre mature, and it was rightly quashed by the High Court.
[381G 382A] 1.06.
Although the initiation of the proceeding for acquisition has to await framing of a scheme, it does not mean that the concluded acquisition proceeding can be con demned as void so as to be ignored 377 later.
A ground based on the present judgment shall be available to the land owners only for such land acquisition proceedings, which are under challenge and are still pending decision.
[382C D] Babu Barkya Thakur vs The State of Bombay and Others, , distinguished.
