On March 25, 1990, the officers of the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence intercepted a motor car driven by the appellant No. 1 with the other appellant as his companion and recovered 1400 gold bars.
The statements of the two appellants were recorded and they were formally arrested on March 28, 1990 and produced before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, who granted re mand.
While the matter was under investigation, a proposal was made to the first respondent Secretary (Preventive Deten tion), Government of Maharashtra for invoking the powers conferred on him by Section 3 of the .
On the very next day after the receipt of the proposal the first respondent passed the orders of detention against the two appellants under sub section (1) of section 3 of the Act.
After these detention orders were passed on April 24, 1990 they were served on the appellants along with the grounds of detention and basic documents on which reliance was placed.
The appellants were informed that they had a right to make a representation to (i) the State 444 Government; (ii) the Central Government; and (iii) the Advisory Board against the detention order, if they so desired.
They were informed that to facilitate expeditious consideration thereof, 'the Superintendent of Jails may be requested to forward the same to the detaining authority.
The appellants preferred a representation addressed to the Detaining Authority and forwarded it through the Superin tendent of Jail.
In the last paragraph of that representa tion a request was made that copies of the representation may be taken out and the same may be forwarded to the State Govt.
and the Central Govt.
The representation was considered and rejected by the State Government.
It was, however, not forwarded to the Central Government and hence the Central Government had no occasion to consider the representation of the appellants for the revocation of the detention orders.
As the detention orders were not revoked the appellants preferred separate habeas corpus writ petitions in the High Court which dismissed both the writ petitions, answering in negative on the question whether the detention orders were vitiated as the Detaining Authority as well as the State Government had failed to forward their representations to the Central Government for the reason that the detenus who had failed to follow the clear and specific instructions given in the grounds of detention regarding the manner and mode of address to various authorities, could not be allowed to reap the benefit of their own default.
This view of the High Court was challenged before this Court by the appellants.
The State Government as well as the Central Government supported the view taken by the High Court contending that the appellants cannot make a grievance if they have despite a clear direction in the grounds of detention chosen to deviate therefrom.
Once the procedure established by law is followed by the respondents the failure on the part of the Detaining Authority or the State Government to accede to the request made by the appellants in the last paragraph of their representations to take out copies thereof and forward the same to the Central Government cannot vitiate the deten tion order.
The Union of India contended that since no representa tion had reached the Central Government there was no ques tion of the Central Government applying its mind thereto and taking a decision thereon.
445 On the question whether failure on the part of the Detaining Authority as well as the State Government to accede to the request of the appellants to take out copies of the representations and forward the same to the Central Government for consideration has resulted in violation of their considerational/statutory right to have their repre sentation considered by the Central Government, and if yes, whether the detention orders are liable to be quashed on that ground, allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Detaining Authority as well as the State Government were not justified in taking a hypertechnical stand that they were under no obligation to take out copies of the representations and forward them to the Central Government.
Such action of the Detaining Authority and the State Government was unreasonable and resulted in a denial of the appellants ' constitutional right.
The impugned deten tion orders are liable to be quashed and directed that the appellants, who were in detention, to be set free.
[459B E] Per A.M. Ahmadi, J. on his behalf himself and V. Ramas wami, J. 1.
Article 22(3)(b) (5) casts a dual obligation on the Detaining Authority, namely, (i) to communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been made; and (ii) to afford to the detenu the earliest opportu nity of making a representation against the detention order.
Consequently the failure to communicate the grounds promptly or to afford the detenu an opportunity of making a represen tation against the order would clearly violate the constitu tional guarantee afforded to the detenu by clause (5) of Article 22 of the Constitution.
It ' is by virtue of this right conferred on the detenu that the Detaining Authority considers it a duty to inform the appellant detenu of his right to make a representation to the State Government, the Central Government and the Advisory Board.
The right to make a representation against the detention order thus flows from the constitutional guarantee enshrined in Article 22(5) which casts an obligation on the authority to ensure that the detenu is afforded an earliest opportunity to exercise that right, if he so desires.
[450H 451C] 2.
The necessity of casting a dual obligation on the authority making the detention order is obviously to ac quaint the detenu of what had weighed with the Detaining Authority for exercising the extraordinary powers of deten tion without trial conferred by section 3(1) of the Act and to give the detenu an opportunity to point out any error in the exercise of that power so that the said authority gets an opportunity to undo the harm done by it, if at all, by correcting the error at the earliest point of time.
[451C D] 446 3.
Under section 11 an officer of the State Government or that of the Central Government specially empowered under section 3(1) of the Act to make a detention order is not conferred the power to revoke it; that power for those officers has to be traced to section 21 of the General Clauses Act.
Therefore, where an officer of the State Gov ernment or the Central Government has passed any detention order and on receipt of a representation he is convinced that the detention order needs to be revoked he can do so by virtue of section 21 of the General Clauses Act since sec tion 11 of the Act does not entitle him to do so.
[454A C] 4.
If the State Government passes an order of detention and later desires to revoke it, whether upon receipt of a representation from the detenu or otherwise, it would be entitled to do so under section 21 of the General Clauses Act but if the Central Government desires to revoke any order passed by the State Government or its officer it can do so only under clause (b) of Section 11(1) of the Act and not under section 21 of the General Clauses Act.
[454C D] 5.
On a conjoint reading of section 21 of the General Clauses Act and section 11 of the Act it becomes clear that the power of revocation can be exercised by three authori ties, namely, the officer of the State Government or the Central Government, the State Government as well as the Central Government.
The power of revocation conferred by section 8(f) on the appropriate Government is clearly inde pendent of this power.
It is thus clear that section 8(f) of the Act satisfies the requirement of Article 22(4) whereas section 11 of the Act satisfies the requirement of the latter part of Article 22(5) of the Constitution.
The statu tory provisions, therefore, when read in the context of the relevant clauses of Article 22, make it clear that they are intended to satisfy the constitutional requirements and provide for enforcement of the right conferred on the detenu to represent against his detention order.
Viewed in this perspective it cannot be said that the power conferred by section 11 of the Act has no relation whatsoever with the constitutional obligation cast by Article 22(5).
[454D G] 6.
It must be realised that when a person is placed under detention he has certain handicaps and if he makes a request that a representation prepared by him may be for warded to the Central Government as well as the State Gov ernment for consideration after taking out copies thereof it would be a denial of his right to represent to the Central Government if the Detaining Authority as well as the State Government refuse to accede to his request and omit to forward his 447 representation to the Central Government for consideration.
In such circumstances refusal to accede to their request would be wholly unreasonable and in total disregard of the right conferred on the detenu by Article 22(5) of the Con stitution read with section 11 of the Act.
[458F G, 459B] Razia Umar Bakshi vs Union of India & Ors., ; Rattan Singh vs State of Punjab & Ors., ; Sat Pal vs State of Punjab & Ors., and Smt.
Gracy vs State of Kerala & Anr., JT ; Tara Chand vs State of Rajasthan, ; referred to.
Per M.M. Punchhi, J. 1.
Section 11 of the Act does not confer any constitutional right on the detenu to have his representation thereunder considered as if under Article 22(5), but merely a provision enabling the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, to revoke or modify detention orders.
Have section 11 of the Act re pealed, it causes no affectation to the constitutional guarantee under Article 22(5) of the Constitution.
Corre spondingly, section 11 of the Act derives no sustenance from the said Article.
Both operate in mutually exclusive fields, though not as combatants.
[459F G]
