The appellant Federation entered into a contract with a Soda Company of Kenya, for supply of 5000 metric tonnes of soda ash dense and the consignment arrived at Bombay on 23.12.1981.
The goods were cleared on payment of customs duty of Rs.32,15,904.21.
The appellant on distribution of the goods to various members of the Federation, received complaints that the soda ash which had been supplied was of sub standard quality.
When the sellers as well as their agents were approached, they sent a team of experts to examine the goods and on inspection the goods were found defective.
As per agreement dated 9.2.1982, the sellers sent a credit note of US $ 2,40,000 as compensation on account of the defective goods.
The amount remitted on account of the import made was only US $ 5,35,000 as against the earlier contracted amount of US $ 7,75,000.
In view of such reduction, the appellant filed a refund application before the Customs Department to the tune of Rs.9.95,892 65.
The Assistant Collector rejected the refund application as he was not satisfied to the extent of deterioration of the goods before clearance as provided by Section 22 of the .
The appeal preferred was rejected by the Collector of Customs on the reasoning that the damage wad discovered after the goods were out of customs control.
The further appeal to the Tribunal was rejected hold ing that the alleged inferior nature of goods was discovered after clearance.
514 Under Section 130E of the , present appeal was made to this Court, contending that the goods supplied were not in accordance with the contractual speci fication, the defects being inherent in nature resulted in diminution in the real value of the goods and what had been agreed upon by the foreign seller was reduction in price on account of the defects, and claimed that it would be enti tled to refund of customs duty under Section 22 of the Act.
On the question, whether the appellant was entitled to the refund of customs duty on account of the compensation given by the seller to the appellant on supply of goods, dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.01.
When the value is assessed on the basis of the invoice and the goods are cleared, the implication is that no remission is allowed and no abatement has been occasioned.
There is no express provision which enables the proper officer to make a re assessment for the purpose of remission on the ground that the goods at the time of their importation or at the time of the clearance was sub standard or damaged and the invoice price does not represent the real value.
[520E F] 1.02.
Any error in the assessment of the value by itself does not enable the importer to claim re assessment or refund.
It has necessarily to be shown that on account of the damaged or deteriorated condition of the imported goods before or during the unloading of the goods in India, the duty to be charged on the goods was proportionate to the value of the damaged or deteriorated goods.
[520G 521A] 1.03.
The question of redetermining the value of the imported goods can arise only in a case where such damage or deterioration before the clearance is proved to the satis faction of the proper officer.
When there had been no indi cation of any such condition and the duty has been assessed on the basis of the invoice value and duty is paid, the assessment would be binding.
The importer on finding the goods cleared and distributed not to his entire satisfaction may have a claim in contract against the seller for provid ing sub standard, damaged or deteriorated goods for the value in the invoice, and it may be open to the buyer to realize from the seller such damages as he would in law be entitled to.
That claim for damages cannot have any bearing to the assessment at the time of the clearance.
The price at which the goods has been sold is represented by the invoice price and whatever amount is realized on subsequent agree ment is only by way of compensation as damages.
It cannot be said that the damages thus received represents the differ ence in price that had been paid and that ought to have been 515 paid.
When the seller had agreed to compensate the buyer for the quality of the goods imported, the buyer does not get the right to claim abatement of duty on the assumption that the real price was something less than what has been indi cated in the invoice.
[521A D] 1.04.
There is no material on record to show that there had been a re assessment of the value of the goods.
What had been estimated is only quantum of damages sustained by the buyers and to that extent they had been compensated.
That arrangement between the buyer and the seller cannot be linked with the assessment of duty and no claim for abate ment of duty under the provisions of Section 22 or a claim for refund under Section 27 could be legitimately enter tained.
[523A B] Biggin & Co. Ltd. vs Premanite, LD., Berry Wiggins & L.D., ; Cehave NV vs Bremer, ; Ford Motor Company of India vs Secretary ' of State for India, [1937 8] L.R. 659.
A. 32 and Vaccum Oil Co. vs Secretary of State for India, [1932] L.R. 59, IA 258, referred to.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, para 574 at page 121, Vol. 12; referred to.
