In the present petitions filed before this court, the petitioners, Research Scholars connected with Projects entrusted to different institutions, prayed for security of employment and improvement of conditions of service.
In the earlier writ petitions this Court indicated that those who have put in 15 years of research work should be immediately regularised and that a core cadre be built up.
The Respond ents undertook to submit a comprehensive scheme and this court granted two month 's time to the Respondents to file the same.
Passing interim orders pending examination of a compre hensive scheme to be submitted by the Respondents, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Indian Council of Medical Research (I.C.M.R.)is actually the organisation set up for research purposes and the Union of India meets the expenditure on research by funding.
This Court does not have the adequate technical know how but is of the view that if appropriate coordination is made and the Health Ministry, ICMR and the Institutes where research is carried on tie up their opera tions, more useful work can be done and simultaneously the researchers would have better terms of employment.
All the Institutes where research is carried on may not be at the National Capital.
Hence a small monitoring unit requires to be set up which would finalise the various research projects well in advance and receive offers of projects from organi sations like World Health Organisation or other bodies.
[598B D] 596 2.
No consideration has been.
given as to why the drug manufacturers in India who have engaged themselves in a Very lucrative trade should also participate in research pro grammes.
Quality of work in research institutes specialised in their fields is bound to be better than research carried on by the manufacturers themselves.
A scheme could be evolved by which established drug manufacturers could be required to participate in such programmes by supporting particular research projects which the monitoring body 'could allot.
Continuing.
research not only keep up the level of knowledge but also helps the enhancement of effi ciency of treatment of diseases and in the matter of provid ing relief to the patients.
[598E G] 3.
Once service guarantees are provided and security of service is available, the flow of inspiration from within perhaps slows down.
However, there is no objection to a core cadre being built up and if the Health Ministry is of the view that there should be a core cadre, it can quickly set up the same and such of the researchers who have put in more or less continued period of work could he brought into the cadre at the first instance on regular basis.
The Committee which the Union of India has to set up my look into this totter more thoroughly and give shape to the idea.
[599A C] 4.
The Patel Chest Institute seem to be more or less a permanent future and researchers therein may be continued against the programmes available.
The funding of course has to be ultimately done by the Health Ministry and the manner of funding may be determined by it.
The researchers who have worked in the All India Institute of Medical Sciences should he continued upon availability of its programmes but those who have put in longer periods may be absorbed in available vacancies.
The stand taken by Committee that researchers may be treated as in service candidates when regular vacancies occur for absorption, is approved.
[599D, E]
