A letter addressed to this Court complaining about prevalence of bonded labour system in the quarries of Fari dabad District in Haryana_ State was treated as a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution.
Two Advocates were appointed as Commissioners to inquire into the working conditions of the stone quarry workers.
Later, this Court, finding the necessity of an in depth investigation into social and legal aspects of the problem, also appointed two Commissioners Dr. 'S.B. Patvardhan and Mr. Krishan Mahajan to study the working conditions provail ing in the various quarries within the Faridabad district with particular reference to violation of provisions of the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act of 1976 and Inter State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment & Conditions of Service) Act.
The Commissioner furnished their report on 28th of June, 1982.
The 3 Judge Bench heard the matter and In its Judgment (reported in ; , dealt with various aspects of the problem and taking into account the information collected by Advocate Commissioners and the report made by Dr. Patvardhan.
The Court did not treat the writ petition as disposed of by its judgment and the application survived for further monitoring.
This Court also appoInted Shri Laxmi Dhar Misra, JoInt Secretary 525 in the Ministry of Labour, Government of India as a Commis sioner to carry out the assignments stated in the judgment.
Mr. Laxmidhar Misra, in due course, submitted his report in two parts one dealing with the identification of the bonded labour and the second covering the inquiry into the implementation of the 21 directives.
The petitioner Morcha, filed a petition for contempt alleging that the directions were not being implemented.
Mr. Mahabir Jain of the Faculty of National Labour Institute was appointed to inquire into the measures and report on the degrees to which the 21 directives issued by the Court had been implemented and to present to the Court a clear picture of the issues involved for enabling it to make its own assessment and come to a conclusion as to whether the directions had been or were being implemented and also as to whether action for contempt was appropriate or in the matter of monitoring the social problem, some other course was necessary to he adopted, and in February, 1989, the report was submitted to the Court.
As the 3 Judge Bench had gone into the philosophy in volved in the matter in the Judgment, what remains for consideration at this stage was more or less a clear review of the enforcement of the directives and assessment of the outcome for achieving the statutory purpose and the consti tutional goal and for the fulfilment of the hopes and expec tations.
of this Court in that regard.
The matter was heard for some time on the basis of these reports of Mr. Jain and this Court reserved Judgment on 10th of July, 1990.
When the totter was about to he disposed a communication was received by the Court dated 24.L1991 from the Director General of Labour Welfare in the Ministry of Labour that the total number of unrehabilitated bonded laboures was 523 upto 30.11.1990, whereas the number to he 3993 according to the petitioner and on 21st February, 1991, this court directed a Committee to check up the particulars and to furnish a report, which was furnished on July 1, 1991, from which it was understood that the total number of identified bonded labour is around 2000 and not 3993.
The report indicated that the wages, the facility of schooling and medical treatment, availability of water, provisions and scope for recreation are aspects which still require attention.
No attention has been 526 bestowed by the inspecting authority.
of the labour law enforcers to secure improved conditions of working.
Allowing the petition this Court, HELD: 1.
For a loan taken at an exorbitant rate of interest the debtor virtually sells himself to the creditor and gets bonded usually for a period of life and renders service for the purpose of satisfying the debt.
The creditor anxious to exploit the situation ensures that the debt is never satisfied and often on the traditional basis of pious obligation the liability is inherited by the children of the original debtor.
The system thus provides a built in mecha nism for continuation of the under privileged section of the society by the privileged few living therein.
[537H 538B] 2.
The bonded labourers are paid nominal wages and often their family members are not permitted to take remunerative jobs elsewhere without permission of the master.
Normally, such permission is not granted and the impoverished condi tion is allowed to continue to the advantage of the credi tor, [538B C] 3.
Quarries ace located in a particular area away from habitation.
On account of*necessity for workmen in the area people from different parts of the country are made to live therein along with their families under very insanitary and inconvenient conditions.
Health care of workmen and members of their families and education of the children as also the adults in such exclusive locality should be of the employer.
To require a school to he built in such an area where there may not be adequate number of children for the purpose of schooling at the expense of the State exchequer may not he appropriate.
That apart these institutions should he a part of the trade.
In the manner the employer has to make provi sion for water and medical care, it should also have the responsibility of providing schooling for the children of the workmen.
Today emphasis is also being given on adult education.
If appropriate facility is provided the workmen beyond their.
working hours can also have scope for learning the three Rs and this could he through a process of adult education with State support under the relevant scheme.
[544G 545B] 4.
The State of Haryana must come, forward to play its role in a better way.
These are quarries located near about the industrial belt of Haryana and not far away from Delhi.
Dust emanating from the, working area in Haryana is bound to affect adversely ,the Delhi atmosp 527 here.
If adequate importance is given to the angle of pollu tion the industry itself has to he regula`ed or may have to be stopped.
[545B C] 5.
The State of Haryana has not taken Court 's interven tion in the proper spirit and has failed to exercise appro priate control though some eight years back this Court had in clear terms laid down the guidelines and had called upon the public authority to take charge of the situation and provide adequate safeguards.
[545D E] 6.
The workmen engaged on fur time basis, who are not prepared to return to, their States, are to he provided with a permanent base for residence at or near the work site. 'This would necessitate, reasonable housing, supply of water, a reasonable provision store at Land, schooling facility, of a hospital, recreational facilities and atten tion tO the law and order problem.
Perhaps near the area a police statiOn or an outpost could be located.
If the work ers were insufficient in number, a doctor could be taken as a visitor to the area at frequent intervals and instead of a regular school one single teacher could he provided to look after the health of the people.
[545G 546B] 7.
Court 's judgment to regulate such matters has inher ent limitation.
These are not schemes which could be conven iently monitored by a Court far less can the apex court keep track of the matter.
its Registry has congestion.
To get attention for a matter of this type from the Court is.
bound to take some time.
Human problems in their normal way do not wait for a time schedule for attention.
in such circumstances, it should be the obligation of the State which on account of running stone quarries within its area must in various ways be getting benefits to look after these.
aspects.
As a welfare State it is now the obligation of the State of Haryana to cater to these requirements of the area.
[546B D] 8.
In these circumstances the State of Haryana was called upon to attend to the needs of the workmen in a well considered and systematic way.
Since those workmen who will be working there have to be protected from the vagaries of employment and the anxiety of the employer to draw work without adequate payments, the authorities of the State of Haryana must take care to protect the workmen from the hands of the: employer by ensuring compliance with the laws if there he any vacuum in the laws, the State of Haryana should rise to play the role of a welfare State and.
play it Well.
In fact there could be a special cess raised against the quarry activities to*be specifically utilised by way of return to the industry and there could he a Special fund.out of which all the amenities could be provided.
What is want ing is 'not power but the mind and alertness regarding one 's duty.
[546E G] 528 9.
The State of Haryana shall now ensure that the people who have been identified numbering about.
2000 are continued in work with the improved conditions of service and facili ties and such of them who want to go back to their native areas be treated as released from bondage and appropriate action must be taken in accordance with Government of In dia 's scheme forthwith.
[547D E] Gupta vs Union of India, [1982] 2 SCR 365, referred to.
