One Yesaji 2, ancestor of the parties rendered meritori ous military service to Ranaji Scindia and in recognition thereof, the Raja of Gwalior granted permanent jagir of Chandurpura village together with the buildings situated in 100 Bighas of land and the residential Bada with right of enjoyment and succession from generation to generation.
By virtue thereof, the ownership, possession and enjoyment was continued successively for seven generations upto Dwarkanath by rule of primogeniture.
Dwarkanath was the nephew (broth er 's son) Of the respondent and father of appellant Nos. 1 and 2.
Dwarkanath being minor at the time of his succession to the estate, the court of wards took over the management and the respondent was appointed as Superintendent and on his death, since appellants 1 and 2 were minors Aruna Rai, their mother, initially managed the estate with the assist ance of the respondent and subsequently the respondent came into full control and management.
The respondent filed a suit for partition .in the year 1962 of the plaint schedule 1 to 3 properties in equal moiety and allotment of one such share to him.
He pleaded that the properties are coparcenary joint family properties and he is entitled to a half share therein.
The respondent received maintenance from the jagir income at the rate of Rs.125 per month.
The appellants defendants disputed the nature of the properties as joint family, status of the respondent and the appellants as coparceners.
They referred to various accretions made to the jagir estate by their father and mother and pleaded that the jagir being an impartible estate is the separate and self acquired properties of Dattatraya 1 Dwarkanath by rule of primogeniture and the concept of coparcenary and joint family status ' are inapplicable to it, and that the respond ent has thus no share therein, but has only a right of maintenance as per the law and the Custom of Gwalior State.
It was also added that the respondent and his wife were given jewellery at.
the time of their mar 645 riage which belonged to the family of the appellants and some of them are stridhana of the 3rd defendant; the re spondent had no share therein or in the utensils etc.
The trial court found that till the date of death of Ghanshyam 2 in 1909, he was jagirdar.
Dattatraya 1 and Dwarkanath suc ceeded as Jagirdars by rule of primogeniture.
After the abolition of the Jagir, compensation was paid to Dwarkanath during his life time as the eldest member of the family and the appellant No. 1 also had been paid balance of compensa tion.
If a joint family possesses property which was admit tedly joint, the presumption would he that the property continued to be joint and the burden lies upon the member who claims as separate property to plead and prove it as separate or self acquired property.
On this reasoning, the trim court granted preliminary decree for partition of half share in schedule 1 and 2 and half share in the moveable property viz., compensation amount jewellery and utensils.
The High Court substantially upheld the findings of the trial court.
It held that rule of primogeniture and survi vorship was introduced by the Manual of Jagirdars of the Gwalior State (Qwaid Jagirdaram) in the year 1913 and with the abolition of the Jagir in 1951 under the Madhya Bharat Abolition of Jagir Act 28, 1951, the properties became the ancestral Hindu Joint family properties and they are parti ble, irrespective of the fact in whose name it was entered either as Bhumidar in revenue papers or Jagirdar.
The High Court while confirming the decree of the trial court, di rected the respondent to bring into hotch potch his jewel lery and the appellants to have a half share therein and accordingly dismissed the appeal and the cross objections.
Hence this appeal by the appellants defendants by special leave.
Partly allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Liability to partition is an ordinary feature of joint family property, but it must not be supposed that joint property and partible property are mutually converti ble terms.
[652F] Succession to an impartible estate is governed by rule of primogeniture and the eldest male member of the family would succeed by survivorship to the impartible estate.
[653H 654A] The impartible estate, though descends by rule of primo geniture and survivorship on the eldest male member of the family, it must also be proved that the junior members gave up expressly or by implication his right to a share therein.[655G] The income of an impartible estate is not income of the undivided 646 family but is the income of the present holder, notwith standing that he has sons or brothers from whom he is not divided.
The fact that the son 's or brother 's right to maintenance arises out of the eldest brother 's possession of impartible estate and is a right to be maintained out of the estate, do not make it a right of a unique or even excep tional character or involve the consequence at Hindu Law that the income of the estate is not the holder 's income.
Income is not jointly enjoyed by the party entitled to maintenance and the party chargeable nor can it be said that the respective chances of each son to succeed by survivor ship make them all co owners of the income with their father or make the holder of the estate a manager on behalf of a Hindu family of which he and they are the male members of the family.
[658C E] The right of joint enjoyment which is ordinary incident to a coparcenary, where the joint estate is partible, is excluded by the rule of primogeniture and impartibility.
The income of an impartible estate and the accumulation of such income are the absolute property of the holder.
The immova ble properties would be incorporated with impartible estate.
It must be proved that the holder had impressed the immova ble properties as part of the estate.
But the movable properties will not.
Movables are not an accretion to the estate as in the case of an ordinary joint family estate.
[659E].
The grant of Chandurpur Jagir was in perpetuity and the enjoyment is from generation to generation.
Geneology ex tracted herein before establishes that devolution by survi vorship to the eldest male member continued till time of Dwarkanath and the respondent received only maintenance from the Jagir estate.
What was implicit was made explicit by Qwaid Jagirdaran issued in Samvat 1970 by Maharaja Scindia of Gwalior State.
[659F G] Thus it is indivisible and impartible and succeeded by lineal eldest descendent of the family by rules of primogen iture.
[659H] Baijnath Prasad Singh vs Tej.
Bali Singh, 48 Indian Appeals 195 A.I.R. 1921 P.C. 62; Katama Natchiar vs Raja of Shivganga, [1863] 9 Noore Indian Appeals, 588 (P.C.); Sartaj Kuari & Anr.
vs Deoraj Kuari, 15 Indian AppealS, 51; Pratap Chandra Deo vs Jagdish Chandra Deo, 54 Indian Appeals 289 A.I.R. 1927 P.C. 159; Anant Shikkappa Patil vs Shankar Ramchandra Patil, A.I.R. 1943 P.C. 196 at 201; Amrendra Man Singh vs Sanatan Singh, 60.
Indian Appeals 142 A.I.R. 1933 P.C. 155; Shiba Prasad Singh vs Rani Prayag Kumari Debi & Ors., 59 Indian Appeals 351 A.I.R. 1932 P.C. 216; Chin 647 nathayi @ Veeralakshmi vs Kulasekara Pandiya Naicker & Anr.
, ; ; Smt.
Rani Prabha Kumari Bibi vs Jagdish Chunder Dhabal, 29 Indian Appeals 82=ILR 29 Calcutta 433 P.C.; Janki Pershad Singh vs Dwarka Pershad Singh, 40 Indian Appeals 170=ILR 35 Allahabad 391 P.C.; Murtaza Husain Khan vs Mohd. Yasin Ali Khan, 43 Indian Appeals 269=A.I.R. ; Jagdamba Kumari vs Wazir Narain, 48 Indian Appeals 195=A.I.R. ; Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs Honble Sri Ravu Swetachalapati Ramakrishna Ranga Rao, Rajah of Babbili, ; Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab vs DeWan Bahadur Dewan Krishna Kishore, Rais, Lahore, A.I.R. 1941 P.C.120; Mirza Raja Shri Pushava thi Viziaram Gajapathi Raj Manne Sultan Bahadur & Ors.
vs Shri Pushavathi Visweswar Gajapathi Raj & Ors., ; ; Muttu Baduganadha Tevar vs Periasami @ Udayana Tevar, 23 Indian appeals 128 P.C.; Ravi Janardhana Krishna Ranga Rao vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1953 Madras 185; Tha kore Shri Vinayasinghji vs Kumar Srinatwarsinghji & Ors., [1988] (Supp.) S.C.C. 133; Sri Raja Rao Venkata Mahipati Gangadara Rama Rao Bahadur vs Raja of Pittapur, 47 Indian Appeals 354=A.I.R. ; Maharajah of Jeypore & Anr.
vs Vikrama Deo Garu, 52 Indian Cases 333=A.I.R. 1919 P.C. 126; Anant Kibe & Ors.
vs Purushottam Rao & Ors., [1984] (Suppl.) S.C.C. 175, referred to.
