The appellant, a non resident company, was carrying on the business of exporting manganese ore, and was assessed to income tax for the assessment year 1953 54.
Subsequently, on coming to know that proceedings for under invoicing were pending against the appellant before the Customs Authori ties, the respondent, the Income Tax Officer issued a notice under Section 148 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 to the appel lant stating that he 'had reasons to believe that the income of the appellant chargeable to, tax for the assessment year 1953 54 had escaped assessment within the meaning of Section 147 of the Act and called upon the appellant to show cause as to why it should not be re assesseed to income.
The appellant 's writ petition challenging the notice was dis missed by the High Court.
In the appeal before this Court on behalf of the appel lantcompany, it was contended that the only material before the Income Tax Officer was the original order of the Collec tor of Customs wherein it was held that the appellant had indulged in under invoicing, resulting in declaring lesser price than the prevailing market price, which could at the most he an information within the ambit of Section 147 of the Act, but could not be the basis or the reason to enter tain the belief, as required under Section 147(a) of the Act and that the notice had been issued under Section 147(b) and not under Section 147(a).
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Two conditions are required to confer juris diction on the Income Tax Officer under Section 147(a) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The first is that the Income Tax Officer must have reason to. 628 believe that the income chargeable to income tax had been underassesseed and the second that such under assessment has occurred by reason of omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for its assessment for the year 1953 54.
[631F] 1.2 In the instant case, the Income Tax Officer in his recorded reasons, has relied upon the facts as found by the Customs Authorities that the appellant under invoiced the goods he exported.
Though the said finding may not be bind ing upon the Income Tax Authorities, it can be a valid reason to believe that the chargeable income has been under assesseed.
The final outcome of the proceedings is not relevant.
There should be existence of reasons to make the Income Tax Officer believe that there has been under assess ment of the assessee 's income for a particular year.
Thus, the first condition was satisfied.
Secondly, the appellant company did not produce the books of accounts kept by it at its head office located outside the country, nor the origi nal contracts of sale which were entered into with the buyers at that place, or .any of the accounts which related to the foreign banks.
No reasons were given for the supply of manganese ore at lower than the market rate.
It is for the assessee to disclose all the primary facts before the Income Tax Officer to enable him to account the true income of the asessee.
Thus, the proven charge of under invoicing per se satisfies the second condition.
[631G H, 632A C] 1.3 The appellant 's assessable income has to be deter mined on the basis of the price received by it for the goods exported.
If the true price had not been disclosed and there was under invoicing, the logical conclusion prima facie is that there has been failure on the part of the appellant to disclose fully and truly all material facts before the Income Tax Officer.
In the circumstances, both the condi tions required to attract the provisions of Section 147(a) have been complied with.
[632D] 2.
Although the notice only mentioned Section 146 of the Act without indicating whether it was under SUb Section(a) or Sub.
Section (b) the reasons recorded by the Income Tax Officer specifically state that the proposed action was under Section 147(a)i of the Act.
Even otherwise, the material on record and the reasons recorded by IncomeTax Officer justify the issue of the notice under Section 147(a) of the Act.
[632F]
