The respondent plaintiff in C.A. No. 18S2/89 was appointed as an ad hoc Sub inspector in the District Food and Supply Department.
He absented himself from duty from 29 September 197S. On 27 January 1977, his services were terminated.
On 18 April 1984, he instituted 'the mir for declaration that the termination order was against the principles of natural Justice, terms and conditions of employment, void and inoperative and be continued to be in service.
The State the appellant defendant contended that the plaintiff 'sservices were terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of his ad hoc appointment and the suit was barred by time.
The trial Court dismissed the Suit on the ground of limitation, but on appeal the Additional District Judge decreed the suit, holding that the termination order though simplicitor in nature was passed as a measure of punishment without an 'enquiry and he should have been given an oppor tunity to explain his conduct by holding proper enquiry and that, since the order of termination was bad, the suit was not barred by time.
The second appeal preferred by the State was dismissed by the High Court holding that as the dismissal of the employee was illegal, 664 void or inoperative being in contravention of the mandatory provisions of any rules or.
conditions of service, there was.no limitation to bring a suit for declaration of contin uance in service.
The respondent plaintiff in C.A. No. 4772/89 was ap pointed on.
14 November 1977.
On 15 March 1979, he was discharged from service for some misconduct and against which appeal was made, which was rejected on 15.6.1979.
When his revision petition was dismissed on 30.11.1979 he brought a suit on 12.2.1985 seeking declaration that the order discharging him from service was illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional against the principles of natural justice and continuance in service.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
The appeal preferred by the plaintiff was allowed by the Additional District Judge that the plaintiff was discharged from service in contravention of the mandatory provisions of the rules and as such it had no legal effect.
There was no period of limitation .for instituting the suit for declaration that such a dismissal order was not binding upon the plaintiff.
The High Court dismissed the second appeal in limine.
On the question, whether limitation governs the suit for declaration by a dismissed employee, if the dismissal was illegal, void or inoperative being in contravention of the mandatory provisions of any rules or conditions of service, this Court, allowing the appeals of the State the defendant, HELD: 1.
The Court 's function on the presentation of plaint is simply to examine whether, on the assumed facts, the plaintiff is within time.
The Court has to find out when the "right to sue" accrued to the plaintiff.
If a suit is not covered by any of the specific articles prescribing a period of limitation, it must fall within the residuary article.
[667H 668.
A suit for declaration that an order of dismissal or termination from service passed against the plaintiff is wrongful, illegal or ultra vires is governed by Article 113 of the Limitation Act.
[6TOG.H] 3.
The party aggrieved by the invalidity of the order has to approach the Court for relief of declaration that the order against him is inoperative and not binding upon him.
He must approach the Court within the prescribed.period of limitation.
If the statutory time limit expires the Court cannot give the declaration sought for.
[669E F] 665 4.
If an act is void or ultra vires it is enough for the Court to declare it so and it collapses automatically.
It need not be set aside.
The aggrieved party can simply seek a declaration that it is void and not binding upon him.
A declaration merely declares the existing state of affairs, and does not 'quash ' so as to produce a new state of af fairs.
[668F G] But none theless the impugned dismissal order has at least a de facto operation unless and until it is declared to be void or nullity by a competent body or Court.
[668H] Smith vs East Elloe Rural Disrict Council, ; at 769, referred to.
Prof. Wade: Administrative Law, 6th Ed.
P. 352, referred to.
State of M.P.v.
Syed Quamarali, , distin guished.
Jagdish Prasad Mathur and Ors.
United Provinces Government, AIR 1956 All 114 and Abdul Vakil vs Secretary of State and Anr , AIR 1943 Oudh 368, Approved.
State of Punjab vs Ajit Singh, and State of Punjab vs Ram Singh, , over ruled.
The words "right to sue" ordinarily mean the right to seek relief by means of legal proceedings.
Generally, the right to sue accrues only when the cause of action arises, that is, the right to prosecute to obtain relief by legal means.
The suit must be instituted when the right asserted in the suit is infringed or when there is a clear and une quivocal threat to infringe that right by the defendant against whom the suit is instituted.
[668C D] Mt. Bole vs Mt. Koklam and Ors., AIR 1930 PC 270 and Gannon Dunkerley and Co. vs The Union of India, ; followed.
