The writ petitioners some of the licensed welfare agencies contemplated under the judgment of this Court in ; , and petitioner No. 2, the Central Volun tary Adoption Resource Agency prayed that the Indian chil dren adopted to he allowed to retain their citizenship till they attain the age of majority; that birth certificates to be issued based upon attested copies of Court 's certificate (decree), adoption deed or affidavits of the officials of the licensed agencies; that quota fixed for placement of children with Indian families he quashed; that show cause notice he issued before cancellation of registration/ li cence to the registered agency; that setting up of Central Adoption Resource Agency be stayed; that to enable the agencies to maintain high standards of care for the chil dren, expenses by about 25% be revised and annual escalation of 10% be made; and that transfer of children from Statutory homes to recognised agencies for placement he allowed.
Partly allowing the writ petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
If the Indian citizenship is allowed to contin ue until the adopted child attains the age of majority, it would run counter to the need of quick assimilation and may often stand as a barrier to the requirements of the early cementing of the adopted child into the adoptive family.
[574G H] 2.
The birth certificate of the adopted child be ob tained on the basis of application of the society sponsoring adoption.
On the basis of the application and such other material which may he relevant to he found in an affidavit to accompany the application made by a responsible person belonging to the agency, the local magistrate should have the authority to make an order approving the particulars to he entered in the birth certificate and on the basis of the magisterial order the requi 569 site certificate should be granted.
This process should be done only after adoption is finalised and the particulars of the adopting foreign parents are available to be included.
The Chief District Medical Officer (CDMO) may be involved in the matter of ascertainment of the age and the magistrate may ordinarily act on the certificate granted by the CDMO.
[574H 575D] 3.
Registered societies to entitle themselves for renew al of registration of licence should exhibit their involve ment in the process of adoption and the authority should have evidence to satisfy that the agency is really involved in the activity.
[575G] 4.
The licensing authority should ordinarily ensure that the registered agency has proper child care facilities so that an agency which does not have such facilities may over a period of years go out of the field.
[575E] 5.In the event of registration/licence being proposed to be cancelled, an opportunity should be granted to such agency.
That would answer the requirements of natural jus tice and would uphold a healthy scheme of administration.
[575H 576A] 6.
The setting up of CARA is justified.
Such an institu tion would be an organisation of primacy and would work as a useful agency in the field.
Although there should be no keen competition for offering adoptions, regulated competition may perhaps keep up the system in a healthy condition.
Existence of CARA in that field is, therefore, welcome.
[576A B] 7.
Keeping in view the general rise in cost of living an escalation by 30% is allowed.
The matter may be reviewed once in three years so far as escalation of expenses is concerned.
[576C D] 8.1.
The children, who can be transferred for the pur poses for placement, would be those, whose parents are not known, orphans and perhaps those who are declared as aban doned children.
The homes are not set up in several States and areas.
Even Juvenile Boards have not been properly functioning and the recognised agencies do not have the facility of child care.
In these circumstances to order transfer of children from statutory homes to recognised agencies can indeed nOt be accepted as a rule.
[576D F] 570 8.2.
As and when such a request is received from recog nised agencies, the Juvenile Court or the Board set up under the Act may consider the feasibility of such transfer and keeping the interest of the child in view, the possibility of an adoption within a short period and the facilities available in the recognised agency as also other relevant features, make appropriate orders.
A strait jacket formula may very often be injurious to the interest of the child.
[576F G]
