Three brothers executed four sale deeds on June 25, 1968, to respondent.
The 4th brother, whose legal represen tatives are the appellants, filed four suits of pre emption against the vendee respondent and those were decreed on terms of payment of pre emption money on or before August 30, 1970.
The plaintiff pre emptors appellants filed four appeals before the District Judge for the reduction of the pre emption money.
On an application moved by the pre emptors the time for deposit of the amount fixed under the decree by the Trial Court was extended till further orders.
The appeals were rejected under Order 41 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure as being insufficiently stamped and not properly presented.
Before hand, however on 26.10.1970, the plaintiff pre emptors, deposited the pre emption amount in the Trial Court.
The pre emptors sought execution of the pre emption decrees.
The vendee judgment debtor raised objections stat ing that the suits stood automatically dismissed for non deposit of the pre emption money within the time identically stipulated under the decrees.
The objection was sustained by the Trial/Executing Court.
704 The appeal to the Appellate Court at the instance of the preemptors, was allowed, permitting the execution to pro ceed.
A Single Judge of the High Court in further appeal upheld the view of the District Judge, but the Division Bench of the High Court allowed the Letters Patent Appeals, upholding the objection made by the vendee respondent, that there were no decrees which could be executed, against which these appeals by special leave to this Court .were filed.
The appellants contended that the controversy could be determined on the anvil of Section 148 of the Code of Civil Procedure by extending time by the Court, as it was extend able when any period was fixed or granted by the Court for the doing of any act prescribed or allowed by the Court, even though the period originally fixed or granted had already expired; that this Court should exercise its plenary power in the interests of justice to extend the time.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
There is no law of pre emption permitting a decree to be drawn in terms of Section 15(1) of the Punjab Pre emption Act.
Were the Court to exercise at all the discretions on the subject, the Court would in any event be completing the process of decreeing the suits; the suits which have been held to fall down under Order 20 Rule 14 of the Code of Civil Procedure, tantamounting to their dismiss al, and that too on present day when such decrees cannot be passed.
[707C D] 2.
The objections of the vendee must remain sustained and the pre emptor appellants must fail in the event, not getting their suits for pre emption decreed.
Decretal money deposited by the appellants may be permitted to be withdrawn by them, if not already withdrawn.
[707F G] Atarn Parkash vs State of Haryana & Ors., ; , followed.
Jogdhayan vs Babu Ram & Ors., ; and Jagar Dhish Bhargava vs Jawahar Lal Bhargava and Others, ; , referred to.
