Plaintiff 's case was that as the defendant and her husband had no issue they brought up the plaintiff as their foster son from the age of eight years and thereafter the plaintiff continued to live with them and was brought up treating him as their own son.
Defendant 's husband 'died on 14.1.1932 and before his death he executed a will bequeathing the suit properties in favour of his wife, for her life with a vested remainder in favour of the plaintiff.
Both the parties lived together with perfect ' under standing 'but after some time there was misunderstanding and the defendant assumed hostile attitude towards the plaintiff and began to claim the suit property as her absolute proper ty.
The plaintiff claimed absolute right in the suit proper ties after the lifetime of the defendant and challenged the right of the defendant to execute any will in respect of the suit properties.
The defendant took the plea that her husband died issueless and 718 intestate and did not exeCute any will at any time.
Neither she nor her husband brought up the plaintiff as their foster son nor did they educate him.
The defendant had brought up her nephew from his childhood and performed his marriage.
On account of love and affection for him and his children, the defendant executed a registered will on 26.10.69 bequeathing all her properties in his favour.
The Trial Court held the will dated 14.1.1932 proved and decreed the plaintiff 's suit.
The First Appellate Court upheld the Judgment and decree of the Trial Court.
The defendant preferred a second appeal in the High Court.
During the pendency of the Second Appeal in the High Court the plaintiff died and his legal representatives were brought on record.
The High Court allowed the second appeal.
The legal representatives of the plaintiff came to this Court by grant of Special Leave.
S.L.P. (C) No. 438/1979.
Married life between '0 ' and his wife, 'M ' was not happy and cordial. 'o ' executed a registered will dated 21.3.1921 bequeathing all his properties including the suit properties in favour of his mother and sister for their lifetime and thereafter in favour of 'R ' and 'D ' two sons of his sister and their issues.
In the said will reference was made re garding the conduct of 'M ' in deserting him and in any event if she changed her mind and agreed to live under the protec tion of the legatees she was allowed to enjoy the income from item I of the suit properties and that she should construct a house in item referred to in the will and to live there during her lifetime and after her death the said Item I and the house site with the house shall go to his sister 's sons. '0 ' died in 1922 and thereafter the legatees under the will entered into possession of all the properties. 'M ' put obstruction to the legatees in getting possession. 'M ' filed a suit in 1923 praying for a declaration that the will made by her husband was not valid and as such be cancelled and for possession and mesne profits and in the alternative she claimed for maintenance both past and fu ture.
719 In the said suit the parties entered into a compromise and a compromise decree was passed on 5.3.1924.
Uuder the terms of the said compromise the execution of the will was accepted and the same was made subject to the terms of the compromise decree.
Under the compromise decree it was agreed that 'M ' would enjoy items 1 & 2 of the properties mentioned in the will and also 50 cents of land during her lifetime.
She would also have an enjoyment of the house site during her lifetime without any right of aliena tion. 'D ' died unmarried in 1930 but during his lifetime he sold his interest in the properties in favour of 'R ', his brother, who died in 1962.
On his death the petitioners being his sons and daughters claimed to have become.
enti tled for all their father 's properties including the rights in the suit property. 'M ' during her life time executed a settlement deed in favour of the respondents giving absolute rights in the suit properties.
The petitioners filed a suit against M and the respond ents for declaration that the settlement deed executed by 'M ' will not enure beyond the lifetime of 'M '. 'M ' took,the plea that the limited interest given to her under the com promise decree had become enlarged into absolute right by virtue of Section 14(1) of the Act.
The Trial Court decreed the suit and it was affirmed in first appeal. 'M ' having died, the respondents preferred a second appeal in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the second appeal against which.
the petitioners filed the S.L.P. S.L.P. (C) No. 2113 of 1980 'R 'did not have any issue from 'A ' and 'S ', his wives.
He being attached with the petitioner, executed a will on 2.7.1945 bequeathing his properties in favour of his second wife 'S ' for her lifetime and thereafter, absolutely in favour of the petitioner.
A provision was also made for the payment of Rs.68 and a direction to make available 18 kalams of paddy in favour of 'A ' for her lifetime.
In order to ensure the payment of the maintenance and delivery of paddy a charge was also created over the properties to go ulti mately in favour of the petitioner.
As the petitioner was a minor at that time the second wife was 720 appointed as his guardian. 'R ' died on 8.7.45 and subse quently his first wife 'A ' was awarded 50 kalams of paddy and a sum of Rs.250 in cash per annum by way of maintenance.
On appeal the High Court modified the decree of the Trial Court and enhanced the maintenance to Rs.480 per annum and directed the petitioner, the legatee under the will to give one building for the residence of 'A '.
Thereafter in 1951 'A ' sought the recovery of possession of one of the buildings.
The Executing Court allotted to her the eastern house backyard and the shops, against which the second wife preferred an appeal to the High Court.
A compromise was entered into between the parties in the High Court.
According to the terms of compromise 'A ' was permitted to occupy the eastern house together with the two shops but the backyard portion was not given.
Later on 'S ' was removed from the guardianship of the petitioner, and natural father was appointed as his guardian.
The respondents were brother 's grandsons of 'A ' who died on 2.2.1966, had settled the suit properties in favour of one 'C ' claiming title to the same in pursuance to a compro mise in A.A.O. 567 of 1950. 'R ' another respondent initially took on lease the properties from 'C ' and later on purchased the eastern half of the building and backyard portion.
The petitioner, challenging the transactions on the grounds that 'A ' was given a right of residence only in the building and the same lasted till her lifetime and such right could never be enlarged into an absolute right; that the settlement deed made by her in favour of 'C ' and the sale made by 'C ' in favour of 'R ', a respondent were invalid and no title could be conveyed by 'A ' in their favour, filed a suit for recovery of possession of the suit properties with mesne profits.
The Trial ' Court held that 'A ' was not the absolute owner of the suit properties as contemplated under Section 14(2) of the Act and decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiff.
Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the appeal.
On a Letters Patent Appeal the Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeal and dismissed the suit.
The plaintiff petitioner has filed the S.L.P. under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
721 Whether, the life estate given to a widow under the will of her Hindu husband beome san absolute estate under the provi sions of the Succession Act was the controversy raised in these cases.
The contention raised was that if a female Hindu acquires any property under a will which gives her a restricted estate in such pro perty then provisions of sub section (2) will override, the provisions of sub section (1) of Section 14 of the Act which makes a female Hindu as full owner.
Dismissing the appeal and the S.L.Ps.
this Court, HELD: PER N.M. KASLIWAL, J. on his behalf and on behalf of K. RAMASWAMY, J. of the Act is in the nature of a proviso or an exception to Sec.
14 and comes into operation only if acqui sition in any of themethods indicated therein is made for the first time without there being any pre existing right in the female Hindu to the property.
If the case falls under the provisions of Sec.
14(1) of the Act then the female Hindu shall he held to he full owner of the property and sub section (2) of Section 14 will only apply where the property is acquired without there being any pre existing right of the female Hindu in such property.
[730D E] 2.
Sub section (2) of Sec.
14 will he construed more in the nature of a proviso or an exception to sub section
(1) of Sec.
14 of the Act.
This view lends support to the object of the section which was to remove the disability on women imposed by law and to achieve a social purpose by bringing about change in the social and economic position of women in Hindu society.
[730E F] Mst.
Karmi vs Arnru and Ors.
, ; Badri Pershad vs
Kanso Devi; , ; V. Tulsamma & Ors.
vs Sesha Reddy (dead) by L.Rs.; , ; Bai Vajia (dead) by L.Rs.
vs Thakorbhai Chelabhai & Ors., ; ; ' Jagannath Pillai vs Kunjithapadam Pillai & Ors., ; ; Gopal Singh & Ant.
vs Dill Ram (dead) by L.Rs.
& Ors.
; , ; Gulwant Kaur and Others vs Mohinder Singh and Others, ; and Jaswant Kaur vs Major Harpal Singh, , referred to.
PER K. RAMASWAMY.
The Act revolutionised the status of a Hindu female; used 722 s.14(1) as a tool to undo past injustice to elevate her to equal status with dignity of person on par with man; extin guished pre existing limitation of woman 's estate, or wid ow 's estate known to Shastric law removed all the fetters to blossom the same into full ownersip.
The discrimination suffered by Hindu female under Shastric law was exterminated by legislative fiat.
The social change thus envisaged must be endeavoured to be given full vigour,thrust and efficacy.
[739F G] 2.
Section 14(1) enlarges the restricted estate into full ownersip when the Hindu female has pre existing right to maintenance etc.
Subsec.
(2) operates When the grant was made for the first time under the document with no pre existing right.
Sub sec.
(2) therefore, must be read as an exception or a proviso to sub sec.
Both the sub sec tions read with the explanation to be pragmaticably consid ered as a constituent integral scheme.
[739G 740A] 3. section 14 is not retroactive in its operation.
Devolution of the property under the will would take effect after the demise of the testator and the legatee would be bound by the terms of gift over etc.
The stranger legatee cannot take shelter under subsequent change of law to enlarge the opera tion of restrictive covenant to claim absolute ownership in the property bequeathed to her.
But socio economic amellora tion under the Act engulfs an instrument under the sweep of section 14(1) thereof, it extinguishes the pre existing limited estate or restrictive condition and confer absolute and full ownership of the property possessed by a Hindu female as on the date when the Act had come into force, namely, June 17, 1956.
The courts are not giving retrospective operation to section 14(1) or to the instrument.
The courts only would be applying the law to the facts found as on the date when the question arose to find whether legatee has pre existing vistage of title under law; and the nature of possession of the property held by her and whether the legatee would get the benefit of section 14(1) of the Act.
There need be no express recital even in the will of the enjoyment of the property devised under the will in lieu.
or maintenance ass limited owner for her life.
Even if 'so mentioned, it would be a reflection or restatment of the law existing as in 1932 when the will was executed.
[740G 741C] 4.
A legatee under a testamentary disposition is bound by the restrictive covenants contained therein.
But distinc tion should be maintained between an ordinary legatee and a legatee/Hindu female coupled with vistage of pre existing title to the property but with a limited estate known to Shastric law.
[740F G] 723 5.
As per existing law as in 1932 the widow as a legatee was entitled to widow 's estate and she remained in posses sion of the date of the Act came into force and was in enjoyment of the income derived therefrom for her life.
No one had a right to interdict it.
The restrictive covenant, therefore, does not stand an impediment to section 14(1) to have full play to extinguish the same and enlarge the limited estate of widow into an absolute ownership.
[741D E] 6.
The restrictions contained in the will, though fails both under sub sec.
(2) as well as sub sec.
(1) of section 14, the right to maintenance being a pre existing right over property "res ad rem" section 14(1) would apply ' The testamentary succession with a restrictive conditon in the will was obliterated.
She became absolute owner on or after June 17, 1956.
[ 741E F] Sir Main Henry: Earlier History of Institutions, at P. 339; E.S. Shivaswamy lyer: Revolution of Hindu Women, [1935] Edn.
P. 64; Manu Smriti, Chapter III verses 55 57, Chapter IX verses 18, 149, 45, 416, 299, Chapter XI verse 67; Mahat ma Gandhiji 'S (article) Young India, dated October 17.
1929; Ravindra Nath Tagore, (his speech in 1913 reprinted in) To the women, P. 18.
The Position of Woman in Hindu civilisa tion, 1955 Edn.
By Altaken, referred to.
State of Madras vs Srimati Charnpakam Doraira/an, ; ; C.B. Muthatmma vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Air India vs Nergesh Meerza & Ors., ; ; Pratap Singh vs Union of India, |19851 Suppl.
2 SCR 773; Seth Badri Prasad vs Smt.
Kanso Devi, ; V. Tulasamma vs Sesha Reddy (dead) by L.Rs.; , ; Bai Vajia (dead) by L.Rs.
vs Thakorbhai Chelabhai & Ors., ; ; Jagannathan Pillai vs Kunithapadam Pillai & Ors., ; ; Gulwant Kaur & Anr.
vs Mohinder Singh & Anr., ; ; Maharaja Pillai Lakshmi Ammal vs Maharaja Pillal Thillanayakom Pillai & Anr., ; Jaswant Kaur vs Major Harpal Singh, ; Munshi Singh vs Smt.
Sohan Bai (dead) by L.Rs., '[1989] 2 SCR 1012; Pearey Lal vs Rameshwar Das, [1963] Suppl.
2 SCR 834; Karmi vs Amru, AIR 1971 SC 745 and Kalawatibai vs Soiryabai & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
