On a complaint made by the Managing Committee of the 6th respondent Cooperative Housing Society, the third respond ent, Registrar, Cooperative Societies, referred the dispute relating to irregularities in the purchase of building material for construction of flats for members of society by the past Managing Committee, of which the appellant was the President at the relevant time, to arbitration.
The first respondent Arbitrator, gave his ex parte award, on the failure of the appellant and another person to file their reply to the claim of the claimant society, and directed the appellant and the other person to pay the society certain sum with interest thereon.
The appellant challenged the award before second re spondent, the Delhi Cooperative Tribunal, which dismissed the same holding that the Arbitrator 's act of proceeding ex parte was justified and that the appeal had no merit.
The appellant 's writ petition was also dismissed by the High Court.
In the appeal before this Court on behalf of the appel lant it was contended that it was Sec.
59 dealing with surchage which was applicable to the instant case and not Section 60, which pertained to settlement of disputes by arbitration since the dispute in question was one which could not be referred to arbitration in terms of Section 60 of the Act.
On behalf of the contesting respondents it was submitted that it was Section 60, which was applicable and not Section 59.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Sub Section (1) of Section 60 of the Delhi Co operative 783 Societies Act, 1972 indicates the true scope of the Section 60, while sub section (2) is merely illustrative, and not exhaustive.
Clause (c) of sub section (1) expressly provides that if any dispute touching the constitution/management or the business of the cooperative society arises between the society or its committee and any past committee.
any offi cer, agent or employee or any past officer of the society, the dispute should be referred to the arbitration.
[787H, 788A B, D] 1.2 In the instant case, the dispute, viz. irregulari ties in the purchase of building material for construction of flats for the members of the Society by the previous Managing Committee, touches the management of the Society and fails within the ambit of Section 60 of the Act.
The third respondent, Registrar, Cooperative, Societies was, therefore, right in referring the dispute to arbitration.
[789D F] Pentakota Srirakulu vs The Cooperative Marketing Society Ltd. ; , followed.
Change Nagar Cooperative House Building Society Ltd. and Anr.
Ashok Ohri, AIR 1976 63 Delhi 239, disapproved.
