The appellants father and son (A 1 and A 2) were tried under Sections 302, 201 and 120 B I.P.C. for causing murder of the wife of A.2.
The deceased was married to A 2 in 1961.
Two sons and one daughter were born to them.
Their matrimonial fife was not smooth.
There were frequent quarrels.
It was in the evidence that the deceased was not healthy both physically and mentally.
She was also admitted in 821 mental hospital once.
She used to confine herself to her room and she appeared to be somewhat mentally deranged.
On 18.3.82 the dead body of the deceased was found in her room in the house of the accused.
At that time admitted ly A 2 was not in the house and he was at Suratgarh.
On being informed about the death, A 1 sent for a doctor, who examined the deceased and declared her to be dead.
Thereaf ter A 1 informed P.W. S, the father of the deceased.
The brother of the deceased, P.W. 6 told P.W. 5 that he had seen the dead body lying in the room and that it was giving rotten smell.
P.W. 6 lodged a report before the Police.
The investigation was taken up, held the inquest, exam ined the witnesses and sent the dead body for post mortem.
The Doctor P.W. 2, who conducted the post mortem, opined that the death was due to head injury and pressure in the neck region.
After completion of the investigation, the charge sheet was laid.
22 witnesses were examined on behalf of the prose cution.
The accused denied the offences.
A 1 stated that he was away from 14.3.1982 onwards and was at Jodhpur in his daughter 's house.
In support of his plea D.W. 1, the neighb out of A 1 's daughter and his grand danghter, D.W. 2, namely the daughter of A 2 and the deceased were examined.
A 2 stated that he was at Suratgarh from 11.3.1982 onwards.
Both of them 'denied the allegations of the pfrosecution.
The trial court held that there was no evidence of conspiracy between the A 1 and A 2 for murdering the de ceased and the circumstances relied upon by the prosecution were hardly sufficient to connect them with the murder and the accused were acquitted by the trial court.
The State preferred an appeal before the Division Bonch of the High Court and the High Court convicted them under Section 120 B and Section 302 read with 34 of the I.P.C. and sentenced each of them to undergo imprisonment for life, against which this appeal was preferred under Section 2(a) of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of General Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970.
The appellants contended that the High Court acted an prejudice and suspicion and that there was absolutely no material to prove the conspiracy and muchless to connect the two accused in any manner with the murder.
822 The respondent supported the findings of the High Court and also contended that the accused would at least be liable of having committed other offences.
Disposing of the appeal by making modification in the sentence, this Court, HELD: 1.
The second accused was not present in the scene house, where the occurrence took place from 11th to 20th March, 1982 and that the first accused was at Jodhpur in his daughter 's house from 14.3.82 to 17.3.82 and returned to Jaipur on 18.3.82.
Therefore, they were not present in the house when the deceased died.
The Medical Officer, P.W. 2 could not say definitely as to whether the death has occurred before four days of his examination and there is absolutely no evidence either circumstantial or direct to hold that the death took place on 11.3.82 itself as found by the High Court.
The evidence of D.W. 2 who is none other than the daughter of the deceased and was very much in the house throughout categorically stated that her mother was alive on 15th March, also.
Apart from D.W. 2 the only other inmate of the house during the crucial period was the moth er in law of the deceased who was not even charge sheeted.
The letter exhibit
P 15 written by the first accused does not in any manner incriminate them and the High Court has grossly erred in holding that A 1 and A 2 entered into conspiracy merely on the basis of conjectures and surmises drawn from theletter.
P.Ws. 4, 9 and 10 have not supported the prosecu tion case and the remaining evidence does not in any manner implicate A 1 and A 2 and the other remaining inmate of the house, the mother in law of the deceased, was not even suspected.
Therefore having given anxious and careful con sideration to the facts and circumstances of the case it is felt by the Court that the prosecution has miserably failed to bring home the guilt of the appellants.
[835A E] 2.
Section 202 I.P.C. punishes the illegal omission of those who under law are bound to give information in respect of an offence which he is legally bound to give, particular ly being the head of the family.
Under this provision it is necessary for the prosecution to prove (1) that the accused had knowledge or reason to believe that some offence had been committed (2) that the accused had intentionally omit ted to give information respecting that offence and (3) that the accused was legally bound to give that information.
[836G H] 3.
A 1 was at least under an obligation to give infor mation about the death of the deceased since the same was unnatural.
From the 823 medical evidence, it is clear that it was not a natural death and consequently the death should at least be noted as one of suicide.
Even in the case of suicide an offence of abetment punishable under Section 306 is inherent.
Therefore even in the case of a suicide there is an obligation on the person, who knows or has reason to believe 'that such a suicidal death has occured, to give information.
[835G 836A] 4.
In the instant case A 1 returned to his house where the dead body was lying on 18.3.82 and the circumstances clearly go to show that he had knowledge that the deceased died of an unnatural death.
Therefore he had knowledge or at least had reason to believe that an offence had been commit ted even if, at that stage, be thought that it was only a suicide.
Therefore it was his bounden duty particularly as head of the family to inform the authorities.
He omitted to do so.
On the other hand, he went about telling that the deceased was still alive and her condition was serious.
But when P.W. 6, the brother of the deceased, came to the house and enquired, A 1 told him that the body would be Cremated and he intended to do so without informing the authorities.
Therefore all the ingredients of Section 202 are made out against him and he clearly committed the offence punishable under this Section at.
that stage.
[838B D] 5.
The fact that A 1 himself was made an accused in other offences subsequently does not absolve him of his complicity in respect of the offence punishable under Sec tion 202 I.P.C. [838D] Kalidas Achamma vs The State ofA.P S.H.O. Karimnagar, I Town P.S., , Approved.
Harishchandrasing Sajjansingh Rathod and Another vs State of Gujarat, , Distinguished.
