The appellants being aggrieved by the promotion policy of the respondent Bank dated 31.10.1983 read with the Circu lar dated 13.9.1989 for promotion from the cadre of Junior Management Grade 1 to Middle Management Grade II, moved the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The policy provides for two channels for promotion, namely, the Merit Channel and the Seniority Channel.
For filling vacancies by promotion from the cadre of Junior Management Grade 1 to that of Middle Management Grade II, 65% of the total vacancies were reserved for the Seniority Channel and the remaining 35% for the Merit Channel.
The criterion mentioned in the policy for the Merit Channel provides 40 per cent marks for written test, 10 per cent marks for seniority, 20 per cent marks for performance appraisal, 20 per cent marks for interview and the remaining 10 per cent marks for passing the examina ' tion held by the Bankers ' institute.
The High Courts dismissed the writ applications,.
against which the appeals were filed in this Court.
TIle appellants contended that the marks under all other heads amounting to it maximum of 80 per cent instead of the maximum of 40 per cent prescribed for the written test should be the proper criterion to call a candidate for interview in order to make a proper selection on the basis of merit; that by taking into account the marks of written test alone there is exclusion of other meritorious candi dates whose aggregate 770 including the marks obtained under the other heads may exceed the corresponding aggregate of marks of candidates 'obtaining higher marks in written test alone.
On this basis the policy for filling vacancies from the Merit Channel by promotion was alleged to be arbitrary.
The respondent Bank, contended that the Provision for the Merit Channel for promotion was made in the policy to give accelerated pro.
motion to the academically brilliant persons with the object of providing incentive to them and thereby improving the quality of personnel in the higher cadre; that the policy of deciding merit on the basis of written test alone has been consistently followed and the Circular dated 13.9.1989 was merely a clarification of the manner of preparation of the Select List to make the selec tion more objective and to yield better results by getting the most meritorious candidates from all circles.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
Keeping in view the laudable object of at tracting academically brilliant candidates into the Bank 's service as officers by direct recruitment by giving incen tive of accelerated promotion to the most meritorious amongst them who maintain a high standard of achievement is conducive to public interest and cannot be faulted.
[773C] 2.
Of the several heads under which the marks are divid ed for promotion to Merit Channel, written test and inter view are the only ones which depend on the current perform ance.
The marks under the remaining three heads of seniori ty, performance appraisal and C.A.LLB.
(passing of examina tion held by Bank 's Institute) relate to past performance of the candidate which are matters of record.
It is, therefore, the appraisal of the current performance by written test and interview which alone is the real part for a proper apprais al of the current performance of the candidate for the purpose of assessing his merit for promotion through the Merit Channel.
In this situation, if the marks obtained in the written test alone are taken into account for preparing the Select List to call candidates for an interview depend ing upon the number of vacancies available in Merit Channel the criterion adopted cannot be termed arbitrary.
[773C F] 3.
The marks obtained for seniority, performance ap praisal and C.A.I.I.B. are based on service record and not ' on appraisal of the candidate by a mode independent of service record for assessing the true current worth of the candidate.
Since, equal opportunity is available to all for competing through the Merit Channel, in addition to the 771 prospects through the Seniority Channel, the policy adopted cannot be treated as irrational, discriminatory or arbi trary.
[773F.G]
