On 22.1.90 a First Information Report was registered under section 120 B read with sections 161, 162, 163, 164 and 165A of the Indian Penal Code read with Sections 5(2), 5(1)(d) and 5(2)/5(1)(c) of the PreventiOn of Corruption Act, 1947 read with sections 409, 420, 468 and 471 of the Indian Penal Code against 14 accused alleging that theyent ered into a criminal conspiracy, obtained illegal gratifica tion in the form of money from BOFORS, a Swedish company through the agent firms/companies/persons as motive or reward for such public servants who by corrupt or illegal means or by otherwise dishonestly using their official position as public servants caused pecuniary advantage to themselves, BOFORS, the agents and others in awarding con tracts to BOFORS for the supply of guns to the Government of India and in the transaction also committed the offences of criminal breach of trust, heating of Union of India, forgery and using of forged documents etc.
The C.B.I. commenced its,investigation during the course of which statements of.witnesses were recorded and took into their custody 753 various documents and files relating to this BOFORS deal.
The C.B.I. moved an application before the Special Judge stating that the investigation of the case was to be con ducted not only in India, but also in Switzerland, Sweden and other countries, that an important aspect of .the inves tigation which was to be conducted in Switzerland was to collect documentary and oral evidence relating to all as pects of the accounts in banks in Switzerland to which remittances were made by ' M/s. A.B. Bofors from Sweden; that the, Director of the C.B.I. requested the concerned authori ties in Switzerland for freezing/blocking certain bank accounts relevant to this case and the Federal Depart .
ment of Justice and Policy, Switzerland moved Judge of Geneva and the concerned Judge of Zurich; that the relevant accounts in the bank had been blocked upto 28.2.1990 and that request for judicial assistance from Switzerland in this ' matter, therefore, should be made by 28.2.1990 failing which the Swiss Law obliges the withdrawal of instructions to block the accounts the Swiss authorities would render assistance in the investigation in Switzerland in accordance with the mutual assistance agreement dated 20.2.1989 only on receipt of a Letter Rogatory from the competent judicial authorities in India.
The C .B.I. requested the Special Judge to send a Letter Rogatory/ request to Switzerland urgently for getting the necessary assistance in the investigation to be conducted in Switzerland lest very important and relevant evidence would remain uncollected and the cause of justice would be frus trated.
The Special Judge allowed the application of the C.B.L Before the new Special Judge who assumed charge of the office from the previous Special Judge, the appellant in Crl.
A. No. 306/91 filed a Public Interest Litigation under Article 51 A of the Constitution of India praying that no Rogatory letter be issued on the formal request of the CBI unless the allegations against named persons were estab lished to the satisfaction of the Court; that no request for Rogatory or 'freezing bank account be made to Swiss Govt.
unless the concerned persons were noticed and heard on the subject; that the petitioner be permitted to join during inquiry in the capacity of public interest litigant; that inquiry section 340, Cr.
P.C. be held to determine the alleged offence committed by various persons and till then all proceedings of Rogatory be stopped.
The Special Judge dismissed the petition and issued Note of Compliance and amended Letter Rogatory.
754 The public interest litigant filed a criminal revision before the High Court.
During the hearing of the case before the High Court, several applications seeking impleadment/intervention were filed.
Dismissing the revision, the High Court held that the petitioner has no locus standi to maintain the petition and consequently the interveners also had no right to seek for impleadment or intervention and taking suo moto cognizance of the matter for the reasons assigned.
in his order the judge directed issue of show cause notice to the CBI and the State (Union of India) as to why the proceedings initiated on the strength of the FIR dated 22.1.90 pending before the Special Judge be not quashed; against which the criminal appeals and the writ petition were filed in this Court.
CrI.A. No. 304/91 is preferred by the Janata Dal against the order passed by the High Court rejecting its application filed before the High Court requesting the Judge to recuse himself from the proceedings.
CrI.A. No. 305/91 is filed by the Janata Dal against the order of the High Court rejecting the application for impleadment of the appellant and other interveners and also issuing suo moto notice to the State and the CBI.
A. No. 306/91 is directed by the original petition er who filed the public interest litigation before the Special Judge challenging the first part of the order of the High Court dated 19.12.90 .dismissing his petition on the ground that he had no locus standi to file the petition.
CrI.A. No. 307/91 is preferred by the Janata Dal ques tioning the correctness of the earlier order passed by the High Court refusing to allow the appellant 's application for impleaament/intervention.
A. No. 308/91 has been directed by the Communist Party of India (Marxist) against the order of the High Court refusing to allow its application for impleadment/interven tion.
CrI.A. No. 309/91 is preferred by india Congress (So cialist) against the main order of the High Court dated 19.12.1990 dismissing its application for impleadment and taking up suo moto cognizance for quashing the FIR.
CrI.A. No. 310/91 is filed by the 'Union of India can vassing the legality and correctness of the order dated 5.9.90 passed by the High Court and praying for a direction directing the High Court to decide the 755 maintainability of the public interest litigation as a preliminary question, and for the deletion of the second respondent.
The permission for deletion was granted.
CrI.A. No. 311/91 is filed by the Union of India and the CBI questioning the second part of the order of the High Court dated 19.12.90 namely taking suo moto cognizance and issuing notice calling upon the CBI and the State to show cause as to why the proceedings.
initiated on the strength of the FIR be no quashed.
The appellants in this appeal impleaded the High Court through its Registrar as a respondent.
W.P. No. 114/91 is filed seeking certain directions relating to Bofors matter and ' for quashing the later part of the order dated 19.12.90 of the High Court.
Dismissing CrI.A. Nos.
304 310/1991 and the Writ Peti tion No. 114/91 and allowing Crl.
A. No. 311/91, this Court, HELD: 1.
Even if there are million questions of law to be deeply gone into and examined in a criminal case regis tered against specified accused persons, it is for them and them alone to raise all such questions and challenge the proceedings initiated against them at the appropriate time before the proper forum and not for third parties under the garb of public interest litigants.
[766H 767A] 2.
The appellant in CrI.A. No. 306/91 has no locus standi to file the petition under Article 5 1 A as a public interest litigant, to invoke the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under Sections 397 read with section 401 of the* Code of Criminal Procedure challenging the correctness, legality or propriety of the order of the Special Judge and to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing the First Information Report and all other proceed ings arising therefrom on the plea of preventing the abuse of the process of the Court.
[767C E] 3.
The initiation of the present proceedings by the public interest litigant under Article 51.A of the Constitu tion of India cannot come within the true meaning and scope of public interest litigation.
[767F] 4.
The appellants namely, Janata Dal, Communist Party of India (Marxist) and Indian Congress (Socialist) equally have no right of seek 756 ing their impleadment/intervention.
For the same reasons, the petitioner in W.P. (Crl.) No. 114/91, has no right to file the Writ Petition as a public interest litigant.
1767G] 5.
The suo moto action of the High Court in taking cognizance in exercise of the powers under Sections 397 and 401 read with Section 482 of the Code based on the convolut ed and strained reasoning and directing the office of the High Court to register a case under the title Court on its motion vs State and CBI cannot be sustained.
[767H 768A] 6.
The directions of the High Court calling upon the CBI and the State to show cause as to why the proceedings initiated on the strength of the First Information Report dated 22.1.90 be not quashed, cannot be sustained.
[768B] 7.
All the proceedings initiated in pursuance of the First Information Report dated 22.1.90 relating to Crime No. RCI(A)/90 ACU IV on the file of the Special Judge including the issuance of the Letter Rogatory/request as they stand now, remain unaffected and they can be proceeded with in accordance with law.
[768D E]
