The appellant was injured in a road accident on 22.1.1989, and a claim petition was filed belatedly on 15.3.1990 with a prayer for condonation of delay, before the Claims Tribunal.
Meanwhile, the was repealed and the came into force with effect from 1.7.1989.
The Claims Tribunal held that in view of the provisions of sub section (3) of Section 166 of the new Act, the delay of more than six months could not be condoned, and dismissed the claim.
Before the High Court the appellant challenged the Tribunal 's decision, but was not successful.
Thereafter, he preferred this appeal by special leave.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that since the accident took place when the old Act was in force, the proceeding before the Accident Claims Tribunal must be held to be governed by the old Act under which the appellant had a right to file a claim petition even more than six months after the expiry of the period of limitation and this right is preserved by reason of the provisions of Section 6 of the ; and that his claim could not have been rejected on the ground of limitation under the new Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. 'The High Court was right in taking the view that the case was covered by the new Act, and delay for a longer period than six months could not be condoned.
[920D] 2.
The claim to compensation which the appellant was entitled to, by reason of the accident was certainly en forceable as a right.
So far the 913 period of limitation for commencing a legal proceeding is concerned, it is adjectival in nature, and has to be gov erned by the new Act subject to two conditions.
If under the repealing Act the remedy suddenly stands barred as a result of a shorter period of limitation, the same cannot be held to govern the case, otherwise the result will be to deprive the suitor of an accrued right.
The second exception is where the new enactment leaves the claimant with such a short period for commencing the legal proceeding so as to make it impractical for him to avail of the remedy.
[916F G] New India Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Smt.
Shanti Misra, ; , relied on.
There is a vital difference between an application claiming compensation and a prayer to condone the delay in filing such an application.
Liberty to apply for a right is not in itself an accrued right or privilege.
[917E] Isha Valimohammad & Anr.
vs Haji Gulam Mohammad & Haji Dada Dust, [1975] 1 SCR 720 and Lalji Raja and Sons vs Firm Hansraj Nathuram, ; , relied on.
Director of Public Works and Anr.
vs Ho Po Sang and Ors., ; and Abbott vs Minister of Lands, , referred to.
In the instant case the period of limitation for lodging the claim under the old as well as the new Act was the same viz., six months which expired three weeks after coming into force of the new Act.
It was open to the appel lant to file his claim within this period or even later by 22.7.1989 with a prayer to condone the delay.
His right to claim compensation was not affected at all by the substitu tion of one Act with another.
Since the period of limitation remained the same there was no question of the appellant being taken by surprise.
So far the question of condonation of six months delay was concerned, there was no charge in the position under the new Act.
The right or privilege to claim benefit of a provision for condonation of delay can be governed only by the law in force at the time of delay.
Even the hope or expectation of getting the benefit of an enact ment presupposes applicability of the enactment when the need arises to take its benefit.
The occasion to take the benefit of the provision for condonation of delay in filing the claim arose only after repeal of the old law.
Obviously the ground for condonation set up as 'sufficient cause ' also relates to the time after the repeal.
The 914 benefit of the repealed law could not, therefore, be avail able simply because the cause of action for the claim arose before repeal. 'Sufficient cause ' as a ground of condonation of delay in filing the claim is distinct from `cause of action ' for the claim itself.
The question of condonation of delay must, therefore, be governed by the new law.
[919F H; A C 920A] 5.
Clause (e) of Section 6 of is also not attracted because, by the enactment of the new law, viz., the remedy of the appellant has not been affected at all.
Appellant 's right to claim compensation by filing the claim within the same period of limitation has been preserved.
And there was no application for condonation of delay in a proceeding pending at the time of repeal so as to allow him to claim any privilege avail able under the old Act.
[916C]
