The appellant Housing Board, which had entered into four contracts with the respondent for construction of tenements within a certain time limit, terminated them after giving notice on the ground that the respondent had failed to complete the construction work despite several extensions granted to him, and filed a suit in the Court of Civil Judge claiming damages of over Rs.4 lakhs.
The respondent filed appllcations under Sections 34 and 20 of the , for stay of the suit and for directions to the appellant Board for filing the arbitration agreement in the Court and also for appointing arbitrator in terms of clause 25 of the agreement.
As per Court 's order, the appellant filed the agreement in the Court and appointed the Arbitra tor.
The Arbitrator made four awards granting the claims of the respondent to the extent of over Rs.8 lakhs and filed them in the Court for making them Rule of the Court.
The appellant 's objections for setting aside the awards on the ground that the Arbitrator had misconducted himself by not framing the main issue, viz., whether or not the claimant abandoned the work and thereby committed the breach of the agreement, by ignoring the letter of termination where in it was clearly stated that the termination had been done on account of the abandonment of the work by the claimant, and failed to decide upon the question of the abandonment of work and wholly side tracked the issue and also by not giving reasons for the award as required under the agree ment, under which he was appointed, were rejected by the Civil Court, which confirmed the awards and made them the Rule of the Court.
The appellant 's appeals against this decision was allowed by the High Court, which set aside the Civil Court 's order and sent back the awards to the arbitra tor for giving reasons, as required under clause 25 of the agreement which specifically provided that in all cases where amount of 905 claim was Rs.50,000 and above, the Arbitrator was bound to give reasons.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appellant Housing Board it was contended that having held that the arbitrator was guilty of misconduct and the awards were liable to be vitiated on that ground, the High Court ought to have set aside the awards instead of sending them back for recording reasons, which was totally unwarranted by law.
On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that the High Court 's order remanding the awards for recording rea sons clearly fell within the purview of Sec. 16(1)(c) of the , as the objection to the legality of the award was apparent on the face of it, and not within the provisions of Sec.
30 of the Act, inasmuch as the arbitrator had not misconducted himself or the proceedings and the awards in question had not been improperly procured.
Dismissing the appeals and confirming the awards, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Section 16 empowers the Court to remit the award to the Arbitrator for reconsideration only in three cases specified therein.
Clause (c) of Sub Section (1) provides that the award shall be remitted to the Arbitrator by the Court where an objection to the legality of the award is apparent on the face of it.
[710D] 1.2 No doubt, in the instant case, the High Court has come to a finding that the Arbitrator was guilty of miscon duct for his failure to give reasons as required but there is nothing to show that the Arbitrator misconducted himself or the proceeding in any other manner, nor is there anything to show that the awards have been improperly procured nor any allegation, far less, any finding, that the Arbitrator was biased or unfair or he had not heard both the parties or he had not fairly considered the submissions of the parties in making the awards in question.
[710E] 1.3 It is evident from the four awards made by the Arbitrator that the Arbitrator has considered all the spe cific issues raised by the parties in the arbitration pro ceedings and came to his finding after giving cogent rea sons.
The awards cannot under any circumstances be consid ered to be made by the Arbitrator without recording any reasons for the same.
In such circumstances, it cannot be held that the Arbitrator has misconducted himself or in the proceedings in the matter 906 of giving the awards.
The decision of the High Court remit ting the awards back to the Arbitrator for giving reasons is set aside and the awards made by the Arbitrator are upheld and made Rule of the Court.
[710F G, 711A]
