The appellant (since deceased) was being assessed as the Karta of the Hindu Undivided Family consisting of himself, his mother, his wife and three sons until the assessment years 1948 49.
For the assessment year 1949 50 and subse quent years upto 1961 62 he filed a return in his individual capacity claiming that there had been a total partition of the family and that he was assessable in respect of the income from the properties of the family that fell to his share on partition; in the alternative he claimed partial partition.
Both of his claims having been negatived, the entire income was assessed in the hands of the Hindu Undi vided Family and the returns filed by the appellant in his individual capacity were finalised on the footing that there was no income assessable in his individual capacity.
The Hindu Undivided Family went up in appeals and ultimately the Tribunal accepted the claim of partial partition in respect of some of the properties.
The conclusion of the Tribunal was affirmed by the High Court, with the result that the income from some of the erstwhile family properties stood excluded from the assessment of the Hindu Undivided Family and became liable to be included in the hands of the appel lant.
The original assessments made on the appellant as an individual for the assessment upto 1961 62 had been complet ed under the Income tax Act, 1922 and in these assessments no income from the erstwhile joint family properties had been included as the Income Tax Officer was of the view, as in 1949 50, that it was assessable in the hands of the family.
There were no proceedings initiated or pending under Section 34 of the 1922 Act in respect of these assessment years as on 1.4.1962, when the 1922 Act was repealed by the 1962 Act.
The Income Tax Officer therefore, served a notice for reassessment on the appellant, invoking the provisions of Section 297(2)(d)(ii) of the Act.
The appellant resisted the reassessment proceedings on the ground that notice was barred by limitation while the department contended that the reassessment proceedings in this case were saved by the provisions of Section 150(1) of the 1961 Act.
The High Court accepted the contention of the department.
10 Dismissing the assessee 's appeal, this Court, HELD: The provisions of Section 150(1) have been spe cially made applicable and operative in respect of a notice under section 148 issued in pursuance of Section 297(2)(d)(ii).
The application of the provisions of Section 297(2)(d)(ii) gives rise to two sets of situations to one of which the language of Section 150(1) would squarely apply.
Section 150(1) will operate to lift the time bar in cases where the reassessment is initiated under section 148 to give effect to an order passed under the 1961 Act.
Section 297(2) is a provision enacted with a view to provide for continuity of proceedings in the context of repeal of one Act by a fresh one broadly containing analogous provisions and the transitory provisions should as far as possible, be construed so as to affect such continuity and not so as to create a lacuna.
It will therefore be appropriate to so read the words of section 297(2)(d)(ii) as to permit the applica bility of section 150 (or section 153) with the necessary modifications.
[18 G, 19A B, D E] The last words of Section 297(2)(d)(ii) should be read to mean that where the proceedings initiated under Section 148, subject to the relaxations and limitation of Sections 149 and 150, all the provisions of the Act shall apply accordingly: that is to say, in the same manner as they would apply in case of proceedings normally initiated under these provisions.
Since reassessment proceedings so initiat ed to give effect to orders on appeal, revision or reference will not be subject to a time limit, the proceedings like wise initiated under Section 297(2)(d)(ii) read with Section 149 will also not be subject to any limitations save to the extent mentioned in Section 150(2).
[19 E F] Income Tax Officer vs Eastern Coal Co. Ltd., ; Commissioner of Income Tax ' vs Kamalapat Moti lal, ; Ambaji Traders vs Income Tax Officer, ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs
T.P. Asrani, ; Jain vs Mahendra, ; Govinddas vs Income Tax Officer, ; Seth Gujannal Modi vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Third Income Tax Officer vs Damodar Bhat, ; Jain Bros. vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
