The lands in question owned by a Trust, of which the appellant was the Managing Trustee, were leased to respond ent.
On his failure to pay rent the Trust filed a suit for his ejectment.
The District Munsiff passed the decree on condition that the appellant would pay the respondent, costs of the building or superstructure, which had been built by the respondent 's predecessor in interest, and which the respondent had purchased from him.
The litigation went upto High Court, which ultimately upheld the decree.
During the pendency of second appeal, the respondent filed before the District Munsiff an application under Section 9 of the Tamil Nadu Tenants ' Protection Act, 1921 as amended by Act XIX of 1955 and Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969.
The provisions of the said Act were extended to the town in which the lands were situated.
In the said application he prayed for the issue of a direction to the appellant to sell to the respondent the said property, the land adjoining the building, as it was necessary for the beneficial enjoyment of the building.
The application was rejected on the ground that such a prayer had been rejected earlier.
The respond ent 's first appeal was allowed by the Subordinate Judge.
The respondent had not surrendered the possession of the proper ty despite the deposit of the compensation amount by the appellant and the execution proceedings had remained stayed.
Hence the appellant filed an appeal in .the
High Court which, however, held that the respondent was entitled to file the application under Section 9 of the Act during the pendency of the execution proceedings, and the right of the respondent had not been affected by the deposit of the compensation amount.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appel lant Managing Trustee, it was contended that the respondent was not entitled to exercise his right to purchase the land immediately adjoining the superstructure as might be re quired for the beneficial enjoyment of the said structure as the 22 said structure had not been put up by him, and 'that al though the respondent might have been in possession at the relevant time, he had lost the possession thereafter and hence he had lost his right under Section 9.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Under Section 9 of the Tamil Nadu Tenants ' Protection Act, 1921, any tenant, as defined in Section 2(4)(ii)(a), who is entitled to compensation under Section 3, and against whom a suit in ejectment has been instituted or proceedings under Section 41 of the , taken by the landlord may, within one month from the date of the Madras City Tenants ' Protec tion (Amendment) Act, 1955, coming into force, or the date with effect from which this Act is extended to the municipal town or village in which the land is situated, or within one month after the service on him of summons, apply to the Court for an order that the landlord be directed to sell for a price to be fixed by the court, the whole or part of the extent of land specified in the application.
Section 10 of the Act makes the provisions under Section 9 applicable to cases where decree for ejectment has not been executed before the date from which the provisions of the Act are extended to the area in question.
[25 C E] 1.2 In the instant case, although the decree for eject ment was passed against the respondent, as he had continued to remain in possession of the property and the decree had remained unexecuted till the date on which the provisions of the said Act had been extended to the area in question, the right of the respondent under Section 9 was not lost.
[25 F] 1.3 As regards the superstructure, it was put up by the predecessor in interest from whom the respondent had pur chased.
Thus, the High Court was entitled to take the view that it was put up by a predecessor in interest of the re spondent.
[25 G] 1.4 In these circumstances, the respondent was certainly a tenant, within the meaning of Section 2(4)(ii)(a) of the Act, which takes within its ambit a tenant whose tenancy has been determined but continues to remain in possession, entitled to compensation under Section 3 of the Act and was, therefore, entitled to make an application under Section 9 of the Act.
[25 H, 25 B] 23 2.
The plea that although the respondent might have been in possession at the relevant time, but since he lost it thereafter, he lost his right under Section 9 cannot be allowed to be raised in this Court since this has not been pleaded in or considered in any of the courts below.
[26 A B]
