Article 371D of the Constitution of India, which is peculiar to the State of Andhra Pradesh only, empowers the President to provide by order for equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to different parts of the State in the matters of public employment and educa tion.
As provided therein the President of India made the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Organisation of Local Cadres and Regulation of Direct Recruitment) Orders, 1975, by virtue of which the State was divided into six zones, and local cadres of posts in respect of the local areas were created.
In respect of Andhra Pradesh Panchayati Raj Engi neering Service the two such zonal posts were Junior Engi neer and Assistant Engineer.
Before the Administrative Tribunal, some promotions made from Junior Engineer to Assistant Engineer were questioned, and the Tribunal held that promotions should be made on the basis of the Statewide list and directed the State Government to redetermine the position of the petitioners before it, in the seniority list.
Aggrieved by the Tribunal 's order, the State Government and the affected officials have approached this Court by way of the present appeals and special leave petitions.
On behalf of the State Government, it was contended that both the posts of Junior Engineer and Assistant Engineer were zonal posts under the Presidential Order and the zonal seniority list had to be followed in the 28 matter of promotions from Junior Engineer to Assistant Engineer and not the Statewide seniority list of Junior Engineers.
On behalf of the Respondents it was contended that Article 371D (2) of the Constitution refers only to direct recruitment and the Presidential Order made under the said Article cannot make a departure and cannot be made applica ble for promotions also.
It was further contended that it is the Statewide list that should be the basis for promotion.
Disposing of these matters, this Court, HELD: 1.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the A.P. Panchayati Raj Engineering Service Rules, 1963 the promo tions have to be based on zonal list; otherwise the very object sought to be achieved as per Article 371D of the Constitution of India and the Presidential Order issued thereunder would be defeated.
The word 'employment ' should be interpreted in a broad and general manner.
The expression 'in the matter of public employment ' in clause (1) of Arti cle 371D is of wider import.
The public employment can be by way of direct recruitment or by promotion.
The Presidential Order would apply both for direct recruitment and for promo tion in respect of categories specified in the Third Sched ule.
Article 371D (2) does not make any departure from this principle.
The words 'in particular, therein only lay empha sis on the aspect of creating local cadres for different parts of the State for the purpose/of direct recruitment and treat such parts as local areas.
This does not in any manner restrict the scope of Article 371D wherein it is clearly declared that in the matter of public employment, the Presi dent is empowered to make an order in the manner stated therein and the public employment cannot but be interpreted to include promotion also.
It, therefore, emerges that Article 371D is in general terms and applies to the public employment as whole and Article 371D(2) in particular ap plies to direct recruitment.
It is only complementary to clause (1) and particularises the matters which an order made under clause (1) provides for.
Any other interpretation would defeat the object underlying these two provisions.
[42 D H, 43 A] The General Manager, Southern Railway vs Rangachari, ; , relied on.
Article 371D is of exceptional nature and the objective is to provide equal opportunities in the backward areas in respect of the specified posts mentioned in the Third Schedule which are included in the local cadres which thus became zonal posts.
As mentioned in para 5 of the 29 Presidential Order and Rule 2 A of the A.P. Panchayati Raj Engineering Service Rules, such zones should be treated as separate units for the purpose of promotions also.
There fore, there is valid nexus to the object that is sought to be achieved and even if there is some anamoly it cannot on that basis be said that such promotions for zonal posts on the basis of the zonal seniority list amounts to discrimina tion.
[44 D E] 2.2.
Rule 2 A makes it abundantly clear that for the purpose of recruitment, appointment, promotion, transfer etc.
each zone shall be a separate unit.
Para 5 of the Presidential Order is also to the same effect.
When once each zone is treated as separate unit for the purpose of promotion also in respect of zonal posts then by virtue of Article 371D and the Presidential Order, the promotion from the post of junior Engineer to the post of Assistant Engi neer which are both zonal posts, should be on the basis of the zonal seniority list inasmuch as the post of Junior Engineer and the next promotion post namely Assistant/Engi neer are included in the local cadres and the zonal list in the Third Schedule.
With regard to the higher post which included in the local cadre and which are Statewide posts, it becomes obvious that the Statewide seniority list of the Assistant Engineer of all zones should be prepared and that should be the basis of promotion to the post of Executive Engineer which is not a zonal post.
Therefore, the direc tions given by the Tribunal to ensure that no Junior Engi neer is promoted earlier than their seniors in the Statewide seniority list to the post of Executive Engineer, should be quashed.
[43 F H, 44 A B] section Prakasha Rao and Anr.
vs Commissioner of Commercial Taxes and Ors., , relied on.
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
vs V.V.S. Krishna murthy and Ors., , referred to.
All promotions of Junior Engineers (redesignated as Assistant Executive Engineers) to the next higher post of Assistant Engineers (redesignated as Deputy Executive Engi neers) have to be made on the basis of the zonal seniority list and not on the basis of the Statewide seniority list of Junior Engineers.
Having regard to the historical background and the object underlying Article 371D and the Presidential Order and in particular para 13 of the Presidential Order, the promotions, if any made should be 30 treated only as provisional.
If Rule 2 A is viewed from this angle particularly in the light of paras 5 and 13 of the Presidential Order it becomes clear that the said Rule has to be given retrospective effect so that the promotions to the junior posts can be brought in conformity with Articles 371D and the Presidential Order.
The promotions made after the Presidential Order dated 18.11.1975 should be treated as provisional and the Government is permitted to review these promotions on the basis of zonal seniority lists and re adjust the same all the future promotions.
from the post of Junior Engineer to the post of Assistant Engineer should necessarily be made on the basis of the zonal seniority lists.
For the purpose of promotion to the post of Executive Engineer, which is not a zonal post, a Statewide seniority list of the Assistant Engineers of all zones should be prepared and such statewide seniority list should form the basis of promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
The State Government is accordingly directed to prepare such lists i.e. zonal seniority lists of various zones for the purpose of promotions from Junior Engineers to Assistant Engineers within the zones and also the statewide seniority list of the Assistant Engineers of all zones for the purpose of promotions to the post of Executive Engineer.
Such of the directions given by the Tribunal in the matters, which are contrary to and different from the conclusions now reached, shall remain quashed.
[44 D E; 44 D H; 45 A B] 3.3.
The inter se seniority and the consequent promo tions of Respondent Nos.
1 to 5 in Civil Appeal No. 3935/88 as well as the petitioners in Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 2150/87 shall be determined subject to the directions, now given.
[45 B C] Y. N. Rangiah and Ors.
J. Sreenivasa Rao and Ors.
, [1983]3 SCC 284; N.T. Devin Katti and Ors.
vs Karnata ka Public Sen,ice Commission and Ors., ; , referred to.
