Appellant Company filed criminal complaints under Section 630(l)(b), Companies Act and Section 406, IPC against its employees (the first respondent of each appeal) as they did not vacate the company quarters after about six months even after retirement.
The Judicial Magistrate, First Class dismissed the complaints as the same were not filed within the period of limitation of six months from the date of retirement of the Respondents employees.
The High Court,holding that the offence under Section 630(1) was not a continuing offence, dismissed the Company 's revision petitions.
In the appeal to this Court on the question, whether the offence under Section 630(l)(b) of the Companies Act is a continuing offence for the purpose of limitation, allowing the Appeals of the Appellant Company, this Court, HELD: 1.
The beneficent provision contained in section 630, no doubt penal, has been purposely enacted by the legislature with the object of providing a summary procedure for retrieving the property of the company: (a) where an officer or employee of a company wrongfully obtains 397 possession of property of the company, or (b) where having been placed in possession of any such property during the course of his employment, wrongfully withholds possession of it after the termination of his employment.
It is the duty of the court to place a broad and liberal construction on the provision in furtherence of the object and purpose of the legislation which would suppress the mischief and advance the remedy.
[406B E] 2."Officer" or "employee" in s.630 of the Companies Act includes both present and past officers and employees.[405B C] 3.
The concept of continuing offence does not wipe out the original guilt, but it keeps the contravention alive day by day.
The courts when confronted with provisions which lay down a rule of limitation governing prosecutions should give due weight and consideration to the provisions of s.473 of the Code which is in the nature of an overriding provision and according to which, notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure any court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiration of a period of limitation, if, inter alia, it is satisfied that it is necessary to do so in the interest of justice.
[409D G] 4.
The expression `continuing offence ' has not been defined in the Code.
The question whether a particular offence is a 'continuing offence ' or not must,therefore,necessarily depend upon the language of the statute which creates that offence, the nature of the offence and the purpose intended to be achieved by constituting the particular act as an offence.
[409F H] 5.The offence under section 630 is not such as can be said to have consummated once for all.
Wrongful withholding, or wrongfully obtaining possession and wrongful application of the company 's property, that is, for purposes other than those expressed or directed in the articles of the company and authorised by the Companies Act, can not be said to be terminated by a single act or fact but would subsist for the Period until the property in the offender 's possession is delivered up or refunded.
It is an offence committed over a span of time and the last act of the offence will control the commencement of the period of limitation and need be alleged.
The offence consists of a course of conduct arising from a singleness of thought, purpose of refusal to deliver up or refund which May be deemed a single impulse.
Considered from another angle, it consists of a continuous series of acts which endures after the period of consummation on refusal to deliver up or refund the property.
It is 398 not an instantaneous offence and limitation begins with the cessation of the criminal act, i.e., with the delivering up or refund of the property.
It will be a recurring or continuing offence until the wrongful possession, wrongful withholding or wrongful application is vacated or put an end to.
The offence continues until the property wrongfully obtained or wrongfully withheld or knowingly misapplied is delivered up or refunded to the company.
For failure to do so sub section (2) prescribes the punishment.
[409H 410E] 6.
The offence under section 630 of the Companies Act is not one time but a continuing offence and the period of limitation must be computed accordingly, and when so done, the complaints could not be said to have been barred by limitation.
[410D F] W.M.I. Cranes Ltd. vs G.G. Advani & Anr., [1984] 1 Kar.
Law Cronicle 462 overruled; Bhagirath Kanoria and Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh with Bahadur Singh vs Provident Fund Inspector and Ors., A.I.R. 1984 S.C. 1688 referred; Baldev Krishna Sahi vs Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. and Anr., [1987] 4 S.C.C. 361; Amrit Lal Chum vs Devoprasad Dutta Roy and Anr.
; , ; State of Bihar vs Deokaran Nenshi, [19731 1 S.C.R. 1004; Bhagirath Kanoria & Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
, ; followed.
Black 's Law Dictionary, Eighth Edition, (Special Deluxe); Salmond and Heuston on the Law of Torts, 19th Edn.
Page 50; Halsbury 's Laws of England.
4th Edn.
Vol 45, Para 1389 referred to.
