The appellant was declared elected to the Orissa Legislative Assembly and the first respondent filed an election petition challenging the election, inter alia, on the ground that the appellant had committed the corrupt practice under section 123(7)(f) Representation of the People Act, 1951, by obtaining the assistance of Sarpanches of certain Grama Panchayats for the furtherance of the prospects of his election.
The petition was dismissed by the Election Tribunal but on appeal., was allowed by the High Court and the election was set aside.
The High Court held that a Sarpanch was a person in the service of the Government with in the meaning of section I23(7)(f) Of the Act.
Held, that a Sarpanch of Grama Panchayat in Orissa was not one of the persons contemplated by section I23(7)(f) and consequently the appellant was not guilty of any corrupt practice in obtaining assistance of Sarpanches.
Two conditions must co exist before S123(7)(f) could apply to a Sarpanch: (i) that he was in the service of the Government, and (ii) that he fell within the class 953 specified in cl.
There was a distinction between " serving under the Government " and " in the service of the Government "; while one may serve under a Government one may not necessarily be in the service of the Government; under the latter expression one not only served under the Government but was in the service of the Government and this imported the relationship of master and servant.
None of the provisions of the Orissa Grama Panchayats Act, 1948, suggested that as between the State Government and the Grama Panchayat and its Sarpanch any such relationship existed.
The mere power of control and supervision of Government over a Grama Panchayat exercising administrative functions or performing duties of governmental nature could not make the Grama Panchayat or its Sarpanch a person in the service of the Government.
The Sarpanch was the executive head of the Grama Panchayat : he was neither appointed nor paid by the Government; he could only be removed by Government on grounds of negligence, inefficiency or misbehaviour.
He was not under the control of the Government while discharging his functions and could not be said to be in service of the Government.
The second condition also did not exist as a Sarpanch was neither a revenue officer nor a village accountant and as such was not one of the class of officers mentioned in cl.
(f) of section 123(7).
