The appellants, owners of the premises in question obtained a decree of eviction against the tenant, Respondent No. 7.
While the decree was under challenge before the High Court, Respondent Nos. 1 to 5 approached the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution, claiming that, being members of Joint Hindu Family, alongwith the lather of Respondent No. 7, they were tenants in their own right under the appellants and were not bound by the decree, since they were not parties in the eviction case.
The appellants denied the claim of independent right of the respondent Nos. 1 to 5 and alleged that they had been subsequently inducted in the premises as sub tenants by respondent No. 7.
The High Court held that since the claim of the Respond ent Nos. 1 to 5 was not examined and decided in the suit and the decree was passed against Respondent No. 7 only, they could not be evicted from the premises.
Allowing the appeal preferred by the landlord appel lants, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The remedy provided under article 226 is not intended to supersede the modes of obtaining relief before a civil court or to deny defences legitimately open in such actions.
The jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari is supervisory in nature and is not meant for correcting errors like appellate Court.
[122 E F] State of Andhra Pradesh vs Chitra Venkata Rao, ; ; Thansingh Nathmal & Ors.
A. Mazid; , and M. Naina Mohammed vs K.A. Natarajan & Ors., [1976] 1 SCR 102, relied on.
120 1.2 The Civil Procedure Code contains elaborate and exhaustive provisions for dealing with executability of a decree in all its aspects.
The numerous rules of order XXI of Civil Procedure Code take care of different situations, providing effective remedies not only to judgment debtors and decree holders but also to claimant objectors as the case may be.
In an exceptional case, where provisions are rendered incapable of giving relief to an aggrieved party in adequate measure and appropriate time, the answer is a regular suit in the civil court.
The remedy under the Code is of superior judicial quality than what is generally available under other statutes, and the judge, being en trusted exclusively with administration of justice, is expected to do better.
It will be, therefore, difficult to find a case where interference in writ jurisdiction for granting relief to a judgment debtor or a claimant objector can be justified.
Rules 97 to 106 of Order XXI envisage questions to be determined on the basis of evidence to be led by the parties and after the 1976 Amendment, the deci sion has been made appealable like a decree.
[123C E] 1.3 In the instant case, it was necessary to adjudicate upon the dispute between the parties and record a finding on the character of possession of Respondent Nos. 1 to 7 before proceeding to consider whether the decree is executable or not against them and having not done so, the High Court has seriously erred in law in allowing the writ petition filed by them.
The decision on the disputed issue was dependent on the consideration of the evidence to be led by the parties, and while exercising the writ jurisdiction, the High Court was not expected to go into that question and ought not to have embarked upon a decision on merits, and should have refused to exercise the special jurisdiction on the ground of alternative remedy before the civil court.
[122 B D]
