By way of notification dated 18.6.1977, the Central Government exempted from duty all goods falling under Tariff item No. 68 of the First Schedule to the in or in relation to manufacture of which no process was ordinarily carried on with the aid of power.
The respondents in the first set of appeals have been manufacturing crude sodium sulphate.
Since the respondents used diesel pumps for pumping brine into salt pans, in the process of manufacture, the benefit of the said notification was denied to them on the ground that the process of manu facture was carried on with the aid of power.
However, on appeal, the Collector of Customs (Appeals) allowed the benefit to the respondents.
Revenue preferred an appeal and the Tribunal affirmed the Collector 's order.
In the other appeals, the Respondents, manufacturer of lime, used to lift the raw materials to the platform at the head of the kiln by the aid of power and the raw materials were mixed manually into the kiln.
The benefit of the said notification was denied to the Respondents by the Assistant Collector.
Even an appeal before the Collector of Appeals failed.
However, on appeal the Tribunal accepted the claim of the Respondents.
In all these matters the Tribunal took the view that the manufacturing process started from the stage of feeding raw materials into the salt pan or the kiln as the case may be and the transferring of the raw materials was a stage prior to the manufacturing process and so the 125 use of power for such transfer would not disentitle the respondents from the benefit under the said notification.
Aggrieved by the orders of the Tribunal, the Revenue has preferred the present appeals.
Before this Court, the Revenue contended that pumping the brine into the pan or lifting the raw materials to the kiln head was a process in relation to the manufacture of the final product and since that process with the aid of power was integrally connected with the manufacture, the exemption would not apply.
The Respondents contended that if the process carried on with the aid of power does not bring about any change in the raw materials, it cannot be said that any process in or in relation to the manufacture of an article has been carried on with the aid of power and, therefore, mere transfer of raw materials by the use of power cannot be considered as a process of manufacture.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1. Process in manufacture or in relation to manufacture implies not only the production but the various stages through which the raw material is subjected to change by different operations.
It is the cumulative effect of the various processes to which the raw materials is subjected to the manufactured product emerges.
Therefore, each step towards such production would be a process in relation to manufacture.
Where any particular process is so integrally connected with the ultimate production of goods that but for that process manufacture of processing of goods would be impossible or commercially inexpedient, that process is one in relation to the manufacture.
[130 E F).
2.1 The natural meaning of the word 'process ' is a mode of treatment of certain materials in order to produce a good result, a species of activity performed on the subject matter in order to transform or reduce it to a certain stage.
There is nothing in the natural meaning of the word 'process ' to exclude its application to handling.
There may be process which consists only in handling and there may be a process which involves no handling or not merely handling but also use.
It may be a process involving the handling of the material and it need not be a process involving the use of material.
The activity may be subordinate but one in relation to the further process of manufacture.
[130G, 131 A B] 126 2.2 A process is a manufacturing process when it brings out a complete transformation for the whole compo nents so as to produce a commercially different article or a commodity.
But, that process itself may consist of several processes which may or may not bring about any change at every intermediate stage.
But the activities or the opera tions may be so integrally connected that the final result is the production of a commercially different article.
Therefore, any activity or operation which is the essential requirement and is so related to the further operations for the end result would also be a process in or in relation to manufacture to attract the relevant clause in the exemption notification.
The word 'process ' in the context in which it appears in the notification includes an operation or activi ty in relation to manufacture.
[132H, 133 A B] J.K. Cotton Mills vs
S.T. Officer; , ; Union of lndia vs Delhi Cloth & General Mills, [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 586, relied on.
3.1 The transfer of raw material to the reacting vessel is a preliminary operation but it is part of a continuous process ,but for which the manufacture would be impossible.
The handling of the raw materials for the purpose of such transfer is then integrally connected with the process of manufacture.
The handling for the purpose of transfer may be manual or mechanical but if power is used for such opera tion, it cannot be denied that an activity has been carried on with the aid of power in the manufacturing process.
The use of diesel pump sets to fill the pans with brine is an activity with the aid of power and that activity is in relation to the manufacture.
It is not correct to say that the process of manufacture starts only when evaporation starts.
The preliminary steps like pumping brine and filling the salt pans form integral part of the manufacturing proc ess even though the change in the raw material commences only when evaporation takes place.
The preliminary activity cannot be disintegrated from the rest of the operations in the whole process of manufacture.
Similarly, when coke and lime are taken to the platform in definite proportions for the purpose of mixing, such operation is a step in the manufacturing process.
It precedes the feeding of the mix ture into the kiln where the burning takes place.
The whole process is an integrated one consisting of the lifting of the raw materials to the platform mixing coke and lime and then feeding into the kiln and burning.
These operations are so interrelated that without anyone of these operations manufacturing process is impossible to be completed.
There fore, if power is used in 127 anyone of these operations or anyone of the operations is carried on with the aid of power, it is a case when in or in relation to the manufacture the process is carried on with the aid of power.
[133 C G] 3.2 'Processing ' may be an intermediate stage in manu facture and until some change has taken place and the com modity retains a continuing substantial identity through the processing stage, one cannot say that it has been manufac tured.
That does not, however, mean that any operation in the course of such process is not in relation to the manu facture.
[136 E] Dy.
Commissioner, Sales Tax; Ernakulam vs Pio Food Packers, ; ; Union of India vs Delhi Cloth & General Mills, [1963] Suppl.
1 SCR 586; Standard Fireworks Industries vs Collector, , relied on.
Nirma Chemical Works & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; Chowgule & Co. Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
