The petitioner Company was engaged in the business of manufacture of aluminium products and its factory was locat ed at Kalwa in Thane District, obtaining aluminium as raw materials from its another factory, situated In a different State.
With effect from 1.10.82 the Company at Kalwa was included in the municipal Jurisdiction of Thane, and prior to that date, the Company did not have to pay any octroi on the raw materials brought into its factory at Kalwa.
The respondent Corporation was levying octroi duty on the imports of aluminium raw materials made by the petition er Company at the rate of from 1.10.1982 to 14.4.1987 and from 15.4.87 at the rate of 2%.
On 18.5.87 the Thane Manufacturer 's Association made a representation to the respondent Corporation about the increase in octroi rates.
The respondent Corporation in Its letter dated 20.11.1987 pointed out that when raw material specified In Entry 77 in Schedule I to the Maharashtra Municipalities (Octroi) Rules imported for use in the manufacture of fin ished goods, It would be subject to the levy of octroi not exceeding 1.25% and not less.
On receipt of this letter, the petitioner Company made detailed enquiries and was informed that under Rule 4 of the Rules the goods mentioned In Part IA of the Schedule I1, which were imported, were liable to be subjected to octroi at a lower rate.
The Company also noticed further 209 that Part IA of the Rules provided that the goods specified in Entry 77, when imported by an industrial undertaking for use as a raw material for processing within that undertaking and if a declaration in Form 14 was filed, the levy of octroi in such cases would not exceed 12.5% and would not be less than 0.25%.
The petitioner, however, had not filed any Form 14 duly filled in and according to it, it acted under a mistake of law and under the bonafide impression that the octroi levied on and recovered by the Corporation at the rate of 1.3% in respect of the period from 1.10.82 to 14.4.87 and at the rate of 2% from 15.4.87 onwards, represented the correct rate.
On 8.3.1988 the petitioner Company in its letter to the respondent Corporation stated that under a mistake of law it paid excess amount and same should be refunded.
On 16.5.1988, the respondent Corporation replied that as the petitioner Company had not complied with the procedure specified in Part IA of the Schedule 11 to the Rules for availing such concessional rates and therefore the refund could not be sanctioned.
On 19.4.1989 the petitioner Company claimed a refund of total amount of Rs. 13,54,101.79 p.
The respondent rejected the claim, against which the Company filed a writ petition in the High Court, seeking refund.
A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that the concessional rate of octroi duty was available only if the declaration in Form 14 was filled with the octroi authorities.
Questioning the High Court 's Order, this Special Leave Petition was filed.
The petitioner Company contended that a procedural failure should not disentitle the petitioner Company, pro vided, if otherwise the Company could have legitimately claimed.
The respondent Corporation submitted that the conces sional rate would be available only if the raw material was utilised by the Company for manufacturing goods within the industrial undertaking; that if a declaration had been filed in proper Form 14 there could have been a 210 scope for verification and in the absence of such a declara tion the question of refunding at this distance of time did not arise; and that the concession should have been availed at the time when it was available, and having failed to avail, the question of claiming the same later did not arise.
Dismissing the petition, this Court, HELD:.
A verification at the relevant time by the octroi authorities becomes very much necessary before a concession can be given.
In the absence of filing such a declaration in the required Form 14, there is no opportunity for the authorities to verify.
Therefore the petitioner Company has definitely failed to fulfil an important obliga tion under the law though procedural.
[214 F] 2.
The verification at the time when the raw material was still there is entirely different from a verification at a belated stage after it has seized to be there.
May be that the raw material was used in the industrial undertaking as claimed by the petitioner Company or it may not be.
In any event the failure to file the necessary declaration has necessarily prevented the authorities to have a proper verification.
[214 H, 215 A] 3.
A concession has to be availed at the time when it was available and in the manner prescribed.
[216 D] 4.
The concession can be granted only if the raw materi al is used in the industrial undertaking seeking such con cession.
For that a verification was necessary and that is why in the rule itself it is mentioned that a declaration has to be filed in Form 14 facilitating verification.
Fail ure to file the same would automatically disentitle the Company from claiming any such concession.
[218 C D] 5.
In the instant case the octroi duty paid by the petitioner Company would naturally have been passed on to the consumers.
Therefore, there is no justification to claim the same at this distance of time and the court in its discretion can reject the same.
[218 G] kirpal Singh Duggal vs Municipal Board Ghaziabad, [ ; ; HMM Limited and another vs Administrator, Bangalore City Corporation and another, [1989]4 SCC 640, distinguished.
Kedarnath Jute Manufacturing Co. vs Commercial Tax Officer, Calcutta 211 and Ors.; , , followed.
Orissa Cement Ltd. vs State of Orissa & Ors., AIR 1991 SC 1676, referred to.
Dictionary of English Law by Earl Jowitt; Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
Para 198, referred to.
