In the suit filed by the Union of India against Union Carbide Corporation (UCC) filed before the Southern District Court at New York, the presiding Judge directed the utilisa tion of 5 Million Dollars deposited by UCC towards Interim Relief Fund, for affording relief to the victims of the Bhopal Gas leak disaster through the Indian Red Cross Socie ty.
The said payment was intended to be without prejudice to the contentions of UCC.
Also it was to be credited against the payment of any final judgment or settlement of the claims against UCC arising out of the Bhopal Gas leak disas ter.
The Indian Red Cross Society sought to stipulate with the American Red Cross that the Indian Red Cross Society should be free from any contingent obligations stemming from the final result of the litigation one way or the other.
However, the terms of the order were not changed.
After the proceedings in the U.S. District Court termi nated upon UCC 's plea of forum non conveniens being upheld, Union of India instituted a suit In the District Court at Bhopal.
The claim in the suit came to be settled In this Court by its orders dated 14/15th February, 1989.
In terms of the settlement order, the said sum of 5 Million US Dol lars was treated as part of the settlement Fund and a direc tion was given to the Registrar to have the amount trans ferred to his credit which was lying unutilised with the Indian Red Cross Society.
The Indian Red Cross Society has filed the present applications.
It contended that the order dated 15th Febru ary, 1989 in so far as it treated the unutilised part of the interim relief fund and authorising the Registrar to realise it as such, was not consistent with the terms under which the relief fund was agreed to be entrusted to and accepted by it and 382 so the directions given in regard to the said relief fund required to be deleted.
On the question whether the interim relief of 5 Million U.S. Dollars was a distant award standing independently and outside the final adjudication, dismissing the applications, this Court, HELD: 1.
The agreement between the American Red Cross and the Indian Red Cross Society came to be discussed before the District Court, New York, during the bearing on 20th November 1985.
The portions of the transcript of what tran spired at the hearing indicate that far from approving the purported arrangement inter se between the American Red Cross and the Indian Red Cross Society, they show that the terms of the order dated June 7, 1985, as to the nature and character of the interim relief as an "advance payment" or "credit to the defence" were left undisturbed.
The tran script of the hearing also reaffirms that "if there is any recovery against Union Carbide, it is a set off '.
Also there is nothing on record to show that the terms as to the nature and character of the interim payment had been altered in terms of the inter se arrangements pleaded by the Indian Red Cross Society.
In the circumstances, the agreement between the American Red Cross and the Indian Red Cross Society cannot prevail over the effect of the order dated 7th June, 1985 of Judge Keenan.
This Court 's directions in this behalf in the order dated 15th February, 1989, are not inconsistent therewith and do not, therefore, require any modification.
[386 B F] 2.
Now that the terms of the settlement have been upheld in the review proceedings the unutilised part of the interim relief of 5 Million U.S. Dollars will become part of the Bhopal gas relief fund and shall have to be administered as such.
The Registrar of the Supreme Court shall be entitled to call up the funds with the Indian Red Cross Society which stood unutilised as on 15th February, 1989.
[386 F G]
