Before this Court, the appellant defendant challenged the judgment of the High Court which held that the decree made against the defendant 'in terms of a compromise in writing and signed by the counsel representing the parties was valid and binding on the parties, and that in the ab sence of any challenge against the order made under Order XXI, rule 23, Civil Procedure Code, allowing execution of the decree, the defendant was no longer entitled to resist execution by recourse to Chamber Summons.
The appellant contended that the High Court was wrong in holding that, notwithstanding the amendment of 1976 insert ing the words 'in writing and signed by the parties ', it was still sufficient if the terms of compromise were reduced to writing and signed by counsel representing the parties, and not necessarily by the parties in person, and that a decree based on a compromise not signed by the parties in person was a nullity and was incapable of execution.
The respondents submitted that it was always under stood that the expression 'party ' included his pleader in matters relating to appearance in court, and his counsel in the cause, therefore, had express or implied authority, unless specifically withdrawn or limited by the party, to represent him in court and do whatever was necessary in connection with the conduct of his suit including adjustment of the suit by agreement or compromises.
188 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD:.
Counsel 's role in entering into a compromise has been traditionally understood to be confined to matters within the scope of the suit.
However, a compromise decree may incorporate not only matters failing within the subject matter of the suit, but also other matters which are collat eral to it.
The position before the amendment in 1976 was that, in respect of the former, the decree was executable, but in respect of the latter, it was not executable, though admissible as judicial evidence of its contents.
[199 C D] 2.
After the amendment of 1976, a consent decree, is executable in terms thereof, even if it comprehends matters failing outside the subject matter of the suit, but concern ing the parties.
[201 E] 3.
The object of the amendment of Order XXIII, Rule 3, C.P.C. was to provide an appropriate remedy to expedite proceedings in Court.
That object must be borne in mind by adopting a purposive construction of the amended provisions.
The legislative intention being the speedy disposal of cases with a view to relieving the litigants and the Courts alike of the burden of mounting arrears, the word 'parties ' must be so construed as to yield a beneficent result, so as to eliminate the mischief the legislature had in mind.
[202 D E] 4.
There is no reason to assume that the legislature intended to curtail the implied authority of counsel, en gaged in the thick of proceedings in court, to compromise or agree on matters relating to the parties, even if such matters exceed the subject matter of the suit.
The relation ship of counsel and his party or the recognised agent and his principal is a matter of contract; and with the freedom of contract generally, the legislature does not interfere except when warranted by public policy, and the legislative intent is expressly made manifest There is no such declara tion of policy or indication of intent in the present case.
The legislature has not evinced any intention to change the well recognised and universally acclaimed common law tradi tion of an ever alert, independent and active Bar with freedom to manoeuvre with force and drive for quick action in a battle of wits typical of the adversarial system of oral heating which is in sharp contrast to the inquisitorial traditions of the 'civil law 'of France and other European and Latin American countries where written submissions have the pride of place and oral arguments are 189 considered relatively insignificant.
[202 E H] 5.
Considering the traditionally recognised role of counsel in the common law system, and the evil sought to be remedied by Parliament by the C.P.C. (Amendment) Act, 1976, namely attainment of certainty and expeditious disposal of cases by reducing the terms of compromise to writing signed by the parties, and allowing the compromise decree to com prehend even matters falling outside the subject matter of the suit, but relating to the parties, the legislature cannot, in the absence of express words to such effect, be presumed to have disallowed the parties to enter into a compromise by counsel in their cause or by their duly autho rised agents.
Any such presumption would be inconsistent with the legislative object of attaining quick reduction of arrears in Court by elimination of uncertainties and en largement of the scope of compromise.
[205 F H] 6.
A judgment by consent is intended to stop litigation between the parties just as much as a judgment resulting from a decision of the court at the end of a long drawn out fight.
A compromise decree creates an estoppel by judgment.
[207 B] 7.
In the present case, the notice issued under Order XXI rule 22 was personally served on the defendant, but he did not appear or show cause why the decree should not be executed.
The notice was accordingly made absolute by order dated 23.1.1990 and leave was granted to the plaintiff to execute the decree.
The decree passed by the High Court on 18.6.1984 in terms of the compromise was a valid decree and it constituted res judicata.
[206 F G] 8.
The consent decree made on 18.6.1984 remained unchal lenged.
None questioned it.
The appellant never raised any doubt as to its validity or genuineness.
He had no case that the decree was vitiated by fraud or misrepresentation or his counsel lacked authority to enter into a compromise on his behalf.
Nevertheless, after six years he questioned its validity by means of chamber summons.
This was an unsuc cessful challenge by reason of delay, estoppel or res judi cata.
[207 E F] Halsbury 'section Laws of England, 4th Ed. Vol.3, Paras 1181 & 1183; Francis Bennion 's Statutory Interpretation, Butter worths, 1984, para 133; Crawford 's Statutory., Construction, Para 254; Rene David, English Law and French Law Tagore Law Lectures, 1980; Spencer Bower to Turner in Res 190 Judicata, Second Edition, Page 37; The Common Law in India 1960 The Hamlyn Lectures, Twelfth Series.
pp 1 4, referred to.
Patience Swinfen vs Lord Chelmsford, [1860]5 H & N 890 at 912; S.C.(Ex.) 382; Mathews vs Munster, [1887] 20 Q.B. 141 at 144; Rondel vs Worsley, [1965] 1 Q.B. 443,502; (Babu) Sheonandan Prasad Singh &Ors.
vs Hakim Abdul Fateh Mohammed Reza & Anr., AIR 1935 P.C. 119,121; Sourendera Nath Mitra & Ors.
vs Tarubala Dasi, AIR 1930 P.C. 158; Hemanta Kumari Debi vs Midnapur Zamindari Co., AIR 1919 PC 79; Jamilabai Abdul Kadar vs Shankerlal Gulabchand & Ors., [1975] Supp.
SCR 336; Monoharbahal Colliery, Calcutta vs K.N. Mishra & Ors., AIR 1975 SC 1632; National Assistance Board vs Wilkin son, ; Sailendra Narayan Bhania Deo vs The State of Orissa, ; ; Mohanlal Goenka vs Benoy Kishna Mukherjee & Ors., ; , Shankor Sitaram Sontakke & Anr.
vs Balkrishna Sitaram Sontakke & Ors. ; , referred to.
Ram Juwan vs Devendra Nath Gupta, AIR 1960 M P. 280; Vishnu Sitaram Auchat vs Ramchandra Govind Joshi, AIR 1932 Bombay 466; Jasimuddin Biswas vs Bhuban Jelini, ILR 34 Calcutta 456; Ganganand Singh & Ors.
vs Rameshwar Singh Bahadur & Anr, ; Chengan Soun, Nayakam vs A.N. Menon, AIR 1968 Kerala 213; Jiwibai vs Ramkumar Shrini was Murarka Agarwala, AIR 1947 Nagpur 17; Govindamreal vs Marimuthu Maistry & Ors., AIR 1959 Mad 7; Laxmidas Ranchhod das & Ors.
vs Savitabai Hargovindas Shah, AIR 1956 Bombay 54; Mohan Bat vs Jai Kishan, AIR ; Smt.
Mohan Bat vs Smt.
Jai kishan & Ors., AIR , Nadirsha Hirji Bana & Ors.
v Niranjanlkumar alias Nireshku mar Dharamchand Shah & Ors., , approved.
Kesarla Raghuram vs Dr. Narsipalle Vasundara, A.I.R. 1983 A .P. disapproved.
