The appellant plaintiff rented out to the respondent defendant the suit premises allotted to him, by sub lease, by a Housing Co operative Society, which itself held the flat under a 99 years lease granted by the Metropolitan Development Authority.
Sometime later he issued a notice of termination of the tenancy to the respondent and called upon him to vacate the premises within a stipulated time.
On respondent 's failure to vacate the premises, he/instituted a suit on grounds of default of payment of rent and reasonable requirement for occupation under Sections 13(1) (i) and 13(1)(ff) respectively.
The trial court decreed the suit on the ground of reasonable requirement but held that the respondent tenant was not in arrears of rent.
On appeal by the respondent, the first appellate court did not examine the merits of the appellant 's claim of reasonable requirement, but examined the appellant plain tiff 's title, though the respondent had not questioned the same and held that, since the appellant was only a lessee under a 99 years lease granted by the Society, which itself was a lessee holding a 99 years lease from the Metropolitan Development Authority, he was not an 'owner ' within the meaning of Section 13(I)(II) of the Act and was, therefore, not entitled to seek eviction under that provision.
The High Court also did not examine the appellant 's claim for evic tion and affirmed the first appellate Court 's finding on the question of title.
Hence the appeal by the appellant plain tiff.
On the question: whether the appellant was the owner of the suit premises for the purpose of instituting a suit for eviction in terms of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956.
246 Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Ownership denotes the relation between a person and an object forming the subject matter of his ownership.
It consists in a complex of rights, all of which are right 's in rem, being good against all the world and not merely against specific persons.
[249 G] Salmond on Jurisprudence, 12th ed.
Ch. 8, p. 246 et.
referred to.
1.2 There are various rights or incidents of ownership all of which need not necessarily be present in every case.
They may include a right to possess, use and enjoy the thing owned; and a right may be indeterminate in duration and residuary in character.
A person has a right to possess the thing which he owns, even when he is not in possession, but only retains a reversionary interest, i.e., a right to repossess the thing on the termination of a certain period or on the happening of a certain event.
[249 G H; 250 A] 1.3 All that a plaintiff needs to prove is that he has a better title than the defendant.
He has no burden to show that he has the best of all possible titles.
His ownership is good against all the world except the true owner.
The rights of an owner are seldom absolute, and often are in many respects controlled and regulated by statute.
The question, however, is whether he has a superior right or interest vis a vis the person challenging it.
[250 B] 1.4 In the instant case, the appellant plaintiff is an allottee in terms of the West Bengal Co operative Societies Act, 1983.
He has a right to possess the premises for a period of 99 years as a heritable and transferable property.
During that period he has a right to let out the premises and enjoy the rental income therefrom, subject to the statu tory terms and conditions of allotment.
The certificate of allotment is the conclusive evidence of his title or inter est.
No doubt he has to obtain the written consent of the Society before letting out the premises.
But once let out in accordance with the terms of allotment specified in the statute, he is entitled to enjoy the income from the proper ty.
Although he is a lessee in relation to the society, and his rights and interests are subject to the terms and condi tions of allotment, he is the owner of the property having a superior right in relation to the defendant.
As far as the respondent is concerned, the appeliant is his landlord and the owner of the premises for all purposes dealt with under the provisions of the Act.
[250 C E] 1.5 Hence.
the High Court and the first appellate court were wrong in setting aside the decree of the trial court solely on the question of 247 appellant 's title, which was never an issue at any stage of the trial.
There was no plea to that effect and no issue was, therefore, framed on the question.
This being the position, the appellant 's claim has to be decided on the basis of the pleadings, i.e. on the basis that he is the owner of the premises in question.
Accordingly, the Judg ments of the High Court and first appellate court are set aside and the matter remanded to the first appellate court for fresh disposal of respondent tenant 's appeal on merits.
[250 E G]
