Section 3(1) of the Rajasthan University Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) Act, 1974 provides that no teacher in any University in Rajasthan shall be appointed except on the recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted under Section 5, and, under Section 3(2) any appointment made in contravention of Section 3(1) is null and void.
Section 6(4) of the Act provides that the Selec tion Committee, while making its recommendations to the Syndicate, shall prepare a list of candidates selected by it in order of merit and shall further prepare a Reserve List in the same order and to the extent of 50% of the vacancies for the post of teachers or officers.
The University of Rajasthan invited applications for the post of Professor in the Department of Botany.
The Selec tion Committee recommended the name of a candidate in its selection list which was approved by the University Syndi cate and the recommended candidate was appointed as Profes sor.
The appellant 's name was included in the Reserve List which was to remain valid for one year as per the Syndi cate 's 416 resolution.
Subsequent to the retirement of the initially appointed Professor, the appellant, who was on the reserve list, was appointed as Professor.
The non selected candi dates challenged the appointment of initially appointed Professor as well as of the appellant and a Single Judge of the High Court held the Selection Committee 's constitution valid but declared the appellant 's appointment illegal on the ground that once a person selected by the Selection Committee is appointed, the reserve list gets exhausted and the person named in the reserve list cannot be appointed against a future vacancy.
On appeal, the Division Bench of the High Court upheld the order of the Single Judge by holding that once a person selected by the Selection Committee joins the reserve list becomes extinct and if some vacancy is caused thereafter.
a fresh and de nova Selection Committee procedure is to be started.
Against the order of the Division Bench of the High Court, appeals were flied in this Court.
Allowing the appeals and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
A reserve list is always prepared to meet the contingency of anticipated or future vacancies caused on account of resignation, retirement, promotion or otherwise.
This is done in view of the fact that it takes a long time In constituting a fresh Selection Committee which has a cumbersome procedure and in order to avoid ad hoc appoint ments keeping in view the interest of the student community.
[422 F] 2.
The High Court committed a clear error in restricting the scope of reserve list only against the post for which the selection was made and which according to it could only be available to the incumbent in the reserve list if the person recommended in the main list did not join such post.
Thus it was wrong in taking the view that a regular vacancy of Professor having arisen on the retirement of initially appointed Professor, again a fresh Selection Committee should have been constituted and no appointment on such post could have been made from the reserve list prepared by the Selection Committee.
The interpretation given by the High Court is not borne out from any of the provisions of Section 3(1), Section 5 or sub section (4) of Section 6 of the Rajasthan University Teachers and Officers (Selection for appointment) Act, 1974.
[423 B; 422 C D] 417 3.
Section 5 of the 1974 Act only provides for the constitution of Selection Committee and the words 'for every selection ' used in sub section (1) of Section 5 only mean that in case of every selection of a teacher or of an offi cer in University, a Committee would be constituted of the persons mentioned in sub section (i) of the said Section 5.
[423 E] 3.1 A reading of Section 5 with Section 6(4) makes it quite clear that the Selection Committee constituted shall recommend not only the candidates selected by it in order of merit but shall further prepare a reserve list to the extent of 50% of the vacancies and persons kept in the reserve list will be considered as having been selected for the concerned post and shall be entitled for appointment if any vacancy is caused during the validity period of the reserve list.
The suitability of the persons kept in the reserve list is also adjudged by the Selection Committee which is constituted for selection of a teacher in the University.
Thus no fault can be found that the incumbent recommended in the reserve list by the Selection Committee was not selected for the con cerned post of teacher.
[423 G H, 424 A B] 4.
In the instant case, the initially appointed Profes sor was going to retire after sometime.
Therefore, it was perfectly valid to select one more person and to keep him in the reserve list for being appointed on the regular vacancy which was shortly anticipated on account of retirement of initially appointed Professor.
The Selection Committee approved and recommended the name of the appellant in the reserve list finding him suitable for appointment on the post of Professor.
The Syndicate which is the highest execu tive body in the University had also approved the appel lant 's name in the reserve list.
Therefore, the selection and appointment of the appellant is valid.
[422 H, 423 A, 422 G, 424 F] 5.
It is well settled that in matters relating to educa tional institutions, if two interpretations are possible, the courts would ordinarily be reluctant to accept that interpretation which would upset and reverse the long course of action and decision taken by such educational authorities and would accept the interpretation made by such educational authorities.
[424 E]
