The appellant company was ordered to be wound up by Court 's order dated 26.6.1967.
The liquidator invited creditors to prove their debts or claims and to establish title, if any to determine priority under s.530(1)(a) of the .
The Sales Tax Officer submitted a comprehensive claim of sales tax plus penalty and claimed priority.
The liquidator rejected the claim for priority in its entirety but admitted a part of it payable as debt with other unsecured creditors.
The Revenue appealed to the High Court contending that the liquidator erred in law in not granting priority to the claim to sales tax payable by the company for the period from 1.4.1957 to 31.12.1965 under the Bombay Sales Tax Act, and for period from 1.7.1957 to 31.12.1965 under the Central Sales Tax Act inasmuch as notice of demand was issued and assessment order was made in respect thereof within a period of 12 months before the relevant date.
The Company Judge, interpreting section 530(1)(a) of the Act, held that tax becomes due when taxing event occurs and not when assessment orders passed; that even though the amount for which priority was claimed was the amount of tax arrears that became payable at the time of making assessment orders after giving credit for what was paid alongwith return, yet it was due for a period much prior to 12 months next before the relevant date, and rejected the appeal on that score, but allowed the claim to the extent of a small amount of penalty under the two Sales Tax Acts upto the relevant date.
The Revenue filed an intra court appeal, which along with another referred matter was heard by a Division Bench.
The Division Bench held that sales tax becomes due and payable when the tax has 528 been assessed and notice of demand for its payment is served.
It allowed the claim of priority to the sales tax due under the two Acts, assessment orders in respect of which were passed within the period of 12 months immediately preceding 26.6.1967.
The balance amount was directed to rank as ordinary debts since the relevant orders were passed after the date of winding up order.
The claim of recovery of penalty was negatived, because the demand was held to be without application of mind as to whether there was reasonable cause for the official liquidator for not paying the amount.
Aggrieved, the company filed the present appeal by certificate.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. Section 530(1)(a) of the provides that State has a priority over debts, liability and obligation of which was born within the time frame of 12 months next before the relevant date and as such due and becoming due and payable within those twelve months, ascertainable, if necessary, later if not already ascertained.
Thus the legal philosophy which permeats the provision is that the debts due and payable, so as to claim priority must be appropriated to the period within 12 months next before the relevant date and their liability for payment must be founded during that period and no other.[536G H, 537 A B] 2.1 The words 'having become due and payable within the twelve months next before the relevant date ' occurring in clause (a) of section 530(1) of the need be understood to mean putting a restriction or cordoning off the amount for which priority is claimable and not in respect of each and every debt on account of taxes, rates and cesses, etc.
which may be outstanding at that time and payable.
And that such priority is in respect only of debts those of which became due and payable because the liability to those is rooted, founded and belonging to that period of twelve months prior to the relevant date and none other; both the conditions existing.
[537C E] Airedale Garage Co. In re:Anglo South American vs The Company, [1832] Vol. , referred to.
2.2 Both Benches of the High Court gave to the provision a very wide and varied interpretation and that too on literality and gramaticals.
The Single Judge was not right in taking the view that the word 'due ' in the first part of clause (a) of s.530(1) of the was to mean 'outstanding and payable at the relevant date ' and in the expression ' having become due ' in the later part of the clause meant that the 529 event which brought the debt into existence occurred and also it became payable so as to be enforced against the company within twelve months before the date of order of winding up.
The Division Bench erred in holding that the only meaning that could be assigned to the word 'due ' occurring in the section was 'it must be presently due ' and the words 'due and payable ' meant that it must be presently payable.
[536G, 531D E & 532F G] Sales Tax Officer, Petlad vs Rajratha Naranbhai Mills Co. Ltd. and Another, [1974] Vol.
and Baroda Board & Paper Mills Ltd. (in liquidation) vs Income Tax Officer etc, [1976] Vol.
46 Company cases 25, overruled.
The liquidator was directed to re examine the claim and to ascertain as to whether the liability to sales tax belonged to and was founded within the period of 12 months next before 26 June, 1967, and as such due and payable, but preserving the order of the Division Bench in relation to its view on penalties.
[537E G]
