According to the prosecution, when the deceased a peti tion writer, was sleeping in a room with his wife (PW.19) on the iII fated night, he heard someone knocking at the door.
The deceased switched on the light and opened the door.
The accused (A.1 and A.2) entered his room.
They whipped up their knives and gave stab wounds; one on the chest, another on the hack while bending.
They also slapped and listed the deceased.
It was further stated that the second appellant (A 5) caught hold of the deceased and banged him against the wall repeatedly.
PW19 tried to save her husband but she was pushed aside.
During the course of the occurrence, a gold 'PUTRI ' which PW 19 was wearing, was attempted to be snatched away from her.
The eldest daughter of the deceased, PW 1, who was sleeping in a room on the first floor, on hearing the cry, got down and saw the appellants and the other accused leav ing her father 's room.
The appellants while running away took with them a box containing some clothes and other articles belonging to PW 1 and chained the doors in such a way that the other inmates of the house could not reach the spot.
The deceased 's son, PW 3, who was sleeping in another room reached the spot.
PW 15, a tenant in an adjoining room on hearing the distress cry of PW 19, wanted to come out of his room but he could not do 426 so as the house was chained from outside.
He came to the spot after the door was opened.
All the witnesses saw bleeding injuries on the body of the deceased who was unable to speak.
PW 3, at the instance of his deceased father brought a pen and a piece of paper on which the injured deceased wrote 'Gulab Chand ' and thereaf ter became unconscious, and he was then taken to the Govern ment hospital where he succumbed to his injuries.
The two appellants (A4 and A5 before the Trial Court) along with three others were tried section 302 IPC or section 302/149 and section 396, for causing the death of the deceased, accused No. 2 stabbing the deceased with a knife and the rest of the accused assaulting him and for committing the offence of dacoity.
The Trial Court found the third accused not guilty of any of the charges and acquitted him but convicted others section 302 read with 34 IPC and sentenced each of them to undergo imprisonment for life, and acquitted them of the offence section 396 IPC.
The High Court confirmed the conviction.
The present two appellants (A4, A5) filed the present appeal against the judgment of the High Court through special leave.
The other two accused (A1 and A2) preferred a separate special leave petition, which was dismissed by this Court.
Allowing the appeal of the two accused (A4, A5), this Court, HELD: 1.
The powers of the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution are wide but in criminal appeals, this Court does not interfere with the concurrent findings of fact, save in exceptional circumstances.
[430 H] 2.
Within the restrictions imposed by itself, this Court has the undoubted power to interfere even with findings of the fact, making no distinction between judgments of acquit tal and conviction, if the High Court, in arriving at those findings has acted perversely or otherwise improperly.
[431 C] Arunachalam vs PSR Sadhananthan, ; ; State of 427 Madras vs
A. Vaidyanatha Iyer; , ; Himachal Pradesh Administration vs Om Prakash, [1972]1 SCC 249, referred to. 3.01 The deceased was a petition writer and so in that capacity he was very well conversant as to how to draft a complaint.
He asked for a pen and paper, and wrote the name, 'Gulab Chand ', evidently thereby saying that Gulab Chand was the assailant.
The deceased had not written any other name except the name of Gulab Chand.
Now the explanation given by the prosecution is that the deceased became unconscious after writing this one name Gulab Chand, thereby saying had he not become unconscious, probably he would have written the name of other assailants also.
[431 E F] 3.02.
PW 19 the wife of the deceased, was sleeping in the same room in which the deceased was sleeping did not inform either PW 1 or PW 2 the names of the assailants but she gave the names only to PW 3, her son.
It transpires from the evidence of PW 19 that after PW 1 went to fetch the rickshaw, PW 3 asked his father as to who had assailed him and that it was only thereafter the injured deceased wrote the name of Gulab Chand on a piece of paper.
Before the deceased wrote the name of Gulab Chand on a piece of paper given by his son, PW 3, no one including PW 19 came forward with the names of the assailants.
[431 F G] 3.03.
The evidence of PW 2 and 19 indicated that PW 3 was not informed of the names of the assailants before his father (the deceased) wrote the name of Gulab Chand.
Till the deceased wrote the name of Gulab Chand on a piece of paper evidently PW 3 did not know as to who the assailant or assailants was/were.
The Courts below have not approached this signifi cant aspect of this salient feature in the proper perspec tive.
[432 G] 3.05.
In the inquest report there is a specific averment that the two assailants namely, Gulab Singh (A.2) and Gulab Chand (A.1) stabbed the deceased with knives which case alone fits in with the earlier statements of PWs 2 and 19 as well as the version of the deceased in Exh.
P. 50.
If really the names of the two appellants had been mentioned by the witnesses, those names also would have been specifically mentioned in Exh.
P. 24, the inquest report.
[433 B C] 428 3.06.
It is in evidence that both the appellants were present at the scene of occurrence when the police constable came, but none pointed out to the police that these two appellants also participated in the crime.
The prosecution has not satisfactorily established the guilt of the two appellants beyond all reasonable doubt.
