The appellant was initially appointed as Inspector of Motor Vehicles and was promoted as Assistant Regional Trans port Officer In 1976, when the Karnataka General Service (Motor Vehicles Branch) (Recruitment) Rules, 1976 were in force.
Karnataka Civil Services (General Recruitment) Rules, 1977 came into being thereafter.
The appellant was promoted as Regional Transport Officer in 1981.
The General Rules of 1977 were amended in 1982 and sub rule (2) of Rule 3 was inserted, and as per the new Rule 3(2) the second Respondent was promoted as Deputy Commissioner of Transport on seniority cum merit basis.
The appellant filed an Application before the State Administrative Tribunal questioning the promotion of the second Respondent on the ground that promotion to the post of Deputy Commissioner of Transport should have been made by selection and not on seniority cure merit basis.
He also sought a declaration that the promotion of Respondent No. 2 was illegal and Respondent No.1 be directed to consider the case of the appellant for promotion to the post of Deputy Transport Commissioner with all consequential benefits.
The Tribunal dismissed the application on 388 the ground that Rule 3(2) of the General Rules, which was introduced later, had the effect of overriding the earlier special Rules, and hence the promotion made as per Rule 3(2) of the General Rule was valid.
Aggrieved by the Tribunal 's order, the appellant pre ferred the present appeal, by special leave.
On behalf of the appellant it was contended that the Special Rules were exclusively meant to govern the recruit ment and promotion of officers of various cadres of the Motor Vehicles Department and the General Rules which gener ally regulate the recruitment of all State Civil Services broadly even though later in point of time cannot abrogate the Special Rules and that they were not meant to be so since the Special Rules were not superseded and were very much in force.
The Respondent State contended that the non obstante clause in Rule 3(2) of the General Rules which was intro duced later clearly indicate the intention of the Legisla ture to supersede the Special Rules and promotions from the cadre of Regional Transport Officer to that of Deputy Com missioner of Transport could only be on the basis of senior ity cum merit and not by selection.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (By the Court) Sub rule (2) of Rule 3 of Karnataka Civil Services (General Recruitment) Rules, 1977 (General Rules) has the overriding effect over the Karnataka General Service (Motor Vehicles Branch) (Recruitment) Rules, 1976 (Special Rules).
[400 D,E] Per Majority (By Reddy, J. Kuldip Singh, .1.
concurring) 1.
Examining the scope of Rule 3(2) particularly along with other General Rules, the context in which Rule 3(2) is made is very clear.
It is not enacted to supersede the Special Rules.
[403 G] 2.1 The non obstante clause is appended to a provision with a view to give the enacting part of the provision an overriding effect in case of a conflict.
But the non ob stante clause need not necessarily and always be co exten sive with the operative part so as to have the effect of cutting down 389 the clear terms of an enactment and if the words of the enactment are clear and are capable of a clear interpreta tion on a plain and grammatical construction of the words the non obstante clause cannot cut down the construction and restrict the scope of its operation.
In such cases the non obstante clause has to be read as clarifying the whole position and must be understood to have been incorporated in the enactment by the Legislature by way of abundant caution and not by way of limiting the ambit and scope of the Spe cial Rules.
Courts should examine every word of a statute in its context and use it in its widest sense.
[402 E G; 403 B] 2.2 There should be a clear inconsistency between the two enactments before giving an overriding effect to the non obstante clause but when the scope of the provisions of an earlier enactment is clear the same cannot be cut down by resort to non obstante clause.
[403 G H] 23 Even the General Rules of which Rule 3(2) forms a part provide for promotion by selection.
As a matter of fact Rules 1(3)(a), 3(1) and 4 also provide for the enforceabili ty of the Special Rules.
The very Rule 3 of the General Rules which provides for recruitment also provides for promotion by selection and further lays down that the meth ods of recruitment shall be as specified in the Special Rules, if any.
The object of these Rules is to provide broadly for recruitment to services of all the departments and they are framed generally to cover situations that are not covered by the Special Rules of any particular depart ment.
In such a situation both the Rules including Rules 1(3)(a), 3(1) and 4 of General Rules should be read togeth er.
If so read it becomes plain that there is no inconsist ency and that amendment by inserting Rule 3(2) is only an amendment to the General Rules and it cannot be interpreted as to supersede the Special Rules.
The Amendment also must be read as being subject to Rules 1(3)(a), 3(1) and 4(2) of the General Rules themselves.
The amendment cannot be read as abrogating all other Special Rules in respect of all departments.
[403 H; 404 A D] 2.4 Where there are no special rules to naturally the General Rules would be applicable.
Just because there is a non obstante clause in Rule 3(2) it cannot be interpreted that the said ammendment to the General Rules though later in point of time would abrogate the special rule the scope of which is very clear and which co exists particularly when no patent conflict or inconsistency can be spelt out.
[404 D E] 390 Maharaja Pratap Singh Bahadur vs Thakur Manmohan Dey and Ors., AIR 1966 SC 1931; Justiniane Augusto De Piedade Barre to vs Antonic Vicente Da Fonseca and Others etc. ; , relied on.
Muniswamy vs Superintendent of Police, ILR 1986 Karnata ka 344, approved.
Eileen Louise Nicolle vs John Winter Nicolle, (1922) I AC 284; In Re Chance, ; Kunter vs Phillips, , referred to.
There is no doubt that a later statute may repeal an earlier one either expressly or by implication.
In the instant case there is no express repeal of the Special Rule providing for promotion by selection.
There is no patent inconsistency between the General and Special Rules but on the other hand they co exist.
Therefore, there is no scope whatsoever to infer the repeal by implication.
[405 B,F] Aswini Kumar Ghosh and Ant.
vs Arabinda Bose and Ant, ; ; The Dominion of India (Now the Union of India) and Anr.
vs Shrinbai A. Irani and Anr, ; ; Union of India andAnother vs G.M. Kokil and Ors. ; Chandavarkar Site Ratna Rao vs
Ashalata section Guram; , ; State of West Bengal vs Union of India, [1964] 1 SCR 371; Reserve Bank of India etc.
vs Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. & Ors, ; ; Municipal Council Palai vs T.J. Joseph, ; , relied on.
Muniswamy vs Superintendent of Police, ILR 1986 Karnata ka 344, approved.
Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes, Eleventh Edition page 168, relied on.
The Government is directed to consider the case of the appellant for promotion to the post of Deputy Commis sioner of Transport on the basis of promotion by selection, as provided in the Special Rules namely Karnataka General Service (Motor Vehicles Branch) (Recruitment) Rules, 1976.
[405 F G] Per Yogeshwar Dayal, J. (dissenting): 1.
It is clear from Rule 1 (3)(a) of the General Rules that the General Rules apply to recruitment to all State Services and to all posts in connection with the affairs of the State.
A perusal of different rules in the General Rules makes it clear that the 391 general provisions which apply to recruitment to all posts under the Government are specified in those Rules instead of repeating them in each and every Special Rules of recruit ment relating to different departments.
It would be impossi ble to limit the application of the General Rules only for recruitment to posts for which no Special Rules have been made.
Thus Rule 1(3) of the General Rules which accepted the applicability of Special Rules is itself a part of General Rules and the non obstante clause is not merely to what is mentioned to the contrary in the Special Rules but it is also notwithstanding anything contained in the General Rules itself.
[410 B D; 411 G] 2.
By the wording of rule 3(2) of the General Rules it is clear that the Government took conscious and deliberate policy decision and gave a mandate to make only posts of Head of Departments, Additional Head of Departments as selection posts and all other posts on promotion will be filled by adopting the criterion of "seniority cum merit".
To give effect to that policy decision instead of amending every Special Rules of recruitment relating to different State Civil Services, the Government made a provision in the General Rules by incorporating a non obstante clause stat ing that it would apply to all services and posts not withstanding the provisions in the General Rules or in the Special Rules of the State.
[410 E G] 3.1 The selection of 'best ' very often has an element of chance which may not be very conducive to proper climate and harmony in service.
Probably because of that experience the rule making authority thought it fit that the process of promotion by selection should be confined only to top posts and for rest of the posts the method should be promotion by adopting the principle of seniority cure merit.
There is a clear mandate of latest intention of the rule making author ity contained in Rule 3(2) of the General Rules and this must be respected by the Court.
Court is not expert body in knowing what is the best method for selection and to assume that the purest method must be found by the Court and imple mented even by violation of the Rule, will not be sound rule of construction of statute.
[412 D F] 3.2 It is not the function of the Court to examine the efficacy of one form of selection or the other.
It is for the recruiting authority, namely, the Government to examine it and enforce it in the way it Likes.
[413 C] 392 3.3 In the present case the respondent No. 2 was promoted after the amendment of Rule 3 of the General Rules and there is no dispute about his recruitment by way of promotion on the basis of seniority cum merit and that the earlier Special Rules which contemplated the promotion by selection were not followed in view of the latest intention clearly given by a positive mandate.
[411 G H] 3.4 As laid down by this Court in Ajay Kumar Baner jee 's case a prior special law would yield to a later gener al law if it satisfies either of the two conditions viz., that the two are inconsistent with each other;, that there is some express reference in the later to the earlier enact ment.
In the instant case, the special law contemplated promotion by 'selection ' whereas the later law, viz., Rule 3(2) of the general law contemplated promotion by seniority cum merit.
The two are inconsistent with each other and if fulfills the first condition.
Since the non obstante clause in the later general law specifically men tions its efficacy inspite of the Special Law, the second condition is also fulfilled.
Thus, in this case, the later general law prevails over the earlier Special Law, having fulfilled not one but both the conditions.
[413 F H; 414 A B] 3.5 It was for the legislature to choose the method to indicate its intention.
The Courts should not defeat their intention by over looking it.
Respondent No. 2 has been selected for promotion by following the General Rules amend ing the Special Rules and it was strictly in accordance with law.
[414 C D] Ajay Kumar Banerjee and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors., , relied on.
Maharaja Pratap Singh Bahadur vs Man Mohan Dev, AIR 1966 SC 1931; Muniswamv vs Superintendent of Police, ILR 1986 Karnataka 344, referred to.
