The Respondent State invited applications for recruit ment of Assistant Engineers (Civil) and (Mech.) for the Public Works Department.
According to the rules governing the recruitment, viz. Karnataka State Civil Services (Direct Recruitment by Selection) Rules, 1973 the marks obtained In the qualifying examination and the marks secured in the interview would be the basis for selection.
The total marks for qualifying examination was kept at 100 and 50 marks were kept for interview.
Thus the marks allotted for interview was 333% of the total marks.
Appellant No. 1 who applied for the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) secured 29.50 marks out of 50 marks in the interview, his marks in the qualifying examination were 69.96, totalling in all 99.46 marks out of 150.
The second appellant, a candidate for the post of Assistant Engineer (Mech.) secured 24.83 marks in the interview and his marks in the qualifying examination being 66.40, he got 91.23 marks out of the total of 150 marks.
Both the appellants were not selected as they got less marks titan the last candidate selected, and they filed a petition before the State Administrative Tribunal challenging the rides on the ground that the percentage of marks for viva voce fixed at 333 was excessive.
The Tribunal having dismissed the peti tions, the appellants have preferred the present appeal, by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. 50 marks for interview out of 150 are clearly in violation of the settled law on this point.
Some candi dates have been selected though 494 they had secured much lesser marks than the appellants in the qualifying examination but had secured very high marks in the viva voce out of 50 marks kept for this purpose.
If the marks for interview were kept even at 15% of the total marks and merit list was prepared accordingly then both the appellants would have been selected and a large number of selected candidates would have gone much lower in the merit list than the appellants.
[495 G, 496 A B] Ashok Kumar Yadav & Ors.
vs State of Haryana & Ors.
, [1988] Supp.
S.C.R. 657; Mohinder Sain Garg vs State of Punjab & Ors., J.T. , relied on.
Though the Karnataka State Civil Services (Direct Recruitment by Selection) Rules are clearly in violation of the dictum laid down by this Court, since the result of the selections was declared in 1987 and the selected candidates have already joined the posts, it would not be just and proper to quash the selections on the above ground.
Further the selections were made according to the Rules of 1973 and this practice is being consistently followed for the last 17 years and there Is no allegation of any malafides in the matter of selections.
[496 C D] 3.
The respondents are directed to give appointment to the two appellants on the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) and Assistant Engineer (Mech.), respectively in Public Works Department within a period of two months in case the appel lants are found suitable In all other respects according to the Rules.
[496 E] 4.
Since the appointments under the Rules were made way back in 1987, the case of other candidates cannot be considered as they never approached for redress within reasonable time.
The relief is thus restricted only to the present appellants who were vigilant in making grievance and approaching the Tribunal in time.
[496 F G]
