Chhota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 confined succession to property to descendants in the male line of Scheduled Tribes covered by the Act.
The petitioners who were the ladies belonging to the 'Ho ' and 'Oraon ' Tribes of the Chhota Nagpur area contended that the provisions of Sections 7 & 8 of the Act were dis criminatory against women and, therefore, ultra vires the equality clause in the Constitution.
The Court at an earlier stage while hearing one of the writ petitions, gave time to the respondent State of Bihar to consider the feasibility of carrying out an amendment in the offending sections so as to clearly provide that succes sion was not confined in the male line.
In pursuance there of, a Committee was set up by the State which came to the conclusion that a custom prevailed among the Scheduled Tribes that a female heir be excluded from succession, and that if there was any change, and the property be allowed to go into the hands of female heirs there would be agitation and unrest.
Adjourning the hearing of the petitions, this Court, HELD: Scheduled Tribe people are as much citizens as others and they are entitled to the benefit of guarantees of the Constitution.
It may be that the law can provide reasonable regulation in the matter of succession to proper ty with a view to maintaining cohesiveness in regard to Scheduled Tribes and their properties.
But exclusion from inheritance would not be appropriate.
Since this aspect of the matter was not examined by the State, it should re examine the feasibility of permitting inheritance and simul taneously regulating such inheritance for the purpose of ensuring 478 that the property does not go out of the family by way of transfer or otherwise.
[480 H; 481 AB] Jitmohan Singh Munda vs Ramratan Singh & Anr., , referred to.
In the circumstances, hearing of the matter be adjourned for three months and the State of Bihar would immediately take into consideration the order and undertake the exercise indicated and report to the Court by way of an affidavit, and along with that a copy of the report may be furnished by the Committee to be set up by the State of Bihar.
[481 B C]
