The appellant landlord filed an application under Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for ejectment of the respondents and the three courts concurrently found that the respondent was the sole tenant.
Relying on an affidavit filed by tenant 's brother before Income Tax au thorities in which he claimed exclusive possession as ten ant, the Rent Controller and the Tribunal concluded that the admission made by the tenant 's brother was binding on the tenant as a result of which sub letting by tenant was proved and consequently allowed the landlord 's eviction petition.
But the High Court dismissed the eviction petition by holding that since the admission made by tenant 's brother was not binding on the tenant, the finding of sub letting by tenant was vitiated in law because it was based on inadmis sible evidence.
In appeal to this court it was contended on behalf of the landlord that (i) the admission made by tenant 's brother was binding on the tenant under section 18 of the Evidence Act; (ii) the High Court erred in interfering with the concurrent finding of fact.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 538 539 HELD: 1.
Section 18 of the Evidence Act postulates that statements made by a party to the proceeding, or by an agent to any such party, whom the Court regards, under the circum stances of the case, as expressly or impliedly authorised by him to make them, are admissions.
Equally statement made by a person who has any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the proceedings or persons having derivative interest make statements during the continuance of the interest also are admissions.
[540 H, 541 A B] 2.
In the instant case, admittedly, the respondent tenant was not a party to the affidavit signed by his broth er.
Therefore, the admission made by his brother that he is the tenant in exclusive possession of the demised premises does not bind the respondent tenant.
Once it is found that respondent alone is the tenant, his brother cannot claim to have any pecuniary or derivative interest in the demised premises.
He is not an agent of his tenant brother.
Since the admission made by tenant 's brother was inadmissible and not binding on the tenant, the High Court rightly held that the finding of sob letting or parting with possession of the premises in dispute was vitiated in law as it was primarily based on inadmissible evidence.
Consequently, it was open to the High Court to re examine and reappreciate the evidence on record.
[541 B E]
