"Vacation " "Sufficient Cause" Meaning of.
Section 14(3) of the Himachal Pradesh Urban Rent Control Act 1987 enables a landlord to obtain an order for eviction of the tenant if he requires the building for his own occu pation and he has no other building in the area concerned.
This right however stands deferred under second proviso for a period of five years if the landlord has vacated a build ing in use without sufficient cause.
The appellant, an owner of a house, was in occupation of first floor of the house, while the second floor was let out to a Judge.
His entire house is requisitioned for occupation of a Judge.
The appellant did not file any objection under section 3(2) of the Requisition Act.
However, after vacating the building he applied for eviction of respondent.
The Courts in view rejected his application by applying the second proviso to section 14(3) of the Himachal Rent Control Act.
468 Allowing the Landlord 's appeal and setting aside the order of Courts below, this Court, HELD: 1. 'Sufficient cause ' is an expression which is found in various statutes.
It has been construed liberally in keeping with its ordinary dictionary meaning as adequate or enough.
That is any justifiable reason resulting in vacation has to be understood as sufficient cause.
For instance economic difficulty or financial stringency or family reasons may compel a landlord to let out a building in his occupation.
So long it is found to be genuine and bona fide it would amount to vacating a building for suffi cient cause.
And the bar of second proviso stands lifted In other words if the vacation of the building was not a pre tence or pretext the proviso could not frustrate the right of landlord to approach the controller for necessary direc tion to tenant to hand over possession to him.
[470 B C] 1.1 Vacation of a building by landlord in pursuance of an order of requisition by the competent authority could not be characterised as 'not without sufficient cause '.
A land lord has no option.
He is required to vacate under con straint of law.
Therefore the statutory restriction created by second proviso would not apply in such a case.
[470 D] 2.
Validity or invalidity of an order under Requisition Act could not adversely reflect on sufficiency of cause under Rent Control Act.
Reason for either arises in differ ent circumstances.
Vacating a building, even under an incor rect order passed by a competent authority under Requisition Act would be for sufficient reason.
The Rent Control author ities could not examine merit of the order under Requisition Act Therefore it could not be a valid consideration for holding that the building was vacated without sufficient cause.
The courts below thus committed an error of law in applying second proviso to reject the application filed on behalf of the appellant.
[470 H, 471 A B]
