Section 3 of the Water (Prevention of Pollution and Control) Cess Act, 1977 provided that water cess was payable by every person carrying on any specified industry and every local authority, for the purposes of the .
"Specified industry" was defined in the Act meaning any industry specified in Schedule 1.
There were 15 items under Schedule I, including "processing of animal or vegetable products industry", under Entry 15.
The question for consideration in the batch of appeals, writ petitions and transferred cases arising out of the notices issued by the concerned assessing authorities de manding water cess from the sugar manufacturers was whether sugar manufacturing industry fell under Entry 15 of Schedule I of the .
Disposing of the appeals, writ petitions and transferred cases, this Court, HELD: 1.
In the context in which the word 'vegetable ' is used in Entry 15, Schedule I of the , 'vegetable product ' means product of or made of or out of 524 vegetable. 'Vegetables ' as understood in common parlance are not products of manufacture unless it is said that agricul ture is an industry for certain purposes and vegetables are products of that industry.
In order to bring an industry within any of the entries in Schedule 1 it has to be seen what is the end product produced by that industry.
Sugarcane is not a vegetable though it may be an agricultural product.
If the botanic meaning of vegetable as referring to any and every kind of plant life is to be given then some of the industries listed in Schedule I like Paper Industry and Textile Industry and even Chemical Industry which are cov ered by other entries could also be brought within Entry 15.
The word 'vegetable ' in the context does not attract the botanic meaning.
The sugar manufacturing industry does not, therefore, come within Entry 15 of Schedule I of the Cess Act.
Consequently, the manufacture of alcohol from molasses, which is a by product of manufacture of sugar, could not be considered to be an industry within Entry 15 of Schedule I. [534 C E, F] 2.1 The word 'vegetable ' has been defined in many ways.
From the botanic point of view 'vegetable ' may include any plant but in common parlance it is understood as referred to edible plants or parts of edible plants.
Unless the botani cal meaning is given to the word 'vegetable ' it is not possible to conclude sugarcane as vegetable.
[528 C] 2.2 Pollution Act may be a regulating Act, but Cess Act is a fiscal enactment.
Therefore, the Court has to look merely at what is clearly said.
There is no room for any intendment and no room for bringing within the provision of the Cess Act anything by implication.
[533 E,F] State of West Bengal & Ors.
vs Washi Ahmed Etc.
; ; Member Secretary, Andhra Pradesh State Board for Prevention and Control of Water Pollution vs
Andhra Pradesh Rayons Ltd. and others; , , M/s Motipur Zamind ary Co. (P) Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, [1962] Suppl.
1 SCR 498 and Rajasthan State Electricity Board vs The Cess Appel late Committee & Anr., JT , referred to.
World Book, Concise Oxford Dictionary, 3rd Ed.
p. 1365, Webster 's International Dictionary and Encyclopaedia Brit tannica, Vol. 23, referred to.
2.3 Construction of words and the meaning to be given for such words shall normally depend on the nature, scope and purpose of the statute in which it is occurring and to the fitness of the matter to the 525 statute.
The meaning given to the same word occurring in a social security measure or a regulating enactment may not be apposite or.
appropriate when the same word is interpreted with reference to a taxing state.
The Cess Act is a fiscal enactment.
[534 B] 3.1.
Processing of vegetable products industry is nor mally understood in the sense that it relates to processing of vegetables, which even after processing retain its char acter as vegetable.
[530 H,531A] 3.2 Processing as generally understood in marine, agri cultural and food products industries is an action, opera tion or method of treatment applying it to something.
It is refining, development, preparation or converting of material especially that in a raw state into marketable form.
In manufacture something is brought into existence, which is different from that originally existed in the sense that the thing produced is by itself a commercially different commod ity, whereas in the case of processing it is not necessary to produce a commercially different article.
[531 C,D] 3.3 Processing essentially effectuates a change in form, cantour, physical appearance or chemical combination or otherwise by artificial or natural means and in its more complicated form involves progressive action in performing, producing or making something.
[533 A,B] CST v.
A.R.Aladin, AIR 1964 Guj. 27.
CIT vs Farruk habad Cold Storage, ; Union of India vs Delhi Cloth and General Mills, AIR 1963 SC 79 and Corn Products Refining Co. vs Federal Trade Commission, CCA.7. , referred to.
