The appellant 's predecessor in interest, respondent herein, was the owner of two properties consisting of a 'built up property ' and a 'vacant property ' in the city of Calcutta.
The built up property comprised of 414.56 sq. mtrs.
of land of which 321 sq.
was covered by a build ing with a dwelling unit therein and the said property was constructed long before the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regula tion) Act, 1976 came into force.
The second property com prised of 339.65 sq.
of vacant land.
The Act came into force on February 17, 1976 but under Section 2A of the Act the appointed day in relation to State of West Bengal was 28th January, 1976.
Thus between the appointed day and the date of enforcement of the Act there was a 20 days ' gap.
On 8th July, 1978 the respondent entered into an agree ment with the appellant to sell the vacant property.
Since both the properties were covered by the Urban agglomeration as specified in category 'A ' in Scheduled 1 to the 1976 Act, under which the ceiling limit prescribed was 500 sq.
, the appellant and the respondent gave a notice of the pro posed sale under Section 26 of the Act to the competent authority.
The competent authority held that the respondent was holding 25421 sq.
of land in excess of the ceiling limit.
The excess land was determined by totalling 414.56 sq.
of the built up property and 339.65 sq. mtrs.
of vacant property to 754.21 sq.
, and substracting 502 therefrom 500 sq.mtrs.
resulting in 254.21 sq. mtrs.
in excess of the ceiling limit.
Accordingly the competent authority issued order vesting the excess land in the State.
Against the decision of the competent authority the respond ent preferred an appeal before the Appellate Authority which was dismissed in default.
In the meantime the appellant filed a suit against the respondent for specific performance of the agreement dated 8th July, 1978 which was decreed and consequently a deed of conveyance was executed in favour of the appellant and the possession of the property was also given to her.
Subsequently the appellant came to know of the dis missal of the respondent 's appeal.
Thereupon she filed a Review Petition before the Appellate Authority stating that she had become the owner of the vacant property and prayed for retrieval of the same from being treated as excess land in the hands of respondent which was dismissed.
The appel lant filed a writ petition in the High Court and a Single Judge allowed the same.
On appeal by State a Division Bench of the High Court reversed the judgment of the Single Judge.
Against the decision of the Division Bench, appeal was filed in this Court.
Setting aside the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court and allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The primary objective of the Urban Land Ceiling and Regulation Act, 1976 is to fix a ceiling limit on the holding of vacant lands, conditioned as they are on the appointed day, and as held on the date of commencement of the Act.
[512 F] 2.
Under Section 3 of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1973 no person is entitled to bold any vacant land in excess of the ceiling limit.
Ceiling limit of vacant land in case of every person like the predecessor in interest of the appellant is 500 sq.
as set up under Section 4.
[508 E F] 2.1 However, as per Section 2(g), 'Vacant land ' does not include land of three categories.
The first category is land on which construction of a building is not permissible under building regulation in force in the area in which such land is situated.
The second category is of land occu pied by any building in an area, where there are building regulations, which has 503 been constructed upon, or is under construction on the appointed day, with the approval of the appropriate authori ty, and the land appurtenant tO such building.
Thus if the building stood constructed on the land prior to January 28, 1976, the land occupied under the building is not vacant land.
It also covers the land on which any building was in the process of construction on January 28, 1976 with the approval of the appropriate authority.
Additionally, the land appurtenant to these two kinds of buildings is also not "vacant land".
The third category likewise conditioned is of land occupied by any building in an area where there are no building regulations, which has been constructed before January 28, 1976 or is in the process of construction on such date, and the land appurtenant to these two kinds of buildings.
[510A D] 2.2 The expression "land appurtenant" as defined in Section 2(g) when related to any building in an area where there are building regulations as well as in an area where there are no building regulations reveals that the addition al extent as permitted is based on the principle of conti guity.
The expression applies to buildings constructed before the "appointed day" as well as to buildings, con struction of which commenced before the "appointed day", and was in progress on that day.
Therefore, if the construction of a building with a dwelling unit therein had begun after the appointed day, then it is all the same "any other land" to be reckoned for calculating the extent of vacant land held by a person.
And if the construction of a building with a dwelling unit therein on land had been completed or was in progress by and on the appointed day, then it is not "any other land" to be reckoned for calculating the extent of vacant land held by a person.
[512G H, 513A B] The built up property in question had been constructed prior to the commencement of the Act.
Therefore, it is outside the purview of "vacant land".
If that is excluded from being reckoned towards calculating the extent of vacant land held by the predecessor in interest of the appellant, the vacant land in the vacant property cannot be declared excess for that is within the permissible limits.
Even if no land is left as land appurtenant to the built up area, then 93.56 sq. mtrs.
the remainder plus 339.65 sq.
of the unbuilt property would total up to the figure less than 500 sq.
; which is again within the permissible limit.
Accordingly the entire proceedings towards declaring excess land in the hands of the appellant and her predecessor in title are quashed.
[513C E] 504 State of U.P. & Or3.
L.J. Johnson & Ors. , held inapplicable.
Union of India etc.
V.B. Chaudhary etc.
; ; Maharao Sahib Shri Bhim Singhji etc.
vs Union of India & Ors., , referred to.
Eastern Oxygen vs State AIR 1981 M.P. 17; Prabhakar Narhar Pawar vs State, AIR 1984 Bom.
122; State vs Radha Raman Aggarwal, AIR 1987 All. 272, cited.
In the scheme of sub section (9) of Section 4 of the Act the visible contrast between "vacant land" and "any other land" held by a person on which there is a building with a dwelling unit therein is prominent.
The said "any other land" is reckoned and brought at par with the "vacant land" for the purpose of calculating the final extent of vacant land.
The expression "vacant land" in the first portion of the provision connotes land minus land under buildings constructed or in the process of construction before and on the appointed day, and the expression "vacant land" in the latter portion of the provision connotes the sum total of "vacant land" of the first order and distinctly the "other land" on which is a building with a dwelling unit therein of which construction commenced after the appointed day, and the land appurtenant thereto.
Such an interpreta tion is required by the context as otherwise the concept of the appointed day and the gap period would be rendered otiose.
The legislature cannot be accused to have indulged in trickery in giving something with one hand and taking it away with the other.
"Any other land" in the sequence would thus mean any other built upon land except the one excluded from the expression "vacant land" on account of it being occupied by a building which stood constructed.
or was in the process of construction, on the appointed day.
[510F H, 511A B] 4.
Section 5 is reflective of the scheme of the Act in as much as transfers of vacant land within the gap period are ignorable, and likewise, vacant land brought under construction of building by a person within the j gap period is also ignorable for the purposes of calculat ing the extent of vacant land, so that the provision of law are not defeated by human ingenuity.
[512 BC] 5.
Though Sub section (11) of Section 4 is not happily worded, yet when meaningfully construed in the context, it means that a building which 505 gets excluded by virtue of the definition of "vacant land" gets clothed with the protective cloak for not being reck oned again as any other land, over which there is a building with a dwelling unit therein.
This provision means to convey that what is not vacant land under sub clauses (ii) and (iii) of clause (q) of Section 2 cannot go to add up as "vacant land" under sub section (9) of Section 4 by descrip tive overlapping.
To wipe out the distinction of "vacant land" and "any other land" as demonstrated in sub section (9) of section 4 is to strangulate and destroy the spirit and life blood of the "appointed day" and the gap period.
[512 D F]
