The appellant wife filed an application for maintenance against respondent husband under section 125 of the Code of Criminal procedure, 1973.
The respondent contested the application on the ground that appellant was not his legally wedded wife since their marriage was void on account of subsistence of respondent 's earlier marriage.
The Magistrate awarded a monthly maintenance of Rs. 400 to the wife by holding that the respondent has not proved his first marrige.
The order of the magistrate was set aside by the High Court in revision accepting the respodent 's plea that his first marriage was subsisting when the respodent married the appellant.
In appeal to this court it was contented on behalf of the respodent that the High Court had no material before it for arriving at the finding that there was an earlier valid marriage on the date respondent married the appellant.
Allowing the appeal, this Court.
HELD:1 Section 125 of the code of Criminal Procedure is meant to achieve a social purpose.
The object is to prevent vagrancy and destitution.
it provides a speedy remedy for the supply of food,clothing and shelter to the deserted wife.
The term "wife" includes a woman who has been divorced by a husband or who has obtained a divorce from her husband and has not remarried.
The woman not having the legal status of a wife is thus brought within the inclusive definition of the term "Wife" consistent with the objective.
However,under the law a second wife whose marriage is void on account of the survival of the first marriage is 905 not a legally wedded wife and is,therefore,not entitled to maintenance under this provision.
Therefore, the law which disentitles the second wife from receiving maintenance from her husband for the sole reason that the marriage ceremony though performed in the customary from lacks legal sanctity can be applied only when the husband satisfactorily proves the subsistence of a legal and valid marriage particularly when the provision in the Code is ameasure of social justice intended to protect women and children.
Accordingly, when an attempt is made by the husband to negative the claim of the neglected wife depicting her as a kept mistress on the specious plea that he was already married, the court should insist on strict proof of the earlier marriage.
[907D H] 2.
The respondent has not discharged the heavy burden by tendering strict proof of the fact in issue.
He clearly admitted his marriage with the appellant acording to Hindu rites.
But there is no clear admission of his earlier marriage to dispense with the proof of subsisting valid first marriage when the second marriage was solemnised.
In the absence of such an admission, the statement that the respondent was living with another woman as husband and wife cannot persuade was court to hold that the marriage duly solemnised between the appellant and the respondent suffers from any legal infirmity.
[906C H] 3.
The nomination in the Insurance Policy and Entry in the Identity Card, referred to by the High Court are not conclusive of the subsistence of a valid marriage between the respondent and his earlier wife.
The High Court has failed to consider the standard of proof required and has proceeded on no evidence whatsoever in determining the question against the appeallant.
Accordingly the order of the High Court is set aside and the order of the Magistrate is restored.
[907B C]
