The respondent company, in its factory set up at Madras 1959, introduced slab system of dearness allowance (DA) i.e. the DA paid to the workmen was linked to the cost of living index as well as the basic pay.
The double linked DA scheme, being consciously accepted as basic constituent by the company and its workmen in various settlements between them, became basic feature of the wagestructure and remained operative in the company for about 30 years, In the year 1983, a dispute arose between the company and its workmen.
The matter was referred to the industrial Tribunal.
One of the issues before the Tribunal was based on the demand of the Management for restructuring of the dear ness allowance scheme and to frame a new scheme.
The Tribu nal abolished the existing slab system of DA and directed the dearness allowance to be linked only to the cost of living index at 33 paise per point over 100 points at the Madras city cost of living index 1936 base.
Before the High Court, both the parties agreed not to press their respective writ petitions except on the issue of restructuring of 130 DA.
Upholding the findings of the Tribunal on the sole surviving issue, the Single Judge dismissed the workmen 's writ petition.
The intra Court appeal filed by the workmen was also dismissed.
grieved, the workmen filed the appeal by special leave to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the workmen that the Tribunal and High Court grossly erred in taking Rs. 26 as a pre war wage of a worker in Madras region and holding that the rate of neutralization on the basis of cost of living index in December, 1984 was 192%; that even assuming that there was over neutralization, the existing pay structure/DA scheme could not be revised to the prejudice of the workmen unless their pay structure was within the concept of 'living wage ' and, in addition, it was proved that financially the company was unable to bear the burden; and that the company could not be permitted to abolish the DA scheme to the detriment of the workmen much less on the plea that the said scheme was more beneficial than the DA schemes adopted by other industries in the region.
The respondent, contended that the company had proved to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that financially it was not in a position to bear the burden of existing DA scheme; that its workmen were in a high wage island and as such the revision of DA scheme was justified.
It was also contended that so long as there was some basis and material to vali date the award, the jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution stood repelled.
On the question; whether the Management is entitled to restructure the DA scheme to the prejudice of the workmen on the ground that the existing system had resulted in over neutralization thereby landing the workmen in the high wage island Allowing the appeal of the workmen, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
The management can revise the wage structure to the prejudice of the workmen in a case where due to financial stringency it is unable to bear the burden of the existing wage.
But in an industry or the employment where the wage structure is at the level of minimum wage, no such revision at all, is permissible not even on the ground of financial stringency.
[p. 142 E] Monthly Rated workmen at the Wadala factory of the Indian Hume 131 Pipe Co. Ltd. vs Indian Hume Pipe Co. Ltd., Bombay, ; , relied on.
M/s Crown Aluminium Works vs Their Workmen, ; & Ahmedabad Mills Owners ' Association etc.
vs The Textiles Labour Assosication; , , referred to.
Killick Nixon Ltd. vs Killick & Allied Companies Employ ees Union, , distinguished.
1.2 The employees are entitled to the minimum wage at all times and under all circumstances.
An employer who cannot pay the minimum wage has no right to engage labour and no justification to run the industry.
[p. 137 C] 1.3 It is for the management, seeking to restructure the DA scheme to the disadvantage of the workmen, to prove to the satisfaction of the tribunal that the wage structure in the industry concerned is well above minimum level and the management is financially not in a position to bear the burden of the existing wagestructure.
[p. 142 F] 2.1 'The concept of 'minimum wage ' is no longer the same as it was in 1936.
Even 1957 is way behind.
A worker 's wage is no longer a contract between an employer and an employee.
It has the force of collective bargaining under the labour laws.
Each category of the wage structure has to be tested at the anvil of social justice which is the live fibre of our society today.
[pp. 136 H, 137 A] 2.2 The Tripartite Committee of the Indian Labour Con ference ' 1957 has formulated five norms for the fixation of 'minimum wage ' (i) three consumption units for one earner disregarding earnings of women, children and adolescents; (ii) minimum food requirement based on net intake calories; (iii) clothing requirement at 72 yards per annum for an average working family of four; (iv) house rent correspond ing to minimum area provided for under the Government 's Industrial Housing Scheme; (v) 20% of total minimum wage for fuel, lighting and other miscellaneous items.
[p. 136 D G] Express Newspapers (P) Ltd. vs Union of India, , followed.
Standard Vacuum Refining Co. of India vs Its Workmen & Anr., ; , relied on.
132 Keeping in view the socio economic aspect of the wage structure the following additional component has also to be taken into account: "(vi) children education, medical require ment, minimum recreation including festivals/ceremonies and provision for old age, marriages etc.
should further constitute 25% of the total minimum wage," The wage structure which approximately answers these six components is nothing more than a minimum wage at subsist ence level.
[p. 137 A C] 2.3 In spite of the promise by the Constitution of a living wage and a 'socialist ' framework to enable the work ing people a decent standard of life, industrial wage, looking as a whole, has not yet risen higher than the level of minimum wage.
[p. 137 D E] 3.1 Purchasing power of today 's wage cannot be judged by making calculations which are solely based on 30/40 years old wagestructure.
The only reasonable way to determine the category of wage structure is to evaluate each component of the category concerned in the light of the prevailing prices.
There has been skyrocking rise in the prices and the inflation chart is going up so fast that the only way to do justice to the labour is to determine the money value of various components of the minimum wage in the context of today.
[p. 140 F H] 3.2 In the instant case, the Company neither pleaded nor argued before the Tribunal that its financial position had so much deteriorated that it was not possible for it to bear the burden of the slab system of DA; nor did the Tribunal deal with this aspect of the matter while considering the demand of the Company for re structuring the DA scheme.
[p. 144 F G] 3.3 Although the DA paid by the Company was somewhat higher than what was being paid by the other similar indus tries in the region, yet it could not be shown that what was being paid by the Company was higher than what would be required by the concept of need based minimum wage.
In any case there is a very long way between the need based wage and the living wage.
[p. 145 AB] 4.
The Tribunal and the High Court acted in total oblivion of the legal position.
Consequently, manifest injustice has been caused 133 to the workmen by the award.
It can, therefore, not be said that jurisdiction under article 136 stands repelled.
[p. 145 CD] Shaw Wallace & Co. Ltd. vs Workmen, & The Statesman Ltd. vs Workmen, ; , referred to.
The Tribunal was not justified in abolishing the slab system of DA which had stood the test of time for almost 30 years and had been approved by various settlements between the parties and as such the award of the Tribunal and the High Court judgments were unsustainable.
[pp. 144 AB; 145 DE] Buckingham and Carnatic Mills Ltd. vs Their Workers, [1951] 2 L.L,.
J. 314 & Good Pastor Press vs Their Workers, , referred to.
