The appellant was a tenant originally in the old building but after it was purchased by the respondent he vacated it and became a tenant under the respondent in the new premises.
In the old building the appellant had sub tenants, who shifted to the new premises along with the appellant when the latter occupied those premises.
One of the terms of the lease which were contained in a letter dated June 7, 1948, written by the respondent to the appellant provided: " In the shops in the old chawl which are with you, you have kept sub tenants.
We are permitting you to keep sub tenants in the same manner, in this place also.
" On April 20, 1949, the respondent brought a suit for ejectment against the appellant on the ground, inter alia, that section 15 of the Bombay Hotel and Lodging Houses Rates Con trol Act, 1947, prohibited sub letting and under section 13(1)(e) of the Act the landlord has the right to evict the tenant on account of sub letting.
The appellant 's defence was (1) that section 15 of the Act was confined to "any other law ", that it did not apply to contracts between the landlord and tenant and therefore it did not preclude an agreement between the parties as to sub letting, (2) that the parties were in pari delicto and therefore the respondent could not succeed, and (3) that the right of the respondent to sue for ejectment on the ground of sub letting being a personal right for his benefit, he must be taken to have waived it as he had allowed the appellant to sub let and, consequently, he could not evict him under section 13(1)(e) of the Act.
Held : (1) that the non obstante clause " Notwithstanding anything contained in any law " in section 15 of the Bombay Hotel and Lodging Rates Control Act, 1947, applies to contracts also as they would fall under the provisions of the law relating to contracts; (2) that the respondent was entitled to sue for ejectment, though the agreement recognised sub letting, as the suit was brought not for the enforcement of the agreement but to enforce the right of eviction which flowed directly from an infraction of the provisions of section 15 of the Act and for which the Act itself 28 218 provided a remedy.
The section is based upon public policy, and where public policy demands, even an equal participant in an illegality is allowed relief by way of restitution or rescission, though not on the contract; and, (3) that the plea of waiver which the appellant relied on cannot be sustained because as a result of giving effect to that plea the court would be enforcing an illegal agreement and thus contravene the statutory provisions Of section 15 Of the Act.
An agreement to waive an illegality is void on grounds of public policy and would be unenforceable.
Case law reviewed.
