A notification u/s.4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was issued for acquisition of the questioned lands along with some other lands for the purpose of development of the town.
On 17.9.80 the same was quashed.
In 1985 another similar notification was issued u/s 4(1) of the Act, for acquisition of the same lands for the Scheme No.23 framed under Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973.
The respondents challenged the notification before the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions annulling the notification and holding that the Scheme No.23 did not operate against certain specified lands of the respondents.
It also found that the statutory requirements for completing the scheme were not complied with and therefore, no action for acquisition under the Scheme could be taken.
These appeals were filed by the Development Authority against the High Court judgments by special leave.
Disposing of the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The pre conditions had not been complied with strictly under the statutory provisions.
The High Court has not found any malafides.
The Development Authority in ques tion consisted of only one person.
His own order was perhaps taken by him and the gov 248 ernmental authorities as the requisite resolution.
The respondents did not take the ground that there was no valid authority behind the scheme.
[249 E F] 2.
The huge patch of land has been substantially improved upon under the scheme.
Cancellation of the notifi cation does not bring the matter to an end.
Obviously, fresh proceedings would be taken after complying with the defect if the judgment of the High Court is allowed to stand.
If the acquisition is not made the respondents should enjoy usual benefits of their land on account of the development of the neighbouring area and if the re acquisition is not made there would be claim for higher compensation.
[249 G250 A] 3.
It is directed that the acquisition remain to subject, to the condition that the notification under sec tion 4(1) of the Act issued in 1985 shall be deemed to be one dated 1.1.88 and the market value of the land for the acquisition shall be determined with reference to that date, and that as the deemed date of the notification under sec tion 4(1) to be postponed by almost three years and during this period since the appellant has brought about the bulk of the improvements in the neighbourhood, 25 per cent of the potential value of the land relatable to the improvements made by the appellant would only be available to the re spondents, but in fixing market value all other legitimate considerations shall be taken into account.
There is no intention to extend the benefit under section 28 of the Act to the owners of the lands already acquired under the noti fication of 1980 or 1985 on the basis of court 's direction that the respondents ' lands shall be deemed to have been notified under section 4(1) of the Act on 1.1.1988.
[250 B D]
