The land in question was granted by the Ruler of erst while State of Ratlam in favour of ancestors of respondents (Pitaliyas) for installation of a ginning factory.
Ancestors of appellants (Jhalanis) entered into a partnership with Pitaliyas and started a ginning factory on a portion of the said land.
In the revenue records, in respect of the entire land the names of Jhalanis and Pitaliyas were entered.
According to the Jhalanis in execution of a decree against Pitaliyas the above land was sold and Jhalanis purchased the said land in an auction.
On an application moved by the Jhalanis, the Tehsildar passed an order mutat ing the names of Jhalanis in respect of the entire land.
The said mutation was allowed on the basis of compromise between the parties and on the basis of a sale certificate issued by the Civil Court.
The Town Improvement Trust started acquisition proceed ings for a housing scheme and acquired certain lands includ ing the land in question.
The Collector started suo motu proceedings, issued notice to the Jhalanis and set aside the order of mutation passed by the Tehsildar.
An appeal pre ferred by the Jhalanis before the Addi 258 tional Commissioner was dismissed.
The Board of Revenue allowed the further appeal and held that pending mutation proceedings, there was compromise between the parties, objections were withdrawn by the Pitaliyas and no appeal or revision was filed against the mutation order nor any suit was filed challenging the order of the Tehsildar.
The Pita liyas then filed a writ petition before the High Court, which was allowed and the order of the Board of Revenue was set aside.
Against the said judgment of the High Court, the Jhalanis have preferred an appeal before this Court.
In the acquisition proceedings the Tribunal gave a finding that Pitaliyas had no right to claim compensation and Jhalanis alone were entitled to the entire amount of compensation.
The order of the Tribunal was challenged by the parties by filing separate appeals before the High Court.
The High Court allowed the appeal filed by Pitaliyas and held that they were entitled to claim compensation in equal proportion with Jhalanis; it dismissed the appeal filed on behalf of the Trust for reducing compensation and allowed the appeal filed by Jhalanis in part and increased the rate of compensation from 65 paise per sq.ft to 75 paise per sq.ft.
Aggrieved against the aforesaid judgment of the High Court in acquisition proceedings, the Jhalanis and the Trust have filed the other two appeals before this Court.
Allowing the appeals on the questions of validity of the mutation made and entitlement to receive compensation, and partly allowing the appeal on the question whether enhance ment of compensation was justified, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
There was a decree of a Civil Court and in execution of the same the properties were auctioned.
Even if there was any dispute as to whether any share of Pitaliyas in the land was sold or not in the auction proceedings the same does not survive after the compromise between the parties.
In the order of the Tehsildar passed as back as 20th February, 1953 the Jhalanis alone were recorded as full owners of the properties and they continued to remain in possession.
The Trust took possession from Jhalanis on 21st March, 1968 in the land acquisition proceedings.
There is nothing on record to show that Pitaliyas ever remained in possession of the land in question after 20th February, 1953 till the time they made a claim of half share in the compen sation before the Tribunal.
[264 D, E] 1.2.
The Collector had no justification at all to have initiated the proceedings suo motu in 1970 after 17 years of the order passed 259 by the Tehsildar.
Even under the law of limitation no suit for possession could have been maintained after 12 years by Pitaliyas and they were not entitled to any share in the amount of compensation.
There was also no justification for entering the names of Pitaliyas in the revenue records and to set aside the order of the Tehsildar dated 20th February, 1953, after 17 years.
The Tehsildar was perfectly justified in passing the order dated 20.2.1953 on the basis of the sale certificate, as well as compromise application and the statement made before him on 16.10.1952.
[264 F, G] 2.
One bigha is equivalent to 22500 sq.
and no contention was raised before the Tribunal that one bigha was equivalent to 21511 sq.
ft. prevalent in the erstwhile State of Ratlam.
For the first time, this point was raised before the High Court.
This being a controversial question of fact and the other side did not have the chance to lead any evidence on this point, the High Court rightly negatived it and held that the compensation for one bigha of land would be calculated as equivalent to 22500 sq.
[265 A C] 3.
The District Judge after consideriug large number of documentary evidence placed on record by both the parties arrived at the conclusion based on good and valid reasons that the fair market price of the acquired land on 22nd August, 1964 was 65 paise per sq.
The High Court went wrong in increasing the rate from 65 paise to 75 paise without any valid reasons whatsoever.
In the circumstances, enhancement ordered by the High Court is set aside and the compensation determined by the District Judge at the rate of 65 paise per sq.
ft. is maintained.
[266 C E]
