The petitioners All India Judges ' Association filed an application under Article 32 of the Constitution of India for directions of this Court for setting up of an All India Judicial Service, for bringing about uniform conditions of service for members of the subordinate judiciary, provision of residential accommodation, transport facility; library and in service training for judicial officers.
Disposing of the writ petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
For a civilised society an enlightened inde pendent judiciary is totally indispensable.
1231 A] 2.
Rendering justice is a difficult job.
Unless the judi cial officer 207 has a reasonably worry free mental condition, it would be difficult to expect unsoiled justice from his hands.
[223 C] 3.
A judge ought to be wise enough to know that he is fallible and, therefore, even ready to learn and be coura geous enough to acknowledge his errors.
The conduct of every judicial officer should be above reproach.
He should be coscientious, studious, thorough, courteous, patient, punc tual, just, impartial fearless of public clamour, regardless of public praise and indifferent to private, political or partisan influences; he should administer justice according to law, and deal with his appointment as a public trust; he should not allow other affairs or his private interests to interfere with the prompt and proper performance of his judicial duties, nor should he administer the office for the purpose of advancing his personal ambitions or increasing his popularity.
[231 F H] 4.
Under the Constitution, the concept of Rule of Law came to be accepted and developed.
Article 50 prescribed the guideline of separating "the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State".
This position is the outcome of recognition of the fact that the judiciary is a class separate from the executive.
[211 D] 5.
The Trial Judge is the kingpin in the hierarchical system of administration of justice.
He directly comes in contact with the litigant during the proceedings in Court.
On him lies the responsibility of building up of the case appropriately and on his understanding of the matter the cause of justice is first answered.
The personality, knowl edge, judicial restraint, capacity to maintain dignity are the additional aspects which go into making the courts ' functioning successful.
[225 F G] 6.
The District Judge is the principal judicial officer of the district.
It is the obligation of the district judge to operate as the captain of the team both under his direct supervision at the headquarters and in respect of the offi cers located in different areas within his district.
Of late, lower or subordinate courts are being established in the outlying and rural interior.
It is the obligation of the district judge to inspect the outlying courts, maintain the proper judicial tempo and temper of functioning in his district and be responsible 1or the efficient running of the system.
[221 G 222 A] 7.
The High Courts must take greater interest in the proper functioning of the subordinate judiciary.
Inspection should not be a matter of casual attention.
The Constitution has vested the control of 208 the subordinate judiciary under Article 235 in the High Court as a whole and not its Chief Justice alone.
Every Judge should, therefore, take adequate interest in the institution which is placed under the control of the High Court.
The administrative control of the subordinate courts of the State vests not in the Chief Justice alone but in the Court over which the Chief Justice presides.
[231 A C] 8.
There is a marked distinction between the nature of work which executive officers and judicial officers are called upon to discharge.
The work of the judicial officers is usually sedantry while that of the executive officer involves a lot of physical movement.
This is particularly so in the lower cadres of both the services.
In view of this feature physical fitness is more important for an executive officer than in case of a judicial officer while in case of judicial officers, there is thus necessarily more of mental activity than physical.
Experience is an indispensable factor and subject to the basic physical fitness with grow ing age experience grows.
[217 D E] 9.
Today a judicial officer always looks at life in a comparative way with administrative officers of his age.
Professional income at the Bar has tremendously swelled up.
Very often counsel 's fee per day equals to the salary of a judicial officer for a full month or even a longer period.
This great disparity affects peace and equilibrium in the judicial operation.
[227 D] 10.
It is absolutely necessary that the Judge enjoys freedom from personal worries.
A reasonable salary appropri ate allowances and manageable living conditions are, there fore, required to be provided.
[226 E] 11.
An All India Judical Service should be set up and the Union of India should take appropriate steps in this regard.
[232 C] 12.
Steps should be taken to bring about uniformity in designation of officers both in civil and the criminal side by 31.3.1993.
[232 C] 13.
Retirement age of judicial officers be raised to 60 years and appropriate steps be taken by 31.12.1992.
[232 C] 14.
As and when the Pay Commissions/Committees are set up in the States and Union Territories; the question of appropriate pay scales of judicial officers be specifically referred and considered.
[232 D] 209 15.
A working library at the residence of every judicial officer has to be provided by 30.6.1992.
Provision for sumptuary allowance has to be made.
[232 D] 16.
Residential accommodation to every judicial officer has to be provided and until State accommodation is avail able.
Government should provide requisitioned accommodation for them by 31.12.1992.
In providing residential accommoda tion, availability of an office room should be kept in view.
[232 E] 17.
Every District Judge and Chief Judicial Magistrate should have a State vehicle, Judicial officers in sets of 5 should have a pool vehicle and others would be entitled to suitable loans to acquire two wheeler automobiles within different time limits.
[232 F] 18.
In service Insititute should be set up within one year at the Central and State or Union Territory level.
[232 G] The Law Commission of India 14th Report, 1958 Judges: by Professor Pannick; Law Commission of India, 1 Ith Report referred to.
Moti Ram Deka, etc.
vs The General Manager, North East Frontier Railway, Maligaon, Pandu, etc.
; , ; Secretary, Government of Madras, Home Department and ,Anoth er vs Zenith Lamps and Electrical Ltd., ; ; Devi Prasad Sharma and Others vs The King Emperor, 70 IA 216; Baradakanta Mishra The Registrar of Orissa, High Court and Another, ; , referred to.
