The appellant company was incorporated in the United Kingdom, with its registered office in London and its business in the United Kingdom consisted of stores and groceries, including tea which represented only about 10% of its business there.
Its operations in India were carried on by a branch with its head office in Calcutta, and the business there consisted mainly in the sale of " packeted " tea throughout India.
The Delhi office of its Indian branch controlled the salesmen and other employees employed in the Punjab, Delhi State, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, but had no connexion with the export side of the business.
The Indian Branch had no subscribed capital nor any reserves, and the capital used in India was money advanced from the company 's fund in England.
The dispute between the respondents who were the employees of the Delhi office and the company related, inter alia, to (1) fixation of grades and scales of pay; (2) whether retrospective effect should be given to the new scales of, pay; and (3) bonus for the year 1951.
The respondents contended that the total global profits of the appellant company should form the basis for determining the claim to bonus on the ground that it was an integrated industry which had trading activities in various countries.
The Tribunal found that the Indian workmen did not in any way contribute to the profits which the appellant company derived from its ex India business, that the Indian branch maintained separate accounts which had been audited and accepted by the Income tax authorities as showing the profit and loss of the Indian branch of the business, and that though, at the relevant time, the appellant company was one legal entity and the capital of the Indian branch came from London, the Indian branch was treated as a separate entity for all practical purposes.
The Tribunal also found that for 195 I there was no available surplus for distribution as bonus to the employees in India.
In the matter of fixation of grades and scales of pay, the Tribunal found that the existing scale of wages of the Delhi employees was far below the standard of a living wage, and for fixing the wage level it took into consideration the company 's global capacity to pay and came to the conclusion that having regard to its global 151 resources the company was financially able to bear a slightly higher wage structure.
Accordingly, the Tribunal revised the grades by giving an increase of 20% to all workers.
As to the date from which the revised grades were to take effect, the Tribunal directed that they should have retrospective effect from January 1, 1954, instead of January 1, 1953, as claimed by the Union.
The appellant contended that the Tribunal erred in taking into consideration the global financial resources of the company in support of an increase in wages while holding that the Indian branch was a separate entity for the payment of bonus, that the financial resources of the Indian branch did not show any capacity to pay higher wages, and that, in any case, there was no reliable evidence to show that the existing wage structure required revision if it was compared to the wage structure in similar industries in the Delhi region.
A question was also raised as to whether the Industrial Tribunal, Delhi, had jurisdiction to make an award in respect of employees of the Delhi office who were employed outside the State of Delhi.
Held: (1) that on the finding that the Delhi office controlled all its employees in the matter of appointment, leave, transfer, supervision, etc., whether employed in Delhi State or outside it, the Industrial Tribunal, Delhi, had jurisdiction to adjudicate on the dispute between the appellant company and its workmen of the Delhi office, as the Delhi State Government was the appropriate Government within the meaning of section 2 of the , and under section 18 of the Act the award made by the Tribunal was binding on all persons employed in the Delhi office; (2) that in the circumstances in which the appellant com pany operated in India at the relevant time and on the finding that no part of the profits made in India was diverted to England and that the Indian business depended on its own trading results the global profits of the company could not be made the basis for awarding bonus to Indian workmen, and that the latter can claim bonus only if there was an available surplus of profits of the Indian business; Muir Mills Co. Ltd. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, Kanpur, ; , Ganesh Flour Mills Co. Ltd vs Employees of Ganesh Flour Mills, A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 382, Burn and Co., Calcutta vs Their Employees, ; and Baroda Borough Municipality vs Its workmen; , , referred to.
(3) that in determining the question of a revision of the wage scale, the relevant considerations were : (1) whether the existing wage structure required revision by reason of its being below the standard of living wage, and (2) whether the industry could bear the additional burden of an increase in the wage scale on the basis of industry cum region by reason of its financial resources in India ; that judged by the considerations stated 152 above, it could not be said that the Tribunal erred in revising the wage structure on the basis of the evidence adduced before it ; and that the increase in the wages was not beyond the financial resources of the company as disclosed by its trading results in India.
There is a distinction between bonus and wage.
Bonus comes out of profits and is paid, if after meeting prior charges, there is an available surplus.
Wages primarily rest on contract and are determined on a long term basis and are not necessarily dependent on profits made in a particular year.
Crown Aluminium Works vs Their Workmen, ; and Express Newspapers (Private) Ltd. vs The Union of India, , relied on.
(4) that the new scales of pay should be brought into effect from November 1, 1955, instead of January 1, 1954, as directed by the Tribunal.
