The Union Territory of Chandigarh, by its Memo dated 19.5.1982 as modifited by another Memo dated 6.9.1990, reserved 5% of seats for children/spouses of military/pars military personnel.
Pursuant thereto the Punjab Engineering College, reserved 15 seats for such candidates.
For the purpose of admission the college categorised in its prospec tus these candidates into 5 sub categories.
These belonging to the respective categories and obtaining qualifying marks in the entrance examination were to be admitted meritwise in the order of priority in descending order: sub category 1 consisted of children/spouses of defence personnel who were awardees of gallantry decorations of Paramvir/Mahavir/Vir Chakra in person or posthumously, or, dependent children/spouses of defence/pars military personnel who were killed or totally incapacitated in action while in service.
Dependent childern/spouses of defence/pars military person nel who died in service were put in sub category 2.
Subcate gory 3 comprised the dependent children/spouses of defence/pars military personnel incapacitated while in service, Dependent children/spouses of Ex servicemen (mili tary and pars military) were 323 placed in sub category 4; and those of serving defence/pars military personnel found place in sub category 5.
For the academic year 1991 92 out of the 15 seats, 9 seats went to all the 9 qualified candidates belonging to sub categories 1 to 3, and remaining seats were allotted to 6 candidates meritwise out of 90 qualified candidates be longing to sub category 4.
Sub category 5 went unprovided.
Respondent no.1 in SLP No.16066/91, who appeared in the entrance examination for the academic year 1991 92 but did not get admission, filed a writ petition before the High Court contending that his father was an awardee of 'Shaurya Chakra ' which was equivalent to Vir Chakra and therefore his case ought to have been considered in sub category 1.
On behalf of the College it was stated that 'Shaurya Chakra ' award was not covered under the rules and regulations and, therefore, respondent no.1, being the son of an Exservice man, could be considered only in sub category 4.
Respondents no.1 and 2 in SLP No.16065/91, the sons of the serving defence personnel, filed another writ petition before the High Court challenging the categorization of defence personnel as unreasonable and contended that chil dren of serving defence personnel should have been preferred over the children of Exserviceman.
The High Court allowed both the writ petitions and directed the College to admit all the three petitioners.
It ordered that subcategory 5 should be treated as sub category 4 and sub categery 4 should be treated as sub category 5, and the admissions should be made accordingly.
The petitioner in SLP No.16451/91, being the son of an serviceman, was initially entitled to be considered under sub category 4 which by the order of the High Court was converted into sub category 5.
He challenged the said con version of categories by yet another writ petition which was dismissed by the High Court.
The Chandigarh Administration and the College filed SLPs No.16066 and 16065 of 1991 against the orders of the High Court allowing the two writ petitions, whereas SLP No. 16451 of 1991 was filed by the petitioner in the third writ peti tion which was dismissed by the High Court.
324 It was contended on behalf of Chandigarh Administration and the College that the High Court exceeded its jurisdic tion in granting the impugned order in as much as in writ jurisdiction the High Court does not sit as an appellate authority over the rule making body nor can it re write the rules.
On 15.11.1991 the three Special Leave Petitions were dis posed of.
Giving reasons in support of its order dated 15.11.1991 this Court, HELD: 1.
While acting under Article 226 of the Constitu tion, the High Court does not sit and/or act as an appellate authority over the orders/actions of the subordinate author ities/tribunals.
Its jurisdiction is supervisory in nature.
[pp. 335 H; 336 A] One of the main objectives of this jurisdiction is to keep the government and several other authorities and tribu nals within the bounds of their respective jurisdiction.
The High Court must ensure that while performing this function it does not overstep the wellrecognised bounds of its own jurisdiction.
[p. 336 A] 2.1 In the instant case, the High Court should not have indulged in the exercise of 'switching ' the categories and that too without giving any reasons therefor.
Thereby, it has practicably assumed the role of rule making authority, or, at any rate, assumed the role of an appellate authority.
That is clearly not the function of the High Court acting under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
334 G H1 2.2 If the High Court was satisfied that the rule was discriminatory and bad, the only course open to it was to strike down the offending rule.
It could also have directed the authorities to reframe the rule and make admissions accordingly.
[p. 333 F] By directing that category 4 should be treated as cate gory 5 and conversely category 5 should be treated as cate gory 4, the High Court has prejudicially affected the rights of candidates falling under category 4 without even hearing.them, particularly when these categories were men tioned in the order of priority.
[p. 335 A] 3.
A rule making authority need not observe the rule of hear 325 ing, but the High Court exercising its judicial power cannot dispense with the requirement.
[p. 335 AB] 4.
Although the orders and directions made by the High Court were totally unsupportable in law, yet, in view of the subsequent developments, the Special Leave Petitions could not be allowed.
By the time the SLPs were taken up and stay granted, the respondents were already admitted in the Col lege and they gave up their seats which they had obtained in other colleges.
Depriving them of their admission in the College at such a late stage would result in grave and irreparable prejudice to them.
The Administration and the College authorities ought to have acted with more alacrity and approached this court earlier than they did.
[p. 336 B D] 5.
In matters where the High Court directs the students to be admitted in educational institutions it would be advisable if the High Court stays the operation of its order for a period of about 3 to 4 weeks if a request therefor is made by the educational institution or the State as the case may be.
[pp. 336 GH; 337 A]
