These Writ Petitions filed before this Court challenged the liberalisation for private sector operations in the Road Transport field, under the .
The petitioners were the existing operators on different routes.
On behalf of the petitioners, it was contended that the issue of more permits on the same route adversely affected their rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution of India.
It was further contended that though imposition of limit for grant of inter State permits was permissible under Section 88(5) of the Act, it was not so in respect of intra region permits and hence it is discrimina tory; that in public interest the grant of intra region permits should be limited.
Dismissing the Writ Petitions, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
Restricted licensing under the old Act led to the 429 concentration of business in the hands of few persons there by giving rise to a kind of monopoly, adversely affecting the public interest.
The apprehensions of the petitioners, that too many operators on a route are likely to affect adversely the interest of weaker section of the profession, is without any basis.
The transport business is bound to be ironed out ultimately by the rational of demand and supply.
Cost of a vehicle being as it is the business requires huge investment.
The intending operators are likely to be con scious of the economics underlying the profession.
Only such number of vehicles would finally remain in operation on a particular route as are economically viable.
In any case the transport system in a State is meant for the benefit and convenience of the public.
The policy to grant permits liberally under the new Act is directed towards the said goal.
[438 A C].
1.2 The petitioners are in the full enjoyment of their fundamental right guaranteed to them under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India.
There is no threat of any kind whatsoever from any authority to the enjoyment of their right to carry on the occupation of transport operators.
There is no complaint of infringement of any of their statu tory rights.
More operators mean healthy competition and efficient transport system.
Over crowded buses, passengers standing in the aisle, persons clinging to the bus doors and even sitting on the roof top are some of the common sights in this country.
More often one finds a bus which has noisy engine, old upholstery, uncomfortable seats and continuous emission of blacksmoke from the exhaust pipe.
It is, there fore, necessary that there should be plenty of operators on every route to provide ample choice to the commuter public to board the vehicle of their choice and patronise the operator who is providing the best service.
Even otherwise the liberal policy is likely to help in the elimination of corruption and favouritism in the process of granting per mits.
[437 EH; 438 A].
Hans Raj Kehar & Ors.
vs The State of U.P. and Ors., ; , followed.
Jasbhai Desai vs Roshan Kumar & Ors., ; ; ,Saghir Ahmad vs The State of U.P. and Ors., ; , relied on.
Rameshwar Prasad & Ors.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh & 0rs.[1983] 2 SCC 195, distinguished.
It is only the State which can impose reasonable res tric 430 tions within the ambit of Article 19(6) of the Constitution of India.
Section 47(3) and S7 of the old Act were some of the restrictions which were imposed by the State on the enjoyment of the right under Article (19)(1)(g) so far as the motor transport business was concerned.
The said re strictions have been taken away and the said provisions have been repealed from the Statute Book.
The new Act provides liberal policy for the grant of permits to those who intend to enter the motor transport business.
The provisions of the Act are in conformity with Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitu tion of India.
When the State has chosen not to impose any restriction under Article 19(6) of the Constitution of India in respect of motor transport business and has left the citizens to enjoy their right under Article 19(1)(g) there can be no cause for complaint.
[440 B D].
The three categories of permit seekers in respect of interegion, intra region and inter State permits cannot be considered to be belonging to the same class.
Different criteria have been provided under the Act for granting permits in respect of each of the categories.
It is not the case that Section 80 brings about discrimination in the matter of grant of permits between applicants belonging to the same class.
[442 B] Hans Raj Kehar & Ors.
vs The State of U.P. and Ors.
; , relied on.
Matters such as conditions of roads, social status of the applicants possibility of small operators being eliminated by big operators, conditions of hilly routes, fuel availability and pollution control are supposed to be within the comprehension of the transport authorities.
The legislative policy under the Act cannot be challenged on these grounds.
It is not disputed that the Regional Trans port Authority has the power under the Act to refuse an application for grant of permit by giving reasons.
It is for the authority to take into consideration all the relevant factors at the time of quasi judicial consideration of the applications for grant of permits.
The statutory authorities under the Act are bound to keep a watch on the erroneous and illegal exercise of.
power in granting permits under the liberalised policy.
[444 D F]
