The Bihar Non Government Primary School (Taking over of Control) Ordinance, 1976 provided by Para 1 and Para 2 that while appointing teachers, I.Sc. trained will be appointed on the basis of I. Sc trained and only Matric with Science trained will be appointed on the basis of Matric trained, and where such candidates were not available the candidates having qualifications more than these would also be appoint ed.
The petitioners were untrained primary school teachers in the State of Bihar.
Later on their services were termi nated.
They filed writ petitions before the High Court which held that their services had been terminated because of improper and illegal recruitment by the State for which they were not responsible, and that the termination orders were violative of principle of natural justice, but did not quash the orders of termination, and directed the State Government to recruit those dismissed teachers who satisfied the re quirements, and to relax the age limit in case of those who meanwhile became overage.
On the special leave petitions filed by the petitioners this Court by its order dated 7.2.1991, directed the State Government to carry out the selection process to take back in the employment the teachers who were found qualified under the Rules in force at the time of 416 their initial appointment, and to give them full benefit of continued service irrespective of any break in service on account of the termination.
In the special circumstances of the case arising out of closure of a number of schools for want of teachers, the Court held that in the event of non availability of trained candidates even untrained candidates could be appointed, and gave time till 30.6.1991 to complete the selection process in accordance with the directions of the High Court.
Consequent there to the Commissioner cum Secretary, Human Resources Department, Government of Bihar made an order determining eligible categories for reappointment out of the dismissed teachers and hold that under the executive directions/regulations only trained teachers were eligible for appointment while untrained teachers, in exceptional circumstance could be appointed against the reserved catego ries of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Urdu and San skrit only, and held that those untrained teachers who did not belong to any of these categories were not eligible for appointment.
The petitioners filed contempt petitions contending that the Commissioner gave a completely wrong interpretation to the relevant executive directions/regulations and had delib erately contravened this Court 's order dated 7.2.1991.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that the Commis sioner had correctly interpreted the executive orders/regu lations and did not contravenes this court 's order and, therefore, he committed no contempt.
Disposing of the contempt petitions, this Court, HELD: 1.
(1) The directions of the Court provided that even the untrained teachers were entitled to be selected and appointed not only in the reserved categories but also in the other categories, provided trained teachers were not available and the untrained teachers were otherwise quali fied without putting the bar of age against them.
[p.421D E] 1.2 The interpretation placed by the Commissioner, was not correct and if that interpretation be accepted, it would efface the very effect of the order of this Court dated 7.2.1991 and defeat the object of that order which was aimed at providing that all the schools must have teachers.
The Commissioner 's order was not in cOnformity with the direc tions given by this Court and the High Court.
[p. 421 B D] 417 2.
It appears to be a case of misinterpretation of the executive directions and order of this Court dated 7.2.1991 and was, therefore, not a fit case in which contempt pro ceedings need to proceed any further.
It could not conclu sively be said that the respondents wilfully or deliberate ly or contemptuously flouted or disobeyed the orders of this Court dated 7.2.1991.
[p 421 E F] 3.
The respondents should properly comply with the orders of this Court dated 7.2.1991 and select and appoint untrained teachers who are otherwise qualified for appoint ment in all categories without putting the condition of training or age bar against them where trained teachers are not available.
The process of fresh selection must be con cluded expeditiously and, in any case, not later than three months from the date of the order.
[pp 421 G H; 422 A]
