Following its earlier decision in 1991(1) P.L.R.I. the High Court held that the principal employer and the Contrac tor were liable for prosecution under the , if they made non compliance of section 7 and section 12 of the Act, respec tively.
Further, it was held that the employee employed through the contractor did not become the employees of the principal employer.
C.A.No. 2335 of 1991 arose by special leave from the decision of the High Court.
The point involved in other appeals is common.
This Court, on the question, if the principal employer did not get registration under section 7 of the Act and/or the contractor did not get a licence under Section 12 of the Act, whether the person so appointed by the principal employer through the contractor would be deemed to the direct employees of the principal employer or not, dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.
The long title and the preamble of the Con tract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 show that it is an Act to regulate the employment of contract labour in certain establish 402 ments and to provide for abolition in certain circumstances and for matters connected therewith.
The Statement of Ob jects and Reasons mentions that the system of employment of contract labour has tended itself to various abuses and the question of its abolition had been under consideration of the Government for a long time.
[405 E] 2.
The serves two fold purpose (1) regulations of the conditions of service of the workers employed by the contractor who is engaged by a principal employer; and (2) also provides for the appropriate Government abolishing contract labour alto gether, in certain notified processes operation or other works in any establishment.
Neither the Act nor the Rules framed by the Central Government or by any appropriate Government provide that upon abolition of contract labour, the said labour would be directly absorbed by the principal employer.
[407 H 408 A] 3.
The Act as can be seen from the Scheme of the Act merely regulates the employment of contract labour in cer tain establishment and provides for its abolition in certain circumstances.
The Act does not provide for total abolition of contract labour but it provides for abolition by the appropriate Government in appropriate cases under Section 10 of the Act.
[413 H 414 A] 4.
In the present case and the other connected Special Leave Petitions no notification has been issued by the appropriate Government under Section 10 of the Act.
[414 B] 5.
It is not for the High Court to inquire into the question and decide whether the employment of contract labour in any process, operation or in any other work in any establishment should be abolished or not.
It is a matter for the decision of the Government after considering the matter, as required to be considered under Section 10 of the Act.
[414 C D] 6.
In proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution merely because contractor or the employer had violated any provision of the Act or the Rules, the court could not issue any mandamus for deeming the contract labour as having become the employees of the principal employer.
[414 E] M/s Gammon India Ltd. and Others vs Union of India, [1974] 1 SCC 596; Standard Vacuum Refining Co vs Their work men, ; F.C.I. Loading and Unloading Workers Union vs Food Corpora 403 tion of India ; Food Corporation of India Workers Union vs
Food Corporation of India and others. , referred to.
Gian Singh & Others vs F.C.I., 1991(1) PLR 1 (Punjab and Haryana); The Workmen of Best & Crompton Industries Ltd. vs The Management of Best & Crompton Engineering Ltd. Madras and Ors, 1985(1) LLJ 492 (Madras); and United Labour Union and Others vs Union of india and Others, 1990(60) FLR 686 (Bombay), over ruled.
P. Karunakaran vs The Chief Commercial Superintendent and Others, 1988(2) LIC 1346 (Kerala) and New Delhi General Mazdoor Union vs Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (Scope) & Another, 1991(2) Delhi Lawyer 189, approved.
