The appellant i.e. the Central Government sanctioned primary school from classes I V to cater to the educational needs of children of persons employed in the ordance factory at Ambazari.
The employees on their own in the same premises opened a secondary school with classes VI to X.
The respondents are teachers in the Secondary School and are being paid out of fees and other donations received by the school, They approached the Central Administrative Tribunal seeking regularisation of their service and demanded equal pay for equal work.
The Tribunal allowed their claim with certain directions to the appellants including the Union of India i.e. directing the Central Government immediately to take up an assessment of the needs of the School to carry on its activities at the present level and to create a sufficient number of posts to be filled up on a regular basis.
The Tribunal further directed the Central Government to take steps to fill up the newly created posts in accordance with recruitment rules to be framed for the purpose.
Allowing Civil appeal No. 233 of 1991 of the Union of India, and setting aside the order of the Tribunal dismissing Civil Appeal No. 480 of 1989 of the respondents who have not been recruited as per direction of the Tribunal, the Court.
HELD: 1.
There is no evidence in record that respondents were appointed as teachers on honorarium by or on behalf of the Central Government.
There is no evidence that they were initially appointed in primary School and later shifted to the Secondary School.
It is undisputed 686 that the Central Government has not sanctioned the Secondary School nor created any posts thereto.
It had only sanctioned the Primary School and the posts connected therewith which are being occupied by regularly recruited teachers.
[688A B] 2.
The directions of the Tribunal are indeed amazing compelling the Central Government to sanction the Secondary School.
The Central Government has taken a decision that it will not involve itself in sanctioning or running classes beyond the Primary School level.
It is a policy matter involving financial burden.
No court or the Tribunal could compel the Government to change its policy involving expenditure.
[688D E] 3.
The respondents are not paid by the Central Government.
There is no relationship of master and servant between the Central Government and the respondents.
The respondents are employed by the local officers so how the Central Government is accountable.
[688G] 4.
Even section 14 of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985 confers no jurisdiction, power or authority on the Tribunal to deal with the service matters of the employees like the respondents.
the respondents cannot claim the pay scale admissible to the Government school teachers and much less regularisation of their services by the Central Government.
[688H 689A] 5.
The directions of the Tribunal are apparently unjustified and without authority of law so cannot be sustained.
[688F]
