The Union government sent a requisition to the Union Public Service Commission for selection of a candidate to post of Assistant Director General (Prevention of Food Adulteration)in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which, under the extant rules, was to be filled in only by direct recruitment.
However, before the Commission could advertise the post,the Government informed it not to proceed with the process of selection as it was examining to fill up the post by promotion of Assistant Secretary.
But inspite of this,the commission Advertised the post and the appellant was called for an interview where upon Respondent No.1, an Assistant Secretary who was expecting her promotion to the post on amendment of the rules,obtained an interim order from Central Administrative Tribunal, staying the process of selection initiated by the Commission.
The appellant, feeling affected by the said order, unsuccessfully moved the Tribunal for impleadment.
Meanwhile two further layers above that of Assistant Secretary, though in higher pay scales but with no separate designations, were created by an amendment of rules in pursuance of this Court 's direction, The Tribunal disposed of the application directing to provide promotional avenues to Respondent No.1 who, while functioning as Assistant Secretary, had also occasionally held the charge of Assistant Director General.
Aggrieved, the appellant preferred the appeal by special leave to this Court.
It was contended by the appellant that once the process for selection had started, it was not open to the Government as well as to the Tribunal to freeze the process and the Commission was entitled to complete the selection; and that the fact of creation of two layers by the amendment of the rules was wrongly overlooked by the Tribunal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 2 HELD : 1.1 If the Government is at a given point of time considering the question of amending the recruitment rules with a view to providing for promotion to a particular post, it can, before an advertisement is issued by the Commission and the process of the selection is under way, request the Commission to withhold the same till it decides on the question of amending the the rules.
(p.5E F) 1.2 Whether to provide for promotion as a mode of appointment to the post in question is a matter of policy left to the government to decide.(p.6AB) 1.3 Once the decision of the Government to withdraw the repuisition was communicated to the Commission before it had set the process of selection in motion by issuing an advertisement, it was not open to the Commission to go ahead with the selection process as the Government could amend the recruitment rules retrospectively, if it so desired, with a view to providing for appointment by promotion .Such an exercise by the Commission would be one in futility, waste of public time and money and hardship to candidates who seek appointment.(pp.5GH;6A) The action of the Commission was somewhat hasty and unjustified.(p.6B) 2.1 If the Commission issues an advertisement at the behest of the Government and pursuant thereto calls a candidate for interview, the candidate has a right to be considered for selection but not a right to be selected or to appointment to the post in question.
The right to selection crystalises only after the candidate is called for interview pursuant to the advertisement.(p.5 C D) N.T. Devin Katti & Ors.
vs Karnataka Public Service Commission & Ors.(1990) 3 SCC 157 and Jatinder Kumar & Ors.v.
State of Punjab & Ors.
(1985)1 SCR 899, referred to.
2.2 In the instant case, the decision of the Government to withdraw the requisition sent to the Commission before the issuance of the advertisement dose not interfere with any vested right of selection because that stage had yet not reached.(p.5F) 2.3 Before the appellant acquired a right to be considered for selection the Government had already intimated that it was examining the question of amending the recruitment rules with a view to providing for appointment by promotion to the post in question.
(p.5G) 3 2.4 The appellant, therefore, cannot claim any vested right.
Nor can the tribunal 's omission to notice that two new layers were created have a bearing on the Government 's decision to place the process of selection in hibernation till a final decision is taken on the proposal to provide for promotion to the post.
(p.6BC)
