The defendant appellant No. 1 and plaintiff respondent were brothers and defendant appellant No. 2 was the wife of appellant No. 1.
The appellant No. 1 was in Government service ever since 1953.
The plaintiff respondent was looking after the entire agricultural property in the village.
Partition was effected during consolidation proceedings and entered in the revenue records and chaks were carved out in accordance with the share of the parties in the consolidation proceedings.
During the consolidation operation, the plaintiff respondent did not raise any dispute that he was owner of the entire property and the names of defendants appellants were wrongly mentioned as benami.
Later, the plaintiff respondent filed a suit on the ground that the suit land was purchased by him alone through 4 sale deeds dated 10.6.1968, 21.6.1968,17.1.1976, and 23.6.1977 wherein the names of the defendants appellants were included only as benamidar and he was the real owner of the land.
The defendants appellants contended that they had paid their part 16 of the sale consideration and the land was jointly purchased in the name of both the parties.
The trial court dismissed the suit holding that the names of the defendants appellants in the sale deeds were not mentioned as benamidars and that the plaintiff respondent did not take any objection in the consolidation proceedings.
When the plaintiff respondent filed an appeal before the first appellate court, it reversed the judgment and decree of the trial court and decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiff respondent.
The second appeal filed by the defendants appellants was dismissed by the High Court.
The defendants filed a special leave petition before this Court on 15th March 1988.
During the pendency of the special leave petition the Benami Transactions (Prohibition of the Right to Recover Property) Ordinance,1988 was promulgated on 19.5.1988.
The ordinance was replaced by the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, which received the President 's assent on 5.9.1988.
The defendants filed an application on 1.5.1989 for allowing them to take additional grounds made available on the basis of the aforesaid `Benami Act '.
Thereafter special leave was granted by order dated 21.8.1989 and the parties were given liberty to file additional documents, if any, within four weeks.
The defendants appellants contended that the suit filed by the plaintiff respondent was not maintainable and barred under Section 49 of the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1954 as the point regarding the land in question being benami was never raised by the plaintiff respondent during consolidation proceedings and the chaks were allowed to be recorded in the name of the defendant appellants.
The plaintiff respondent contended that if the ratio of Mithilesh Kumari 's case, JT.
1989(1) SC 275, was applied, it could be made available only in a case where appeal was pending before the higher Court and that no advantage could be taken by the defendants appellants, of Section 4 of the Benami Act, as no appeal was pending on the date when the Benami Act came into force.
17 On the question, whether any suit relating to benami transactions can be decreed after the coming into force of the Benami Act, this Court, allowing the appeal of the defendants, HELD : 1.01.
In a suit for recovery of benami property if any appeal is pending on the date of coming into force of Section 4, the appellate court can take into account the subsequent legislative changes.
[20C] 1.02.
The Law Commission 's view was that the legislation replacing the ordinance should be retrospective in operation and that no locus penitentia need be given to the persons who had entered in the benami transaction in the past.
[20G] 1.03.
In the present case the defendants, having lost in High Court, could have approached this Court only through a special leave petition under article 136 of the Constitution and it is only after the grant of such special leave that the appeal could be heard.
Though the special leave might have been granted subsequently on 21.8.89 but it is a fact that the Judgment and decree of the High Court had already been challenged by the defendant appellants, and it cannot be said that no appeal was pending before this Court simply on the ground that only special leave petition was pending when the Benami Act came into force.
[21C E] 1.04.
An appeal is a continuation of suit and in the present case, the appeal was pending before this Court.
The suit had been filed by the plaintiff respondent claiming that he was the real owner of the property and the names of the defendants appellants were mentioned in the saledeeds as benami.
[21E F] 1.05.
Section 4 of the Benami Act is a total prohibition against any suit based on benami transaction and the plaintiff respondent is not entitled to get any decree in such suit or in appeal.
[21F] Mithilesh Kumari and Anr.
v Prem behari Khare, J.T. , referred to . 2.01.
The expression "shall lie" in Section 4(1) and "shall allow" in Section 4(2) of the Benami Act are prospective and shall apply to present (future stages) and future suits, claims or actions only.
[20B] 2.02.
The expression "any property held benami" is not limited to any particular time, date or duration.
[20C] 18 3.
No foundations were laid in the written statement nor any issue was raised by the defendants appellants, on the question of applicability of Section 49 or th U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act.
The defendants appellants cannot be allowed to take such plea.
[19H 20A]
