The appellant (in Criminal Appeal No. 553/89) was prose cuted for selling adulterated supari with admixture of saccharin.
He filed a petition in the Kerala High Court under section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code for quash ing the criminal proceedings which was dismissed by a single judge.
Against the decision of the single judge an appeal was filed in this Court.
The appellant (In Criminal Appeal No. 283/91) was also prosecuted for selling adulterated Supari but was acquitted by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Palakkad.
On appeal the Kerala High Court set aside his acquittal and convicted him under section 16(1) (a) (i) of the Prevention of Food Adul teration Act and sentenced him to imprisonment for 6 months and a fine of Rs.1000.
Against the order the Kerala High Court an appeal was filed in this Court.
The appellant (In Criminal Appeal No. 284/91) was con victed ruder section 7(i) and (v) read with sections 16(i) (a) (ii) of the prevention of Food Adulteration Act for sale of adulterated supari with admixture of saccharin.
He filed a Revision Petition in the Kerala High Court and a Single Judge dismissed the same.
Against the order of the Single Judge an appeal was filed in this Court.
The facts in the connected civil appeal (Nos. 3708 13/89) are that a batch of writ petitions was filed in the Andhra Pradesh High 391 Court for a declaration that the admixture of saccharin in supari was in accordance with Rule 44 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 and for restraining the re spondents from interfering with the business of sale of supari.
A Division Bench of the High Court allowed the writ petitions.
Against the decision of the Division Bench Union of India has filed appeals in this Court.
Civil Appeal No. 1897/91 is directed against the order of the Division Bench of the Kerala High Court which held that the learned Single Judge should have declined jurisdic tion for the reason that the relief claimed was of a general character for a declaration that the admixture of saccharin in Roja Scented betelnut is not a blanket ban under Rule 47 read with Appendix 'B ' of the Prevention of Food Adultera tion Rules, 1955.
Criminal Appeal No. 722/91 is directed against the order of the High Court of Kerala setting aside the order of acquittal passed by the trial court and remanding the matter to the trial court for fresh disposal according to law.
The High Court did not agree with the submission that the arti cle of Supari was not adulterated as saccharin could be added to Supari.
Accordingly it held that saccharin could not be added to supari and consequently remanded the matter to the trial court for fresh disposal according to law.
In appeals to this court it was contended on behalf of the accused that on the construction of Rule 44(c) it per mits sale of Article of food which contains artificial sweetener with the standard as laid down in Appendix 'B ' to Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955.
Disposing the appeals, this Court, FIELD: 1.
Rule 44(g) of the Prevention of Food Adultera tion Rules, 1955 indicates that sale of any article of food which contains artificial sweetener is banned.
The ban is lifted only if such artificial sweetener is permitted to be added to the article of food for which standards have been laid down in Appendix 'B ' to the Rules.
Rule 47 in other form specifically bars saccharin or any other article of artificial sweetener to be added in any article of food, except where the addition of such artificial sweetener is permitted in accordance with the standards laid down in Appendix ' 'B '.
Thus both Rules 44(g) and 47 constitute a total blanket ban on the addition of any artificial sweeten er including saccharin to any article of food 392 unless standards for that article of food is prescribed which authorises the use of such an artificial sweetener.
[398 G, 399 A B] 2.
The prescription of standard of saccharin or any artificial sweetener in Appendix 'B ' is really irrelevant.
It is not the question of standard being prescribed for saccharin which is irrelevant what is relevant is the stand ard being prescribed in Appendix 'B ' of the article of food which is being sold and which standard permits user of saccharin.
This is the real intention of the legislature while enacting Rule 44(g) of the Rules.
[399 E F] 3.
What one has to see is the article of food in which the artificial sweetener is sought to be added.
The article which was being sold should contain a standard and the standard should permit artificial sweetener to be added.
If the standards for that article of food is provided in Appen dix 'B ' to the Rules and such standards permit the addition of saccharin or any other artificial sweetener, then and then only saccharin or any other artificial sweetener could be added and not otherwise.
[399 A C] 4.
Admittedly no standard has been laid down for Pan Masala or Supari i.e. the article of food which was being sold.
Therefore, the exception permitted by clause (g) of Rule 44 has no application and no relevance.
[398 H, 399 A] Pyarali K. Tejani vs Mahadeo Ramchandra Dange and Ors., ; , explained and applied.
State of Maharashtra vs Ranjitbhai Babubhai Suratwalla, ; Thummalapudi Venkata Gopala Rao vs The State.
, M/s Wahab and Co. a proprie tary concern represented by its ' proprietor N.A. Wahab son of N. Mohammad Sheriff vs Food lnspector.
Tiruchirappalli Municipal Corpn., Trichy.
[1990] L.W. (Crl.) 437; Kailash vs The ,State of Rajasthan, ; State of Assam vs Ram Karani anti Ors., (1987) 3 All India Prevention of Food Adulleration Journal 153; Ujjain Municipal Corpn.
, Ujjain vs Chetan Das, (1985) I F.A.C. 46, overruled.
State by public prosecutor vs
K.R. Balakrishnan, ; Food Inspector vs Usman. ; Krishna Chandra (In jail) vs State of Uttar pradesh, , approved.
