The appellant was carrying on the business of a railway contractor in a place in the district of R.
In April 1943, the Income tax Officer of R which was under the charge of the Commissioner of Income tax, Bengal (Mufassil), served a notice under section 22(2) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, on the appellant who in pursuance of the notice filed the return on February 28, 1944.
The Income tax Officer then served notices on him under SS.
22(4) and 23(2) Of the Act for the production of books, etc., but before the final assessment was made, the Central Board of Revenue by an order passed under section 5(2) of the Act, transferred the appellant 's case along with some other assessment cases, to the Commissioner of Income tax (Central), Calcutta.
On February 11, 1948, the Income tax Officer, Calcutta, to whom the appellant 's case was assigned, issued notices again under SS.
22(4) and 23(2) of the Act and after making the usual enquiries made the assessment order on March 15, 1948.
The appellant 's appeals to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and then to the Appellate Tribunal raising objections to the legality of the transfer of his case to Calcutta and to the jurisdiction of the Income tax Officer, Calcutta, were dismissed.
The Appellate Tribunal held that as the objection related to the place of assessment it was not competent for the Tribunal to go into that question.
The appellant then made an application to the Commissioner of Income tax for reference under section 66(1) of the Act, but this was dismissed on the ground that the assessee never raised any objection before the Income tax Officer to his jurisdiction and that, in any case, the question of jurisdiction could not arise out of the order of the Tribunal.
An application filed by the appellant to the High Court under section 66(2) of the Act was dismissed and though the order of dismissal was not taken up on appeal, the appellant filed an appeal to the Supreme Court against the order of the Appellate Tribunal.
It was contended for the appellant that under section 64(1) and (2) of the Act he was entitled to be assessed by the Income tax Officer of the area within which the place of his business was situate, that the 302 assessment by the Income tax Officer of Calcutta was illegal assumption of jurisdiction and that, in any case, the order of transfer by the Central Board of Revenue under section 5(2) of the Act was not valid because, if it wanted to transfer the assessment proceedings from the file of one Income tax Officer to another it could be done only under section 5(7A) and not under section 5(2).
Held : (1) Sub section (7A) of section 5 which confers on the Central Board of Revenue the power to transfer any case from one Income tax Officer to another is not a provision which in any way modifies or cuts down the power given to the Central Board of Revenue under sub section 2 of section 5 which enables it to specify as to which of the Commissioners would perform functions in respect of different areas, persons, incomes or cases or classes thereof.
The two sub sections are complementary and operate in two separate spheres.
Pannalal Binjraj vs Union of India, ; and Bidi Supply Co. vs Union of India, ; , distinguished.
In the present case, the Central Board of Revenue directed the Commissioner of Income tax (Central), Calcutta, to exercise his functions in respect of certain cases including the case of the appellant and that fell under section 5(2) and not under section 5(7A).
The order of transfer was, therefore, valid.
(2)The jurisdiction of the Income tax Officer, Calcutta, to make the assessment on the appellant cannot be challenged, in view of sub section 5(a) of section 64 of the Act, under which sub sections
(1) and (2) of section 64 have no application to an assessee in respect of whom anorder has been made by the Central Board of Revenue under S.5(2) of the Act.
(3) Objections as to the place of assessment cannot be raised in appeal either before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or before the Appellate Tribunal.
Wallace Brothers & Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, Sind and Baluchistan, and Seth Kanhaiyalal vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1936] 5 I.T.R. 739, relied on.
Dayaldas Kushiram vs Commissioner of Income tax (Central), and Dina Nath Hem Raj vs Commissioner of Income tax, All. 616, distinguished.
Consequently, as the question as to the place of assessment could not arise out of the order of the Appellate Tribunal no such question of law could be referred to the High Court.
