While the appellant was working as Divisional Manager at Delhi, the general insurance business was nationalised and its management was taken over by the Central Government under General Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance, 1971 which was replaced by Act 57 of 1972 and vested in the Custodian of the New India Assurance Co. Ltd. the management of Orissa Insurance Co operative Society Ltd. By operation of Section 7 of the Act the services of the appellant and others stood transferred and vested with the custodian.
The appellant was kept under suspension from August 9,1973 pending investigation into charges of embezzlement.
Explanation was called for on October 16,1973 and the appellant submitted his reply on December 7, 1974, While dropping the proceeding, the appellant was served with a termination order dated april 17, 1975 issued by the respondent.
The appellant challenged the aforesaid termination order in a writ petition in Delhi High Court which was dismissed by a Single Judge on November 11,1983 and this judgment was confirmed by the division Bench in a Letter Patent Appeal.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the 221 appellant placing reliance on the majority view in D.T.C vs D.T.C Mazdoor Congress & Ors.
judgment Today 1990(3) SC 725 that Rule 5 of the Orissa Insurance Co operative Ltd. services Rules is ultra vires of Article 14 of the Constitution.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that unlike Rule 9 involved in D.T.C 's case, Rule 5 in the instant case provided guidelines, and that the Board of Directors had to take a decision, whether the need to continue the employee 's service subsists which would be based on relevant material and thus there would be objective consideration before taking a decision, not only regarding the need to continue the post but also the services of the Officer or the employee, and if so construed the rule is not ultra vires of article 14.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Rule 5 of the Orissa Insurance Co operative Society Ltd. is capable of the interpretation that the Board of management may form an objective opinion, on the basis of material, that the post which the officer or the employee is occupying is no longer in need and that the post would be abolished.
This would be a policy decision depending on the exigencies.
Once the Board reaches such a decision to abolish the post, in consequence the service of the officer/employee occupying the post could be terminated.
Viewed in that light the said rule does not become arbitrary, unreasonable or void offending Article 14 and therefore the rule is valid.
[225G 226 B] There is a presumption in favour of constitutionality of a legislation or statutory rule unless ex facie it violates the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of the constitution.
If the provisions of a law or the rule is construed in such a way as would make it consistent with the Constitution and another interpretation would render the provision or the rule unconstitutional, the Court would lean in favour of the former construction.
[225 E] It is clear in the instant case, that the Board of Management did not abolish the post but put an end to the service of the appellant, obviously due to loss of confidence as his honesty and integrity became suspicious and his continuance in service was felt inexpedient and not in the interest of the business of the respondents.
But rule 8 was available for taking action for misconduct but was not availed.
Therefore, the order terminating the services of the appellant is illegal.
[226 C] 222 Normally the appellant is entitled to reinstatement but the ends of justice would be met by directing the respondents to pay him Rs. 1,00,000 as compensation, instead of reinstatement and further continuance in service.
The compensation awarded would be staggered between the year 1973 till date for the purpose of income tax and given the appropriate relief.
[226D E] March of service jurisprudence necessitates that the respondent recast Rule 5 in tune with the Constitution and the law.
[226 E]
