On 16.1.1986, the Deputy Commissioner issued a notification constituting a Mandal under section 4 (1) of the Karnataka Zila Parishads, Taluk Panchayat Samithis, Mandal Panchayats and Nyaya Panchayats Act, 1983 and located the headquarter of the Mandal at Mudiyannur.
Later on exercising powers under section 4 (3) of the Act he changed the headquarter to Uthanpur.
On 14.12.1987 a writ petition (W.P.No. 7685/86) was filed challenging the decision of the Deputy Commissioner.
The High Court dismissed the petition holding that on passing a resolution my Mandal to change the headquarter from the existing place to another place, the Deputy Commissioner was to consider if he would like to exercise power under section 4(2) of the Act.
The Mandal passed a fresh resolution and thereupon the Deputy Commissioner issued a notification under section 4 (2) of the Act for change of headquarter and on 20.1.1988 the draft notification was published in the Gazette.
The respondents 1 to 10 filed a writ petition (W.P. No 1888/88) 287 before the High Court challenging the draft notification.
The writ petition was dismissed.
Considering the resolution and the objections to the notification, the Deputy Commissioner issued another notification under section 4 (2) of the Act and the headquarter of the Mandal was changed from Uthanpur to Mudiyannur.
The respondents challenged the notification by filing a revision application under section 4 (3) of the Act which was dismissed by the Divisional Commissioner.
The respondents moved the High Court in W.P. No. 77 of 1989 challenging the order of the Deputy Commissioner.
The Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the petition, against which an appeal was filed before the Division Bench of the High Court.
The Division Bench allowed the appeal following an earlier decision of the High Court in Writ Application No. 2564 of 1987 dated 28.5.1991.
The correctness of the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court was challenged in this appeal by special leave.
The appellant contended that once the power to specify the headquarter was conferred on the Deputy Commissioner by Section 4 (1) of the Act, it could be exercised from time to time by virtue of section 14 of the Karnataka General Clauses Act,1897; that the scheme of section 4 of the Act should be construed with the aid of section 14 of the General Clauses Act in such a manner as not to leave a vacuum for the exercise of power for a change of headquarter; that if the High Court 's view was approved, there could be no power vested in any authority whatsoever for changing or specifying the headquarter of the reconstituted Mandal which vacuum might lead to avoidable complications; and that once the legislature invested the Deputy Commissioner with the power to specify the headquarter under section 4 (1), subject to the modification by the Commissioner under section 4 (3), the power to alter the headquarter of the Mandal from time to time, if the occasion so required, must be read into it.
288 The respondents submitted that while sub section (2) of Section 4 of the Act in terms empowered the Deputy Commissioner to alter the headquarter of the Mandal because the headquarter once specified under section 4(1) should remain unaltered; that the act designedly did not confer any power on any authority whatsoever to change the headquarter once specified under section 4 (1).
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.01 Section 4 (1) empowers the Deputy Commissioner to do two things, namely (i) to declare an area as a Mandal, and (ii) to specify its headquarter.
[293 B] 1.02 The power conferred by sub section (2) of Section 4 of the Karnataka Zila Parishads, Taluk Panchayat Samithis, Mandal Panchayats and Nyaya Panchayats Act, 1983 can be exercised where there is a change in the areas of the Mandal either by addition or reduction in the area.
Under clause (c) of sub section (2) of Section 4, the Deputy Commissioner is also invested with the power to alter the name of any Mandal.
[293 D E] 1.0 The scheme of sub section (2) of Section 4 would show that when there is any increase or decrease in the area of any Mandal, the Deputy Commissioner may, after the previous publication of the proposal by notification, exercise that power and rename the Mandal, if so required.
[293 E] 1.04 If the situation so demands and there is justification for altering the place of headquarter, it would be open to the Deputy Commissioner to exercise power under section 4 (1) of the Act read with Section 14 of the General Clauses Act to meet the situation.
[294 C] 1.05 The word `also ' preceding the words `specify its headquarter ' cannot be understood to convey that the power once exercised would stand exhausted.
Such a construction sought to be placed by counsel for the respondent does not accord with the language of the provision.
It merely conveys that when the Deputy Commissioner constitutes a Mandal for the first time it will be necessary for him to specify its headquarter also.
[293 B C] 1.06 The power to specify the headquarter conferred on the Deputy Commissioner can be exercised from time to time as occasion 289 requires by virtue of section 14 of the General Clauses Act.
[293 C D] 1.07 The ultimate decision as to the place or location of Mandal headquarter is left to the Government to decide and conferment of discretion upon the concerned authority in that behalf must necessarily leave the choice to the discretion of the authority and it would not be proper for the courts to interfere with the discretion so exercised.
This is not to say that the discretion can be exercised in an arbitrary or whimsical manner without proper application of mind or for ulterior or malafide purpose.
If it is shown that the discretion was so exercised it would certainly be open to the courts to interfere with the discretion but not otherwise.
[293 H; 294 A B] 2.
The absence of the power in sub section (2) of Section 4 to specify the headquarter afresh does not necessarily mean that once the initial constitution of the Mandal takes place and the headquarter is specified, the power is exhausted, notwithstanding section 14 of the General Clauses Act.
If such an interpretation is placed on the scheme of section 4 of the Act neither the Deputy Commissioner nor any other authority will thereafter be able to alter and specify any other place as the Mandal 's headquarter.
Such a view would create a vacuum and even when a genuine need for specifying any other headquarter arises, the authorities will not be able to exercise power for want of a specific provision in the Act and that may lead to avoidable hardship and complications.
It is, therefore, essential that the provision of the Act be read in a manner so as to ensure that such a vacuum does not arise and the power is retained in the concerned authority which can be exercised should a genuine need arise.
[293 F H] J.R. Raghupaty & Ors.
vs State of A.P. & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
