The Respondents landlords filed a suit for possession of the suit premises against the appellants on the ground of default in payment of rent, amongst other, The 7th Additional Small Causes Judge, dismissed the suit holding that the service of notice dated 7 8 1980 on the defendants terminating the tenancy was not proved, even though one out of the three acknowledgments due, had been received duly signed.
As regards the question of default in payment of rent, the learned Judge took the view that the case did not fall under Section 12(3)(b) of the Act, as the defendants had paid Rs. 55,800 on 16.1.1984 and thereafter made regular payment of Rs. 600 every month.
On appeal by the respondent landlords, the learned additional District Judge reversed the findings of the trial Court and decreed the suit.
The learned Additional District Judge held that when the notices are sent by registered post, it is presumed to have been served and mere denial by the tenants had no value, unless they proved some extraordinary happenings or events which prevented following of usual course of business.
On the question of default in payment of rent the learned Judge held that as the defendants did not deposit the entire arrears on the first date of hearing and did not deposit the further rent during the pendency of the appeal, they persistently committed defaults during the pendency of the suit and also the appeal.
The appellants thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the aforesaid order of the learned Additional District Judge.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition and affirmed the order passed by the learned Additional District Judge.
Hence this appeal by the appellants, after obtaining special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 228 HELD: The notice under Section 106 T.P. Act can be sent by post to the party who is intended to be bound by it.
Thus the notice sent by registered post in the name of the defendant company who is the tenant is fully in accordance with the requirement of section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act.[232H 233A] The plaintiffs had sent a copy of the notice to all the three defendants by registered post.
Three postal receipts Exhs.
52,53 and 54 have been filed in the present case Exh. 51, one acknowledgment receipt.
As regards Exh. 51, the defendants No.2 has appeared in the witness box and has denied his signatures.
However, it has not been shown that this acknowledgment receipt was related to which of the three notices sent vide postal receipts Exhs. 52,53 and 54.
[231E F] The rebuttal, if any, made by defendant No.2 can be related only with regard to Exh.
51 for one notice but not with regard to all the three notices sent by registered post vide Exhs.
52 to 54.[232D] The service of notice shall have to be presumed so far as defendant company is concerned and there is no rebuttal to presumption by the defendant appellants.
[232E] The finding recorded by the learned Additional District Judge that the defendants were defaulter in the payment of rent as full amount of rent was not paid or deposited on the first date of hearing and no rent was paid month by month during the pendency of the appeal could not be assailed.
[233B] Green View Radio Service vs Laxmibai Ramji and Anr., , referred to.
