The appellant, (first accused), a former Inspector of Industries, alongwith an Inspector of Industries, (second accused), was prosecuted under section 120 B read with section 420 IPC, sections 5(1) (b) and 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 on the ground that both the accused entered into a criminal conspiracy and acting in concert, the first accused obtained the Small Scale Industries Registration Certificate for additional lines of manufacture, Essentiality Certificate and Import Licences on false representations while the second accused enabled him to obtain the same by his false recommendations.
The Trial Court acquitted both of them on all the charges.
The State filed an appeal before the High Court which on re appreciation of evidence held that the prosecution has established conspiracy beyond doubt and that only one conclusion was possible on the evidence that the accused are guilty of all the charges.
Accordingly it set aside the acquittal and convicted both the accused on all the counts and sentenced the appellant to imprisonment for two years under section 120 B, and for two years under section 420 IPC.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the 250 appellant accused that: (i) the High Court erred in reversing the judgment of acquittal passed by the High Court; and (ii) the benefit of probation under section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure should be extended to the appellant.
Disposing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The High Court was right in coming to the conclusion that the guilt against the appellant was established beyond doubt.
Accordingly, the conviction and the sentence awarded by the High Court is upheld.
[251 G 253 B] The occurrence relates to the period between February, 1967 and February, 1969.
The Trial Court acquitted the appellant while High Court reversed the acquittal and convicted them.
This Court granted bail to the appellant in 1980.
Since then the appellant has several achievements to his credit in the industrial field.
Therefore, this is a fit case where benefit of probation under section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 should be extended to the appellant.
[253 C E]
