With a view to check transportation of illicit liquor, the Police were maintaining a watch and the speeding car driven by the detenu, husband of the appellant/petitioner was signalled to stop.
Instead,the detenu accelerated the car and drove straight towards the Police party.
They had to jump on to the foot path to save themselves.
The detenu hurled abuses and threatened to kill the Police officers.
He kept on driving the car recklessly, dashed against a pedestrian thereby injuring him.
Ultimately the car collided with a stationary taxi and stopped.
The Police rushed to apprehend the detenu and two others in the car, but they jumped out of the car and escaped.
Police seized the motor car and recovered illicit liquor therefrom.
A police case was registered against the detenu and two other unknown persons for offences under Sections 307,324 read with Section 34 IPC.
The detenu made himself scarce and could not be arrested immediately.
However, after a few days he was arrested and he admitted the incident including his escape.
He was produced before the Magistrate and was released on bail on the condition that he should report to the police daily.
Since the detenu failed to carry out the condition, bail was cancelled and he was taken into custody.
The detenu then moved the Sessions Court against the cancellation of his bail, which was admitted and he was granted bail.
During the investigation of the case, Police could record statements 235 from four witnesses, who deposed only on condition of anonymity as they feared retaliation from the detenu.
The detaining authority on being satisfied that the detenu was likely to indulge in activities prejudicial to the maintenance of "public order" passed an order of detention and the grounds of detention were served on the detenu.
The said order was confirmed by the State Government on the report of the Advisory Board.
The wife of the detenu challenged the detention order before the High Court.
The High Court having dismissed the Writ Petition she has filed the present appeal by special leave, as also a Writ Petition before this Court, challenging the detention order passed against her husband.
On behalf of the appellant/petitioner, it was argued that the activities of the detenu had no impact on the public and therefore could not be said to have disturbed the even tempo of the society and as such his detention for acting in a manner prejudicial to the "public order" was unjustified.
It was further contended that Section 3(2) of the Maharashtra Prevention of Dangerous Activities of Slumlords, Bootleggers and Drug Offenders Act, 1981 prohibited the State Government to make an order of detention in the first instance, exceeding three months, and since in the present case the detention order was for more than three months, it was invalid.
Dismissing the matters, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
Crime is a revolt against the whole society and an attack on the civilization of the day.
Order is the basic need of any organised civilized society and any attempt to disturb that order affects the society and the community.
The distinction between breach of `law and order ' and disturbance of 'public order ' is one of degree and the extent of reach of the activity in question upon the society.
In their essential quality, the activities which affect "law and order" and those which disturb "public order" may not be different but in their potentiality and effect upon even tempo of the society and public tranquility there is a vast difference.
In each case, therefore, the courts have to see the length, magnitude and intensity of the questionable activities of a person to find out whether his activities are prejudicial to maintenance of "public order" or only "law and order".
[244E G] 1.2 Respect for law has to be maintained in the interest of the society and discouragement of a criminal is one of the ways to maintain it.
The 236 objectionable activities of a detenu have, therefore, to be judged in the totality of the circumstance to find out whether those activities have any prejudicial affect on the society as a whole or not.
If the society.
and not only and individual, suffers on account of the questionable activities of a person, then those activities are prejudicial to the maintenance of "public order" and are not merely prejudicial to the maintenance of "law and order".
An order of detention would be valid if the activities of a detenu affect "public order" but would not be so where the same affect only the maintenance of "law and order".[245B C] Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar.
; ; Arun Ghosh vs
State of West Bengal, ; Madhu Limaye vs Ved Murti, [1970]3 SCC 738; Kanu Biswas v State of West Bengal, ; ; Ashok Kumar vs Delhi Administration, ; Subhash Bhandari vs District Magistrate, Lucknow; , , relied on.
State of U.P vs Hari Shankar Tewari, [1987] 2SCC 490; Ahmedhussain Shaikhhussain vs Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad & Anr, [1989]4 SCC 751; T.Devaki vs Government of Tamil Nadu & Ors.
[1990] 2SCC 456; Referred to 2.1 The explanation to Section 2(a) of the Maharashtra Prevention of Dangerous Activities of Slumords, Bootleggers and Drug offenders Act, 1981 brings into effect a legal fiction as to the adverse affect on `public order '.
It provides that if any of the activities of a person referred to in clauses ( (i) (iii) of Section 2(a) directly or indirectly causes or is calculated to cause any harm, danger or alarm or a feeling of insecurity among the general public or any section thereof or a grave or a wide spread danger to life or public health, then public order shall be deemed to have been adversely affected.
Thus, it is the fall out of the activity of the `bootlegger ' which determine whether `public order ' has been affected within the meaning of deeming provision or not.
This legislative intent has to be kept in view while dealing with detentions under the act.
[246 B, C] 2.2 In the instant case, the substance of the grounds on which detention has been ordered is that the detenu is a bootlegger and in furtherance of his activities and to escape from the clutches of law, he even tried to run over, by his speeding vehicle, the police party, which tried to signal him to a stop, exhorting all the time that he would kill anyone who would come in his way.
He continued to drive in a reckless speed and dashed against a pedestrian causing injuries to him, where 237 again he had exhorted that anyone who would come in his way would meet his death.
Four witnesses A, B, C, D, who agreed to give statements to the police on conditions of anonymity, clearly stated that they would not depose against the detenu for fear of retaliation as the detenu had threatened to do away with anyone who would depose against him.
The evidence of witnesses shows that the detenu was indulging in transporting of illicit liquor and distributing the same in the locality and was keeping arms with him while transporting liquor.
The activities of the detenu, therefore, were not merely `bootlegging ' but went further to adversely affect the even tempo of the society by creating a feeling of insecurity among those who were likely to depose against him as also the law enforcement agencies.
The fear psychosis created by the detenu in the witnesses was aimed at letting the crime go unpunished which has the potential of the society, and not merely some individual, to suffer.
The activities of the detenu, therefore, squarely fall within the deeming provision enacted in the explanation to Section 2(a) of the Act.
It, therefore, follows that the activities of the detenu were not merely prejudicial to the maintenance of `law and order ' but were prejudicial to the maintenance of `public order '.
[246D H, 247 A] Om Prakash vs Commissioner of Police & Ors., [1989] Supp.
(2) SCC 576; Rashidmiya vs Police Commissioner, Ahmedabad & Anr., [1989] 3 SCC 321; Piyush Kantilal Mehta vs Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad City and Anr., [1989] Supp.
(1) SCC 322, referred to.
The maximum period of detention is prescribed under Section 13 of the Act which lays down that a person may be detained in pursuance of any detention order made under the Act, which has been confirmed under Section 12 of the Act.
Therefore, the order of detention in the instant case, though it was for a period of more than three months, is not vitiated since the order is in conformity with the said provisions.
[248D, E]
