The respondent 's land admeasuring 5 acres 589 1/3 Sq. yards was acquired by the State Government in 1963 for a housing scheme and compensation at Rs.1.58 per Sq. yard was awarded.
On reference, the Civil Court enhanced the compen sation to Rs. 10 per Sq. yard with solatium at 15 per cent and interest at 4 per cent.
On appeal and cross appeals, the High Court confirmed the award.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the De partment, it was contended that the respondent had purchased the land in question in 1961 in three documents at Rs.0.42 p. per sq. yard and sold in 1963 one acre of the land at Rs.5 per sq. yard and, therefore, the deeds under which the transactions took place reflected the prevailing market value of the land in question, and courts below committed grave error in relying on a decision of the High Court awarding Rs. 10 per sq. yard in respect of another land acquired under a Notification of 1961, and that when a large extent of land was acquired for a housing scheme, at least 1/3 of the land should be deducted towards laying the roads, setting up parks, drainage and other amenities.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The market value postulated in Section 23(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is designed to award just and fair compensation for the lands acquired.
The word "market value" would postulate price of the land prevailing on the date of the publication of the notifica 473 tion under Section 4(1).
In determining the market value of the land, the price which a willing vendor might reasonably expect to obtain from a willing purchaser would form the basis.
For ascertaining the market rate, the Court can rely upon such transactions which would offer a reasonable basis to fix the price.
The price paid in sale or purchase of the land acquired within a reasonable time from the date of the acquisition of the land in question would be the best piece of evidence.
In its absence the price paid for a land pos sessing similar advantages to the land in neighbourhood of the land acquired in or about the time of the notification would supply the data to assess the market value.
[475E G] Periya & Pareekanni Rubbers Lief.
vs State of Kerala, [1990] Supp. 1 SCR 362, referred to. 1.2 In the instant case, admittedly, the claimant pur chased land at Rs.0.42 p. and in a span of one year and four months, sold at Rs.5 per sq yard.
When the claimants them selves sold as a willing seller of an acre of land @ Rs.5 per sq.
yard, if a large extent of five acres and odd under acquisition is offered to be sold as a block, it would not fetch higher rate but surely be negotiated for a lesser rate, if not the same market value of Rs.5 due to time lag of nine months.
May be the payment of Rs. 10 per sq yard to the owner of another land acquired in 1961 was a windfall.
Taking the totality of the facts and circumstances, the High Court committed grave error in completely ignoring the sale transactions of the lands under acquisition.
In view of the time lag, the prevailing market value of the land as on the date of the notification would be Rs.6 per sq. yard.
[476B, E G] 1.3 In Building Regulations, setting apart the lands for development of roads, drainage and other amenities like electricity etc.
are condition precedent to approve lay out for building colonies.
Therefore, based upon the situation of the land and the need for development, the deduction shall be made.
Where acquired land is in the midst of al ready developed land with amenities of roads, drainage, electricity etc.
then deduction of 1/3 would not be justi fied.
In the rural areas housing schemes relating to weaker sections, deduction of 1/4 may be justified.
[477G H, 478A] Spl.
Tehsildar, Vishakapatnam vs Rednam Dharma Rao & Ors., CA No. 4187 of 1982 decided on July 17, 1990; Tribeni Devi & Ors.
vs Collector of Ranchi, ; at 213; Smt.
Kaushalya Devi Bogre & Ors.
vs The Land Acquisi tion Officer, Aurangabad; , ; Vijay Kumar Motilal vs State of Maharashtra, ; Vijay singh Liladhar vs Special Land Acquisition Officer, 760; Spl.
Land Acquisition Officer, Bangalore vs
T. Adinaray an Setty, [1959] Sppl.
1 SCR 404 and The Tehsildar, Land Acquisition, Vishakapatnarn
P. Narasing Rao & Ors., , relied on. 1.4 In the instant case, 1/3 of the market value should be deducted for development of the lands.
[478B] 1.5 The market value is determined at Rs.6 per sq. yard and after deducting 1/3 for development of lands, it would be Rs.4 per sq. yard.
[478C] 2.
It is settled law that when wrong application of a principle has been made or important points affecting valua tion have been overlooked or misapplied by the High Court or Reference Court, this Court would, under Article 136 of the Constitution, correct the same.
The Spl.
Land Acquisition Officer, Bangalore vs
T. Adina rayan Setty, [1959] Suppl.
1 SCR 404; Dattatrayaya Shankarb hat Ambalgi and Ors.
vs The Collector of Sholapur and Anr., ; The Dollar Co. Madras vs Collector of Madras, and Padma Uppal etc.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
, ; , relied on.
