The Education and Youth Services Department of the State of Karnataka issued an order dated 3rd October 1981 which provided two different methods of selection of teachers in private aided degree colleges one by Selection Committee and another by Management.
Under the order appointments for more than three months could be made by a selection committee whereas temporary appointments for less than 3 months could be made by the Management and such temporary appointments could be continued for a futher period of not more than 3 months, with one day 's break in service.
The Government order also provided that such temporary teachers shall be paid fixed salary being ten rupees less than the minimum payable to regular teachers.
The teachers temporarily appointed under the said order accordingly continued in service for a long period but with a break of a day or two every three months in their service.
Subsequently, they filed a writ petition in this Court seeking regularisation of their services by invoking the principle of equitable estoppel arising from implied assurance due to their long continuance.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that; (i) since the State has regularised the services of contract teachers and local teachers appointed in Government or vocational colleges they should also he extended similar treatment; and (ii) payment of fixed salary instead of regular emoluments for eight months in a year was discriminatory and arbitrary.
398 Allowing the petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
Provision of one day 's break in service in the Government order is deprecated and is struck down as ultra vires.
If the intention was to differentiate between appointments for more than three months and others it was a futile exercise.
That was already achieved by providing two different methods of selection one by Selection Committee and other by Management.
Distinction between appointment against temporary and permanent vacancies are well known in service law.
It was unnecessary to make it appear crude.
If the purpose was to avoid any possible claim for regularisation by the temporary teachers then it was acting more like a private business house of narrow outlook than government of a welfare State.
Such provisions cannot withstand the test of arbitrariness.
[403 G; 402 A B] B.R. Parineeth & Ors.
vs The State of Karnataka & Ors.
CMW 6232 of 1990 decided on 3.7.1990, referred to.
Order for payment of fixed salary to temporary teachers is declared invalid.
An appointment may be temporary or permanent but the nature of work being same and the temporary appointment may be due to exigency of service, non availability of permanent vacancy or as stop gap arrangement till the regular selection is completed, yet there can be no justification for paying a teacher, so appointed, a fixed salary by adopting a different method of payment than a regular teacher.
Fixation of such emoluments is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[403 G; 402 F G] 2.1 Payment of nearly eight months ' salary by resorting to government order and, that too fixed amount, for the same job which is performed by regular teachers is unfair and unjust.
Such injustice is abhorring to the constitutional scheme.
[403 A B;] 3.
The practice of management of not making regular selection utmost within six months of occurrence of vacancy is condemned.
The helplessness expressed by the State that the managements went on continuing such teachers without holding regular selections despite orders of educational authorities may be true but not convincing and sounds like surrender in favour of private managements.
[403 C, 402 E] 3.1 Managements shall take steps, whenever necessary, to fill up permanent vacancies in accordance with rules.
Delay in filling 399 up the vacancies shall not entitle the management or director to terminate the services of temporary teachers except for adequate reasons.
But it shall entitle the government to take such steps including supersession of management or stopping grants in aid if premitted under law to compel the institutions to comply with the rules.
[404 B] 4.
Regularisation of services of teachers of Government colleges by the State may not furnish, any basis for petitioners to claim that the state may be directed to issue similar order regularizing services of teachers of privately managed colleges.
All the same such policy decisions of government in favour of one or the other set of employees of sister department are bound to raise hope and expectations in employees of other departments.
Therefore, it is incumbent on governments to be more circumspect in taking such decisions.
[404 E G] 5.
Ad hoc appointments, a convenient way of entry usually from backdoor, at times even in disregard of rules and regulations, are comparatively recent innovation to the service jurisprudence.
The infection is widespread in government or semi government departments or State financed institutions.
Malady appears to be widespread in educational institutions as provisions for temporary or ad hoc appointments have been exploited by the managements of private aided colleges to their advantage by filling it, on one hand, with persons of own choice, at time without following the procedure and keeping the teachers exposed to threat of termination, on the other, with all evil consequences flowing out of it.
Any institution run by State fund but managed privately is bound to suffer from such inherent drawbacks.
[400 G H; 401 C D] 6.
In the circumstances of the case following directions are issued: a) Any teacher appointed temporarily shall be continued till the purpose for which he has been appointed exhausts or if it is in waiting of regular selection then till such selection is made; [404 A] b) Services of such temporary teachers who have worked as such for three years, including the break till today shall not be terminated.
They shall be absorbed as and when regular vacancies arise; [405 B] 400 c) If regular selections have been made the government shall creat additional posts to accommodate such selected candidates; [405 B] d) From the date of judgment every temporary teacher shall be paid salary as is admissible to teachers appointed against permanent post.
[405 D]
