The respondent was the daughter of the original landlord who had let out the premises to the appellant on October 1, 1961.
She purchased the property from her father on June 27, 1964 and thus stepped into his shoes as the `landlord ' as defined under section 2 (e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
The respondent sought eviction of the appellant from the demised premises on the ground of personal bonafide requirement.
The appellant resisted the eviction petition on the grounds that the premises were not let out for residential purpose only but for commercial purpose also i.e. for keeping foreign students as paying guests, and that the respondent does not have a bonafide need or requirement as such.
Relying upon the Rent Note and the appellant 's letters dated October 7, 1961 and August 18, 1962 addressed to the respondent 's father, and the earlier proceedings between them for eviction of the appellant on the ground of sub letting the premises for commercial purpose, both the statutory authorities the Additional Rent Controller and the Rent Control Tribunal found that the premises which had also been used incidentally for commercial purposes so as to exclude the application of section 14(1) (e) read with the explanation thereto, and dismissed the respondent 's application for eviction.
473 This finding was reversed by the High Court in the respondent 's second appeal under Section 29 of the Act.
The High Court found that there was no evidence for the statutory authorities to come to the conclusion, which they did, as regards the premises having been used for commercial purpose.
The High Court accepted the appeal and set aside the judgment and order of the Rent Controller and the Rent Control Tribunal, and allowed the eviction application.
The tenant appealed to this Court by Special appeal.
On behalf of the respondent landlord it was submitted that even if the High Court was wrong in coming to the conclusion that there was no evidence about foreign students being lodged by the tenant, the mere fact that foreign students stayed as paying guests in the premises did not imply either that they lodged with the consent of the landlord or that such lodging amounted to a commercial use of the building, and that the High Court was right in saying that the ground contained in clause (e) of sub section (1) of section 14 was attracted.
Allowing the appeal, and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, and restoring the orders of the Additional Rent Controller and the Rent Control Tribunal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The finding of the High Court is unsustainable.
The High Court was not justified in saying that there was no evidence to hold that the premises were used for boarding and lodging foreign students.
The specific plea of the landlord in the earlier proceedings was that the tenant had sub let the premises for commercial purposes.
The tenant contended that she had never parted with her exclusive possession of any part of the premises and the foreign students who were lodging with her were her paying guests and were not her tenants.
The plea of sub tenancy raised by the landlord was thus rejected on the ground that those who lodged with her were not sub tenants but only paying guests.
[476 G H] 2.
The letters dated October 7, 1961 and August 18, 1962 clearly disclosed the fact that foreign students were lodged in the premises as the guests of the appellant.
The evidence let in by the appellant and not contradicted by the respondent clearly showed that apart from the appellant all the other inmates of the premises were foreign students staying with her as her paying guests.
The appellant testified that she earned her livelihood from the income she received as lodging fee from students who lodged with her, and 474 that is was out of that income that all her personal expenses including the rent payable by her for the premises had been met.
These are the findings of the two fact finding authorities, and those findings are based on oral and documentary evidence.
To have reversed those findings by the High Court in Second Appeal on the ground that they were perverse was totally uncalled for.
[477 A C] 3.
In the absence of any question of law, much less any substantial question of law, the High Court was not justified in reversing the concurrent findings of the statutory authorities.
[480 B] 4.
Clause (e) of section 14(1) of the Act is applicable only if the landlord is in a position to establish that the premises let for residential purposes are required bona fide by him for occupations as residence.
Assuming that the bona fide requirement of the landlord is established the landlord must still prove that the premises had been let for residential purposes.
The Explanation of clause (e) makes it clear that the words `premises let for residential purposes ' included any premises let for residential purposes but used incidentally, without the consent of the landlord, for commercial or other purposes.
The Explanation is attracted when : (1) the premises have been let for residential purposes, (ii) the premises have been used incidentally for commercial or other purposes,and (iii) the landlord has not given his consent for such incidental use for commercial or other purpose.
[478 D F] 5.
If the premises have never been used for any non residential purpose, the aid of the explanation is unnecessary to attract clause (e).
The Explanation is called in aid only where premises let for residential purpose have been used incidentally for commercial or other non residential purpose, but without the consent of the landlord.
[478 G] 6.
If the landlord is in a position to establish that the premises have been let for residential purposes and that he has never consented to the user of the premises for any other purpose, the mere fact that such premises have been incidentally used for commercial or other purposes would not change or affect the residential character of the premises.
[479 A] 7.
If the premises have been regularly and openly used for non residential purposes, the knowledge and consent of the landlord, unless proved to the contrary, are ordinarily presumed and in 475 that event the explanation would be of no avail to save the ground under clause (e).
[479 B] 8.
In the instant case, it is not disputed that the premises had been let for residential purposes, but it is also beyond doubt that to the knowledge of the landlord the premises have been regularly used by the tenant not only for her own residence but also for her foreign guests.
The landlord has as all material times known or is presumed to have known that foreign students have been staying with the appellant as her paying guests and that she has been ever since 1961 running a boarding house in the premises.
At no time did the landlord object to the user of the premises by the appellant for such purpose.
[479 C D] 9.
The continued user of the building ever since 1961 for the purpose of lodging paying guests shows that the respondent landlord and her father have not only been aware of such user of the building, but have also impliedly consented to such user.
This presumption is irresistible from the evidence on record.
Such user takes the premises in question out of the ambit of `premises let for residential purpose ' so as to exclude the ground contained in clause (e).
[479 E] Dr. Gopal Dass Verma vs Dr. S.K. Bhardwaj & Anr., ; ; Kartar Singh vs Chaman Lal & Ors., (SC) (1969) IV All India Rent Control Journal 349; Hobson vs Tulloch, [1898] 1 Chancery Division 424; Thorn & Ors.
vs Madden, [1925] All E.R.321 and Tandler vs Sproula , referred to.
