Rule 2 of the Bombay Prohibition (Manufacture of Spirit) (Gujarat) Rules, 1963, framed by the State Government in exercise of powers conferred under Section 58A of the Bombay Prohibition Act, dealt with grant of licence for working of distillery for the manufacture of spirit.
One of the conditions for grant of licence was that the cost of maintenance of staff, viz. payment of salary and allowances, was to be paid to the Government by the licensees.
This was challenged by the appellant and the High Court upheld the levy as being within the legislative competence of the State.
Aggrieved against the High Court 's order, the appellant has preferred the present appeal.
The appellants contended that since the judgement appealed against proceeded on privilege theory, it cannot withstand the principle laid down in Synthetic & Chemicals, case; and that levy as a fee under Entry 8 of list II of Seventh Schedule or excise duty under Entry 51 is different than the cost of supervision charged under Section 58A of the Bombay Prohibition Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 392 HELD: 1.1 Even though the power to levy tax or duty on industrial alcohol is vested in the Central Government, the State was till left with power to lay down regulations to ensure that non potable alcohol, that is, industrial alcohol, was not diverted and misused as substitute for potable alcohol.
This is enough to justify a provision like 58A of the Bombay Prohibition Act.
[394 D] 1.2 Principle of occupied field precluded State from trenching on any power which was already covered by Central legislation.
But in absence of any provision in Industries (Development & Regulation) Act touching upon regulation or ensuring that industrial alcohol was not divered, the State was competent to legislate on it under Entry 33 list III of VII Schedule.
[394 F G] 1.3 Trade and commerce and supply and distribution of goods are exclusive state subject under entries 26 and 27 of List II of VII Schedule.
But both are subject to entry 33 of List III.
What is covered in entry 33 is excluded from List II.
And the power to legislate in respect of what is covered by List III is enjoyed both by Central and State legislatures subject to Article 246 of the Constitution.
Since section 58A can be traced to regulatory power of the State exercisable under entry 33 of List III the challenge to its validity is liable to fail.
Thus, Section 58A of the Bomaby Prohibition Act is valid and is not violative of any constitutional provision.
[395 B C].
1.4 It cannot be said that no cost for supervision could be demanded unless the power to issue licence for production was found to exist in State.
[395 d] Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd. & Ors., vs State of U.P & Ors. ; , followed.
