The appellant, a company registered under the Indian , was using industrial alcohol as one of the raw materials for manufacturing resins, chemicals, sodium carboxy methyl, cellulose and certain other chemicals.
In May, 1970, the company installed its own distillery for the purpose of manufacturing industrial alcohol from mollasses.
The respondent No.2 on 3.7.1969 issued a licence to the company for manufacturing spirit.
In accordance with the conditions No. 2 and No. 3, the respondent No. 2 appointed a 9 member supervisory staff consisting of one Inspector, one Sub Inspector, one Nayak, one Jamadar and five constables, to supervise the manufacture of the spirit in the company 's distillery plant.
The appellant company was required to provide residential accommodation to the supervisory staff within its factory premises and to deposit supervisory charges from time to time.
The company complied the requirements.
In 1973 the appellant company filed a Civil Application in the High Court challenging the constitutional validity of the Section 58(A) of the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949.
The High Court dismissed the petition, hence this appeal by certificate granted by the High Court under Articles 132(1)133(1)(a) of the Constitution.
The appellant company contended that this Court in Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. case, [1989] Supp.1 SCR 623 held that in respect of 676 industrial alcohol, the States had no power to impose the impost;that in view of the judgment of this Court, the theory of privilege as adumbrated by the High Court could not be sustained, and that there was no quid pro quo.
The respondent State submitted that the Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. case dealt merely with the vend fees, and not about supervisory charges.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: 1.01.
The States have the power to regulate the use of alcohol and that power must include power to make provisions to prevent and/or check industrial alcohol being used as intoxicating or drinkable alcohol.
This is an added reasoning to uphold the validity of Section 58(A).
[684D, F G] Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd.v.
State of U.P. and Ors., [1989] Supp.1 SCR 623 Followed.
1.02.Section 58(A) of the Bombay Prohibition Act creates a statutory duty of supervision and incidentally provides for recovering from a manufacturer or a businessman having been permitted under a licence to carry on lawfully a business or industrial activity which would otherwise have been unlawful.
[684G 685A] 1.03.The maintenance of the staff contemplated under Section 58(A) of the Act is primarily for the purpose of ensuring that while dealing with industrial alcohol, no attempt shall be made to divert non potable alcohol.
Therefore, by regulatory measures, the State sees to it that industrial alcohol is not diverted for the use as potable alcohol.
Such a regulatory measure is perfectly valid.
However, such a power was sustained though not on police power but as a regulatory measure.
[679C D] Southern Pharmaceuticals & Chemicals vs State of Kerala, ; ; Sh.
Bileshwar Khand Udyog Khedut Sahakari Mandali Ltd. vs The State of Gujarat & Anr., C.A. No. 503 of 1974 Followed.
The appellants are precluded from contending that the services did not make the impost, since the High Court has noted that it was not contended before it that there was not sufficient quid pro quo between the 677 quantum of impost and the services rendered to the manufacturer or businessman.
[679E F]
