In 1909, for the purpose of residential accommodation, plots of land were given on lease by the Government to the appellants and others for which a premium of Rs. 350 and an annual rent of Rs. 3 8 0 for each plot had to be paid.
Clause III of the deed of lease in each case provided: " And the lessor does further covenant that lie will at the end of the term Of 30 years hereby granted and so on from time to time thereafter at the end of each successive further term of years as shall be granted at the request of the lessee execute to him a renewed lease of the land hereby demised for the term Of 30 years: Provided that the rent of the land hereby demised shall be subject to such fair and equitable enhancement as the lessor shall determine on the grant of every renewal: Provided also that every such renewed lease of the land shall contain such of the covenants, provisions and conditions in these presents contained as shall be applicable and shall always contain a covenant for further renewal of the lease." 181 By the year 1939 the first 30 years ' period of some of the leases came to an end, and the Government sought to enhance the annual rent from Rs. 3 8 0 to Rs. 21 14 0 per plot and also to insert some new terms in the renewed deeds of lease.
The appellants brought a suit inter alia for a declaration that the enhancement proposed was not, fair and equitable within the meaning of Clause III of the deed of lease, that the fair and equitable rent should be Rs. 7 per plot and that if the court was of the opinion that Rs. 7 was not a fair and equitable rent then it should fix such sum as it considered fair and equitable.
The respondent pleaded that such a suit was incompetent.
The question was whether the civil court had jurisdiction to enquire whether the enhancement of the rent determined by the lessor was fair and equitable within the meaning of cl.
III of the deed of lease, and whether, in any case, the lease was void for un certainty.
Held, (per jafer Imam and section K. Das, jj.), that the lease is not void for uncertainty; that the expression " fair and equitable " in the clause in question means fair and equitable in fact, and not what the lessor subjectively considered to be fair and equitable; and, that reading the clause as a whole and giving effect to all the words used therein, the meaning is that the lessor must first determine what it considers to be fair and equitable enhancement, but, if in fact it is not so, it is open to the lessee to ask the court to determine what is fair and equitable enhancement.
Accordingly, the suit was maintainable.
The rule laid down in Gourlay vs The Duke of Somerset, (18I5) ; ; , held applicable.
The New Beerbhom Coal Company Limited V. Boloram Mahata and others, (1880) L.R. 7 I.A. 107 and Secretary of State for India in Council vs Volkart Brothers, Mad.
595, relied on.
Collier vs Mason, ; ; and Tekchand Kapurchand vs Mt. Birzabai, A.I.R. 1942, Nag. 119, distinguished.
Per Kapur, J. The correct interpretation to be put on cl.
III of the deed of lease is that the lessor was given the authority to determine the enhancement of rent but such enhancement was to be fair and equitable and what would be fair and equitable in any particular case was also to be determined by the lessor.
The rule applicable to the present case is that relating to valuation or fixation of prices that where the valuation is fixed by a valuer the court will hold it conclusive in the absence of fraud or mistake or misconduct and the court will not enter into the propriety of the valuation made or substitute its own valuation in place of that determined by the valuer because that will not be an execution of the contract of the parties but making a contract for them.
Case law discussed.
