C.A.No.869 of 1987 On 15.3.1951, the appellant was appointed as a Pharmacist, which was then designated as compounder.
On 13.2.1976 he was retired compulsorily by the Government under the first proviso to Sub rule of Rule 71 of the Orissa Service Code.
The appellant challenged the order by way of a writ petition in the High Court contending that the order was the result of ill will and malice the Chief District Medical Officer bore towards him; that his entire service was spot less and that at no time were any adverse entries in his confidential character rolls communicated to him.
The respondent Government submitted that the decision to retire 837 the petitioner compulsorily was taken by the Review Committee and not by the Chief Medical Officer; that besides the remarks made in the confidential character rolls, other material was also taken into consideration by the Review Committee that it arrived at its decision bonafide and in public interest which decision was accepted and approved by the Government.
The allegation of malafides was denied.
The High Court looked into the proceedings of the Review Committee and the confidential character rolls of the appellant and dismissed the writ petition on the reasoning, that an order of compulsory retirement after putting in the prescribed qualifying period of service did not amount to punishment; that the order was passed by the state Government and not by the Chief Medical Officer and that the petitioner has failed to establish that remarks in the confidential character rolls were not duly and properly recorded.
It held that the adverse remarks though not communicated, can yet be relied upon.
Accordingly it held that the decision to retire was taken by the Review Committee on proper material and there were no grounds to interfere with its decision.
The present appeal by special leave was filed by the government servant against the decision of the High Court on the question, whether acting upon undisclosed material was a ground for quashing the order of compulsory retirement C.A. No. 870 of 1987 was also filed on similar facts.
It was contended by the appellant that since an order of compulsory retirement had adverse effects upon the career and prospects of the government servant, the order should be passed in accordance with principles of natural justice; that before passing the order, a notice to show cause against the order proposed should be given to the government servant; that the order of compulsory retirement was based upon uncommunicated adverse remarks and that the appellant was also not afforded an opportunity to make a representation against the same; and that as per the new concept of Article 14 adumbrated Maneka Gandhi case, AIR 1978 SC 579, any and every arbitrary action was open to judicial scrutiny.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.01.
What is normally required to be communicated is adverse remarks not every remark, comment or observation made in the confidential rolls.
There may be any number of remarks, observations and 838 comments, which do not constitute adverse remarks, but are yet relevant for the purpose of F.R. 56(j) or a Rule corresponding to it.
[855B C] 1.02.
The adverse remarks ought to be communicated in the normal course, as required by the Rules/ orders in that behalf.
Any representations made against them would and should also be dealt with in the normal course, with reasonable promptitude.
[854D E] 1.03.
The action under F.R.56(j) (or the Rule corresponding to it) need not await the disposal or final disposal of such representation or representations, as the case may be.
In some cases, it may happen that some adverse remarks of the recent years are not communicated or if communicated, the representation received in that behalf are pending consideration.
On this account alone, the action under F.R.56(j) need not be held back.
[854E F] 1.04.
There is no reason to presume that the Review Committee or the government, if it chooses to take into consideration such uncommunicated remarks, would not be conscious or cognizant of the fact that they are not communicated to the government servant and that he was not given an opportunity to explain or rebut the same.
Similarly, if any representation made by the government servant is there, it shall also be taken into consideration.
[854F G] 1.05.
Not only the Review Committee is generally composed of high and responsible officers, the power is vested in government alone and not in a minor official.
It is unlikely that adverse remarks over a number of years remain uncommunicated and yet they are made the primary basis of action.
Such an unlikely situation, if indeed present, may be indicative of malice in law.
[854G H] 2.01.
An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
[855D] 2.02.
The order has to be passed by the government on forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a government servant compulsorily.
The order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the government.
[855D E] 2.03.
Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of an order of compulsory retirement.
This does not mean that judicial scrutiny 839 is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as an appellate court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide or (b) that it is based on no evidence or (c) that it is arbitrary in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material; in short, if it is found to be a perverse order.
[855E F] 2.04.
The remedy provided by Article 226 of the Constitution is no less an important safeguard.
Even with its well known constraints, the remedy is an effective check against mala fide, perverse or arbitrary action.
[855A] 2.05.
An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a court merely on the showing that while passing it, uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration.
That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for interference.
[856B] 2.06.
The government (or the Review Committee, as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter, of course, attaching more importance to the record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
If a government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
[855G 856A] 2.07.
The nature of the function is not quasi judicial in nature and because the action has to be taken on the subjective satisfaction of the Government, there is no room for importing any facet of natural justice particularly because an order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment nor does it involve any stigma.
[856E] Union Of India vs M.E.Reddy, ; ; Union of India vs J.N.Sinha, [1971] 1 SCR 791, Applied.
Shyam Lal vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Shivacharana vs State of Mysore, AIR (1965) SC 280; State of Orissa vs Dr. Binapani Devi, ; ; A.K. kraipak vs Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 150; R.L. Butail vs Union of India, ; Dr. N.V. Puttabhatta vs State of Mysore; , ; Gian Singh Mann vs Punjab and Haryana 840 High Court; , ; O.N.G.C. vs Iskandar Ali, Brij Bihari Lal Agarwal vs High Court Of Madhya Pradesh, ; Baldev Raj Chaddha vs Union Of India, ; ; J.D. Srivastava vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; Brij Mohan Singh Chopra vs State of Punjab, ; Gurdyal Singh Fiji vs State of Punjab, ;m Amarkant Chaudhary vs State of Bihar, ; ; Baidyanath Mahapatra vs State of Orissa, ; ; Barium Chemicals vs Company Law Board, ; ; Vallukunnel vs Reserve Bank of India, ; ; Maneka Gandhi 's case, AIR 1978 SC 579, Referred to.
