The appellant obtained, by transfer, an Import Licence for the import of admissible Items as per Para 220 (2), (3), (4) and (6) of the Import Policy 1990 93 Vol.
I and placed an order on a foreign firm for the supply of cloves No. 1 quality.
On arrival of the goods in the Indian Port, the appellant filed Bill of Entry for the clearance of the goods for home consumption, and claimed clearance of the goods against the additional licence on the ground that the cloves were covered under Item 169 of Appendix 6, List 8, Part I of the Import and Export Policy, being Drugs/Drug intermediate not elsewhere specified.
" The Department relying on Para 167, which dealt with the import of spices, took the view that the cloves could be imported only against specific licence relating to cloves.
Hence the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court for a direction to the respondent to clear the goods against the Bill of Entry filed by the appellant.
The High Court held that cloves could not fall within the expression "Drugs/Drug intermediate not elsewhere specified" and the import of the cloves without specific licence was not permissible, and that the licence relied upon by the appellant was not valid for the import of cloves.
In the appeal before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant importer that in popular sense and trade parlance, clove was also used as drug intermediate, and that in the Import Policies of 1982 83 to 1985 86 cloves were specified as crude drug and the cloves and clove oil were used for treatment of dyspepsia, flatulence, etc., and tooth problems and, therefore, the High Court committed an error in holding that clove 998 was not a Drug/Drug intermediate, and that it did not fall within Item 169.
Dismissing the appeal of the Importer, this Court, HELD : 1.1 Para 167 under Chapter XIII of the Import Policy of April 1990 93 clearly provides the heading Import of Spices and under this heading of spices it further makes a mention that import of Cloves, Cinnamon/Cassia, Nutmeg and Mace will be allowed against licences.
Thus, it is clear beyond any doubt that cloves have been included under the heading Spices and the import of cloves is only permissible against specific licences obtained in the manner provided in Para 167.
In the face of this provision, dealing with the import of spices, which specifically includes cloves, the general provision of Item 169 mentioning Drugs/Drug intermediates cannot be applied.
[1002D E] 1.2 In the instant case the appellant had obtained the licence in November, 1990 and has imported the cloves in May, 1991 and as such the import of cloves in question, shall be governed by the provisions contained in the Import Policy of April, 1990 93, and not by any meaning given to cloves in any earlier Policy.
Therefore, when para 167 provides of obtaining specific licence for cloves, there is no necessity of finding its meaning from earlier Policies or its use as medicine.
There is a clear provision under Para 167 as regards import of spices and it would govern the import of cloves.
That apart, the High Court was right in holding that in the common parlance as well as in trade and commerce, clove is treated as spice and not drug.
It is a matter of common knowledge that the cloves are sold in a `Kirana ' shop and not in the shop of a chemist or druggist.
[1002C, F G]
