The West Bengal Registration Service comprised the post of Sub Registrars and other posts above the level of sub Registrars.
By a resolution dated May 22, 1952 the post of Sub Registrar was directed to be regarded as gazetted w.e.f.
1st April, 1952.
Thereafter by a Notification dated 17th July, 1953 the Registration Service was, with effect from the date of its constitution i.e. 30th January, 1953 included in the West Bengal State Service.
The respondents alleged that notwithstanding the commitment made by the 1953 Notification that they would be accorded all the privileges admissible to officers belonging to State Service, their pay scale was not revised equivalent to the minimum pay scale admissible to State Service Officers.
Even when pursuant to the recommendations of the Pay Com 898 mittee the pay scales were revised they were placed on a scale which was lower than the minimum scale payable to State Service Employees.
Further though the First State Pay Commission recommended a Scale of Rs. 425 825 for Sub Registrars yet the recommendation did not find favour with State Government and their pay scale was fixed at Rs. 300 600.
Also pursuant to the recommendations of the Second State Pay Commission their pay scale was revised to Rs. 425 1050 i.e. scale No. 11, although the minimum scale fixed fog the State Service Officers was Rs. 660 1600 i.e. Scale No. 17.
Feeling aggrieved by the decision of the State Govt.
the respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court of Calcutta under Article 226 of the constitution for a mandamus to award scale No. 17 of Rs. 660 1600 as admissible to State Service Officers .
During the pendency of the writ petition the Third State Pay Commission submitted its report.
This Commission also rejected their claim of pay scale of Rs. 660 1600, the minimum scale for State service, on the ground that their duties and responsibilities did not justify the higher pay scale.
By its judgment dated 28th June, 1989, a Division Bench of the High Court allowed the writ petition and awarded revised scale No. 17 by holding that the Government had acted arbitrarily and in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution in not awarding scale No. 17 to the Sub Registrars.
The High Court based its decision on the facts that (i) the post of Sub Registrar was a gazetted post belonging to the State Service; (ii) the first State Pay Commission recommended a higher pay scale which was turned down by Finance; and (iii) the revised educational qualification for Sub Registrar, a law degree, was the same as required for Munsiffs.
Subsequently the respondents filed an application for interim relief seeking permission to exercise option for the corresponding scale No. 17 of Rs. 2200 4000 equivalent to the old scale of Rs. 660 1600 which was allowed by the High Court by its order dated 16th March, 1990.
They also filed an application seeking clarification of the Court 's order dated March 16, 1990 and by its order dated 30th March, 1990 the High Court permitted the officers belonging to the posts above the level of Sub Registrars to opt for corresponding scales Nos. 18 and 19. 899 In appeals to this court against the judgment of the High Court dated 28th June, 1989 and orders dates 16th and 19th March, 1990 it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (i) the High Court committed a serious error in revising the pay scale of sub Registrars in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution because pay fixation was essentially an executive function ordinarily undertaken by an expert body like a Pay Commission whose recommendations are not justiciable; (ii) there being no scheme as `Constituted State Service ' the employees have been categorised as Group `A ', `B ', `C ', and `D ' on the basis of evaluation of their work and the recruitment policy.
For examination purposes the State Public Service Commission has placed the Sub Registrars in Group `D ' whereas those in scale No. 17 fall in Group `A '.
Therefore, they are not comparable and cannot be placed in same pay scale.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that since after 1981 the qualification of a degree in law, as required in the case of Munsiffs, was also added to their eligibility criterion, they should be equated with Munsiffs in the matter of pay scale.
Allowing the appeals and setting aside the orders of the High Court, this Court, HELD : 1.
The High Court committed a serious error in law in holding that the Government 's action in not granting the scale No. 17 to Sub Registrars was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[915G] 2.
Equation of posts and determination of pay scales is the primary function of the executive and not the judiciary and, therefore, ordinarily courts will not enter upon the task of job evaluation which is generally left to expert bodies like the Pay Commissions etc.
But that is not to say that the Court has no jurisdiction and the aggrieved employees have no remedy if they are unjustly treated by arbitrary state action or inaction.
[912E F] Parbat Kiran Maithani & Ors.
vs Union of India & Anr.
, ; ; State of U.P. & Ors.
vs J.P. Chaurasia & Ors., ; , cited.
Ordinarily a pay structure is evolved keeping in mind several factors, e.g. (i) method of recruitment, (ii) level at which recruitment is made, (iii) the hierarchy of service in a given cadre, (iv) minimum educa 900 tion/technical qualifications required, (v) avenues of promotion, (vi) the nature of duties and responsibilities, (vii) the horizontal and verticle relativities with similar jobs, (viii) public dealings, (ix) satisfaction level; (x) employers ' capacity to pay etc.
These factors have to be kept in view while evolving a pay structure and the horizontal and verticle relativities have to be carefully balanced keeping in mind the hierarchial arrangements, avenues for promotion etc.
Such a carefully evolved pay structure ought not to be ordinarily disturbed as it may upset the balance and cause avoidable ripples in other cadres as well.
[913C E] 4.
One of the basic principles for pay fixation is that the salary must reflect the nature of duties and responsibilities attached to the post, meaning thereby that the pay scale must be commensurate with the task to be performed and the responsibility to be undertaken by the holder of the post.
Merely because the Sub Registrars were conferred gazetted status and the Registration Service was included in State Service did not entitle the Sub Registrars to be placed in the higher scale if their duties and responsibilities did not justify the same.
By conferment of gazetted status or placement in State Service, no qualitative change was brought about in the job performance of the Sub Registrars and their superiors.
[914E G] 4.1 The High Court failed to evaluate the difference in the nature of duties and responsibilities of a Munsiff and a Sub Registrar.
The duties and responsibilities of a Munsiff and a Judicial Magistrate are far more onerous than those of a Sub Registrar.
The Sub Registrar 's duties are relatively simple namely to receive, examine and register the document whereas the duties of a Judicial Officer at the floor level are to hear cases, examine witnesses, interpret and construe different laws, hear oral arguments and deliver reasoned judgments.
He has to keep abreast with a host of laws unlike a Sub Registrar who is expected to study only a couple of laws connected with the registration of documents like the Registration Act, the Stamp Act etc.
The responsibilities of a Judicial Officer are therefore far greater than those of Sub Registrars.
Therefore, to compare the Sub Registrars with Judicial Magistrates Munsiffs is to compare unequals.
It would, therefore, be wholly arbitrary to place them in the same pay scale.
[915D g] 5.
One of the inputs for pay determination is educational requirement for the post.
The higher the educational qualification the better 901 would be the quality of service rendered and the end result would in the ultimate be far more satisfactory.
That indeed cannot be disputed.
But educational qualification is only one of the many factors which has relevance to pay fixation.
The complexity of the job to be performed and the responsibilities attached thereto are entitled to great weight in determining the appropriate pay scale for the job.
Prima facie there appears substance in the grievance of the Sub Registrars that while the minimum educational qualification for direct entry into the post has been periodically raised, the level of pay scale, for the post has not undergone any change, whatsoever.
[916A C] 6.
The State Government is directed to re examine the question of the appropriate pay scale for Sub Registrars by a speaking order after hearing the representatives of the respondent association.
If the State Government decides on the upward revision of the salary of the Sub Registrars, it will simultaneously consider the question of upward revision of the pay scales of higher posts in the department.
[916E F]
