The appellant, an Advocate practising in the High Court was earlier working in the Defence Accounts Department, on re employment, after retiring from the Army.
He had filed a Writ Petition before the High Court, claiming certain benefits like pension, gratuity, pay and allowances etc., pertaining to the service rendered by him in the Defence Accounts Department and the Army.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition.
It also dismissed the appellant 's review application.
This Court also dismissed his Special Leave Petition against the High Court 's order.
Thereafter, the appellant, moved a Contempt Petition under Section 16 of the making some serious allegations against the two Judges of the High Court, who dismissed his Writ Petition and also the Review Petition.
A Division Bench of the High Court summarily dismissed the contempt petition.
865 Meanwhile, the Registry of the High Court examined the allegations made in the affidavit filed by the appellant under Rule 5 of the Rules regarding contempts framed by the High Court.
A Division Bench of the High Court, before which the matter was placed on the order of the Chief Justice, took cognizance of the criminal contempt and directed issue of notice to the appellant directing him to show cause as to why he should not be punished for contempt of Court.
The appellant filed his reply raising certain preliminary objections, contending that the notice was bad for the reasons that (1) the Section of the Act under which cognizance had been taken was not specifically mentioned; (2) the notice did not show sufficient cause as to why the words and expressions used in the offending portions marked had been construed as contemptuous (3) the procedure followed by the High Court was contrary to the rules framed by it; and (4) no consent of the Advocate General had been obtained, and prayed for discharge of the rule of contempt.
Meanwhile, on the basis of the High Court 's Order, the appellant inspected the Court records relating to this matter, and thereafter, he was also informed that the proceedings were under the provisions of Article 215 of the Constitution of India.
After examining the remarks made by the appellant in his contempt petition the High Court rejected the objections of the appellant/contemner and held that the contemner was guilty of criminal contempt of not only scandalising the Court and lowering its authority but also substantially interfering with the due course of justice.
Taking note of the defiant attitude of the contemner who even did not think it necessary to apologise but tried to justify the aspersions, the High Court sentenced the contemner to suffer simple imprisonment for two months.
In the appeal before this Court, the contemner who appeared before the Court in person, contended that the order of the High Court should be set aside on the ground of procedural irregularities in that (1) that the offending remarks had not been communicated to him as per Rules 5 and 9 framed by the High Court; (2) that the cognizance of the criminal contempt had not been taken in conformity with Section 15 of the Act; (3) that the procedure, after cognizance as prescribed under Section 17 of the Act had not been followed; and (4) that Article 215 of the Constitution of India did not prescribe any procedure to be followed.
He 866 also contended that he had not been given a fair and full hearing and that the Judges had browbeaten and unjustly convicted him ignoring the well settled principle that every person had an inalienable right of making fair criticism, and that the order in question was pre conceived and pre judged one.
In his written statement also he made certain remarks about the Judges of the High Court, in attempting to justify his action which had led to the initiation of proceedings for contempt of Court before the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The power conferred upon the Supreme Court and the High Court, being Courts of Record under Articles 129 and 215 of the Constitution respectively, is an inherent power and the jurisdiction vested is a special one not derived from any other statute, but derived only from Articles 129 and 215 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, the constitutionally vested right cannot be either abridged by any legislation including or abrogated or cut down.
Nor can they be controlled or limited by any statute or by any provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure or any Rules.
The special feature of the procedure to be followed in a contempt proceeding being summary procedure, which is recognised not only in India but also abroad, the caution that has to be observed in exercising this inherent power by summary procedure is that the power should be used sparingly, that the procedure to be followed should be fair and that the contemner should be made aware of the charge against him and given a reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
[883B D] Sukhdev Singh Sodhi vs The Chief Justice and Judges of the PEPSU High Court, ; ; R.L. Kapur vs State of Madras, ; ; Delhi Judicial Service Association vs State of Gujarat, ; ; section Mulgaokar; , ; Brahma Prakash Sharma and Others vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, ; and D.N. Taneja vs Bhajan Lal, ; relied on.
Hira Lal Dixit vs State of U.P., ; ; Advocate General, Bihar vs M.P. Khair Industries, ; ; Ashram M. Jain vs A.T. Gupta, and M.B. Sanghi vs High Court of Punjab and 867 Haryana; , , referred to.
State of Bombay vs P. 1958 Bom.
Law Reporter, (60) Page 873, referred to.
Clements and the Republic Costa Rica vs Erlanger, page 383, Ex parte Terry, ; , 307; , 80 (1888); Matsusow vs United Sates, ; , 339 (5th Cir.) 1956; Sukhdev Singh Sodhi, C.K. Daphtary; Re Abdool vs Mahtab, (1867) 8 WR Cr. 32 page 33; at 40; Andre Paul vs Attorney General, AIR 1936 PC 141, Attorney General vs Butterworth, (1963) 1 Q.B. 696; Reg.
vs Odham 's Press Ltd. Ex parte A.G., (1957) 1 Q.B. 73; Morris, vs The Crown Office, , 1081, Offutt vs U.S., ; Jennison vs Baker, 1006, referred to.
Belchamber 's Practice of the Civil Court, 1884 Ed.
P. 241; Contempt of Court.
By Oswald and Halbury 's Law of England (4th Edition) by Lord Hailsham page 3, referred to. 1.2.
In the instant case, the offending criticism and the scandalising allegations made by the appellant/contemner are most fatal and dangerous obstruction of justice shaking the confidence of the public in the administration of justice and calling for a more rapid and immediate punitive action.
These calculated contemptuous remarks and the sweeping allegations are derogatory in character, not only to the dignity of the Judges and casting aspersions on their conduct in the discharge of their judicial functions but also wounds the dignity of the Court.
It is highly painful to note that the appellant/contemner who is none other than an Advocate practising in the same highest Court of the State after having failed to wrench a decision in his favour in his own cause which he prosecuted as party in person has escalatingly scandalised the Court by making libellous allegations which are scurrilous, highly offensive, vicious, intimidatory, malacious and beyond condonable limit.
Even a cursory reading of the remarks made against the Judge of the High Court unambiguously show that the potentially prejudicial utterances and the outrageous allegations rumbustiously and invectively made by the contemner with malicious design of attempting to impair the administration of justice have struck a blow on the judiciary and also seriously sullied the image, dignity and high esteem which the office of the Judge of the High Court carried with it and thus impeded the course of justice by fouling its source 868 and stream.
The incident in question is a flagrant onslaught on the independence of the judiciary, destructive of the orderly administration of justice and a challenge to the supremacy of the Rule of Law.
The maxim "Salus populi suprema lex", that is, "the welfare of the people is the supreme law" adequately enunciates the idea of law.
This can be achieved only when justice is administered lawfully, judicially, without fear or favour and without being hampered and thwarted, and this cannot be effective unless respect for it is fostered and maintained.
[888E H,889A C] 1.3.To punish an Advocate for Contempt of Court, no doubt, must be regarded as an extreme measure, but to preserve the proceedings of the Courts from the being deflected or interfered with, and to keep the streams of justice pure, serene and undefiled, it becomes the duty of the Court, though painful, to punish the contemner in order to preserve its dignity.
No one can claim immunity from the operation of the law of contempt, if his act or conduct in relation to Court or Court proceedings interferes with or is calculated to obstruct the due course of justice.
In view of the heinous type of scandalising the Court, the finding of the High Court that the appellant/contemner has made himself guilty of criminal contempt is confirmed.
[889D E] 1.4 As regards the sentence, it is clear from the order of the High Court that the appellant had adopted a defiant attitude and tried to justify the aspersions made by him even without thinking it necessary to apologise.
Before this Court also, the appellant has neither expressed any contrition nor has he any repentance for the vicious allegations made against the Judges of the High Court.
But, on the other hand, he has exhibited a dogged determination to pursue the matter, come what may.
A reading of his memorandum of grounds and the written and signed arguments show that he was ventured into another bout of allegations against the High Court Judges and persisted in his campaign of vilification.
His conduct in this Court has aggravated rather than mitigating his offence.
[889F H] 1.5.
Therefore, having regard to the sentencing policy that punishment should be commensurate with the gravity of the offence, the sentence of 2 months ' imprisonment in no way calls for interference and is accordingly confirmed.
[890A]
