The appellants, the victims of the dacoity and other prosecution witnesses were residents of the village, where the crime took place in the house of P.W.11.
The accused were closely related.
P.W. 11 's cousin and uncle were P.W. 3 and the deceased, respectively, and P.W. 2 was also a close relative of P.W. 11.
There was a simmering discontent between the family of P.W. 11 and the family of the accused, Sukhari Singh.
The accused Sukhari Singh claimed that a pond was bestowed of him by the erstwhile Zamindar before the coming into force of the Zamindari Abolition Act.
As the tank was under the control of the accused, he prevented the cattle of the villagers from drinking water from it.
3/4 days prior to the occurrence of dacoity, the Pan chayat of the village suggested to the accused Sukhari Singh to surrender the tank in the name of a Shiva temple.
The accused suggested to the Panchayat the place constructed and occupied by the complainant party, (the deceased and his relatives) for tying their cattle on the unsettled lands at the bank of the pond also should be likewise given to the Shiva temple.
The Panchayat was not agreeable to the counter suggestion of the accused.
It was the case of the prosecution that the dacoity was mastermined and made at the house of the complainant with a sole purpose to avenge.
On the night intervening 5th 6th April, 1970 the P.W. 11, the first informant and his cousin, P.W.3 and his uncle, the deceased were sleeping 606 on the cots lay spread in the outer courtyard of their house.
P.W. 11 was awaken by some noise as if some persons were coming.
He stood up and switched on his five cell torch and saw 20 25 dacoits armed with lathis, bhallas, garasas, and guns coming towards his house.
On his focussing the torch they stopped.
Then the dacoits also switched on their torches.
P.W.11 recognised in the torch light the accused inclusive of 5 appellants.
Accused sukhari Singh shouted, "kill kill." Accused Munni Singh fired with his gun at P. W. 11 but the gun fire did not his him.
While P.W. 11 was running, one of the dacoits hit him with a stick with an iron ring.
There was some oozing of blood but it was not profuse.
He ran for about 30 steps to get to his wheat field, which was about 2 to 3 feet below the level of his courtyard.
From there he saw the remaining part of the occurrence.
P.W. 11 's uncle was shot by the accused Munni Singh and he fell down Other dacoits who were near him started hitting him with spears.
One of the dacoits held a ladder in his hand, through which he climbed up to the roof of the inner house, from where he jumped into the female apartment and opened the outer door.
Then the dacoits entered the house and started looting and plundering.
Two dacoits scolded his cousin P.W. 3 to keep lying down on his cot.
In the occurrence, P.W.3 received no injury.
The dacoits were active for about 15 to 20 minutes.
On hearing the noise and commotion of the vil lagers, the dacoits decamped with the looted goods.
Some of the villagers followed them to some distance but the dacoits kept firing on them.
With the result that some of them were injured.
P.W. 11 's uncle and other injured persons were removed to be taken to the hospital, but P.W. 's uncle died on the way.
Then P.W.11 proceeded to the Police Station, taking the dead body of his uncle with him, and lodged F.I.R. P.W.12 went to the spot and saw the evidence of dacoity in the form of thing lying scattered and some of the articles left behind by the dacoits.
He had the injured persons examined medically.
He arrested the accused persons Finally investigation was completed by another officer and the accused persons were put up for trial.
The matter went to trial under the old Code of Criminal Procedure before the First Additional Sessions Judge against the 6 named persons and one other.
There were commitment proceedings before a Magistrate 607 in which evidence was recorded.
At the commitment stage, 10 persons were put to face the enquiry, out of which three accused died.
There remained 6 of the original accused named in the F.I.R. and one more, not so named to face trial.
The trial court convicted all the 7 accused under Section 396, IPC and imposed on them a sentence of life imprisonment.
On appeal, the High Court acquitted two of them, namely Ram Narain Singh, the one unnamed in the F.I.R. and one Charittar Ahir, one of the so named and maintained the convictions of other accused.
This appeal by special leave was by the other accused challenging the judgment of the High Court, Allowing the appeal of the accused, this Court, HELD : 1. 01.
The prosecution had four sets of witnesses which could establish identity of the dacoity.
Three sets became redundant and only on the basis of one set was identity of the appellants established.
The first set consisted of three injured persons who were not examined at the trial by the prosecution.
This set did not help the prosecution at all.
The second set consisted of the evidence of P.W. 3, P.W.4 and P.W.9.
The names of P.Ws.4 and 9 were not mentioned in the F.I.R. and their evidence was left out of consideration by the Courts below.
Statement of P.W. 3 was left aside by the High Court.
In the third set was the evidence of P.W.I P.W.5 and P.W.8, who did not identify any of the dacoits.
None of these witnesses was declared hos tile.
Thus their evidence rather goes adverse to the prose cution.
The fourth set consisted of evidence of P.W.2 and P.W.11 whose evidence has been relied upon by the High Court to identify the 5 appellants and on the basis of the very same evidence two co accused, were acquitted because P.W.2 named one and excluded the other and P.w.11 named the other one and excluded the former giving rise to a doubt about the complicity of those two.
[611 612D] 1.02.
Seeing the formidable force of the dacoits and their number, the two P.Ws.2 and 11 would have been so non pulsed that they would not have dared to betray their presence by switching on and off their torches especially when they were unarmed and were no match to the might of the dacoits.
These two witnesses do not claim that they could identify the 608 dacoits by means other than their torches.
This part of the story of the prosecution obviously does not inspire confi dence.
It is also worthy of notice that P.W.11 was injured on the head before he ran for safety.
That was enough to shake and frighten him.
But before the receipt of such injury he claims to have switched on his torch first and to have seen in the first glimpse the appellants and others.
But his flash of the torch was met instantaneously with numerous torch flashes by the dacoits and its was like day light as said by P.W.1.
[613 F H] 1.03.
It is difficult in the situation to believe P.W.11 that he could in a split second have such a perception so as to identify all the five appellants and some others.
It is obvious and natural that behind a lit torch darkness prevails hiding the identity of the torch bearer and persons situated close.
So identity of the da coits was not possible by P.W.11.
[613 H614 A] 1.04.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, there is a grave doubt about the participation of the appel lants in the crime because of the failure of the prosecution to lead convincing evidence about the identity of the appel lants as dacoits.
There is even no corroboration worth the name in the form of recovery of fire arms and other weapons, or of the looted articles from the appellants, so as to lend some assurance to the participation of the appellants in the crime.
It may well be that the motive asserted by the prose cution relating to the dispute about the pond may have given cause to P.W.11 to assume that the appellants were responsi ble for the dacoity committed in his house and for P.W.2, to entertain that belief in a sweep.
[614 C E]
