This appeal challenged the validity of the Jammu and Kashmir Big Landed Estate Abolition Act, XVII Of 2007 which was enacted by Yuvaraj Karan Singh on October 17, 1950, in exercise of the powers vested in him by section 5 of the Jammu and Kashmir Constitution Act 14 of 1996 (1930) and the final proclamation issued by Maharaja Hari Singh on June 20, 1949, by which he entrusted all his powers and function to the Yuvaraj.
The object of the Act was to improve agricultural production by abolishing big landed estates and transferring land to the actual tillers of the soil.
The suit out of which the present appeal arises was brought by the appellant in a representative capacity for a declaration that the Act was void, inoperative and ultra vires and that he was entitled to retain peaceful possession of his lands.
Both the trial Court as also the High Court in appeal found against him and dismissed the suit.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
The validity of the Act was challenged mainly on the ground that Yuvaraj Karan Singh had no authority to promulgate the Act.
It was contended that (i) when Maharaja Hari Singh conveyed his powers to the Yuvaraj by his proclamation of June 20, 1949, he was himself a constitutional monarch and could convey no higher powers, (2) the said proclamation could not confer on the Yuvaraj the powers specified therein, (3) the powers of the Yuvaraj were substantially limited by his own proclamation issued on November 25, 1949, by which he sought to make applicable to his State the Constitution of India, that was soon to be adopted by its Constituent Assembly, in so far as it was applicable, (4) as a result of the application of certain specified Articles, including article 370 of the Constitution of India to the State of Jammu Kashmir, the Yuvaraj became a constitutional monarch without any legislative authority or powers and (5) the decision of the Constituent Assembly of the State not to pay compensation was invalid since the Assembly itself was not properly constituted.
Held, that Yuvaraj Karan Singh, when lie promulgated the Act, had the power to do so and its validity was beyond question.
271 It was indisputable that prior to the passing of the Independence Act, 1947, Maharaja Hari Singh like his predecessors, was an absolute monarch so far as the internal administration of his State was concerned.
Section 3 Of the Regulation 1 of 1991 (1934) issued by the Maharaja not only preserved all his preexisting powers but also provided that his inherent right to make any regulation, proclamation or ordinance would remain unaffected.
The Constitution Act 14 of 1996 (1939) promulgated by him did not alter the position.
Sections 4 and 5 of that Act preserved all the powers that he had under section 3 of the Regulation 1 of 1991 and section 72 preserved his inherent powers so that he remained the same absolute monarch as he was before.
With the lapse of British paramountcy on the passing of the Independence Act, 1947, the Maharaja continued to be the same absolute monarch, subject to the agreements saved by the proviso to section 7 Of the Act, and in the eyes of international law could conceivably claim the status of an independent sovereign.
It was unreasonable to suggest that the provisions of the Instrument of Accession signed by the Maharaja on October 25, 1947, affected his sovereignty, in view of cl. 6 thereof, which expressly recognised its continuance in and over his State.
There was no substance in the argument that as a result of his proclamation issued on March 5, 1948, which replaced the emergency administration by a popular interim Government headed by Sheik Mohammad Abdullah and constituted a Council of Ministers who were to function as a cabinet, the Maharaja became a constitutional monarch.
The cabinet had still to function under the Constitution Act 14 of 1996 (1939) under the overriding powers of the Maharaja.
When the Maharaja on June 20, 1949, therefore, issued the proclamation authorising the Yuvaraj to exercise all his powers, although for a temporary period, it placed the Yuvaraj in the same position as his father till the proclamation was revoked.
The Maharaja was himself an absolute monarch and there could be no question as to his power of delegation.
In Re. ; , , referred to.
The proclamation issued by the Yuvaraj on November 25, 1949, did not vary the constitutional position as it stood after the execution of the Instrument of Accession by the Maharaja nor could it in any way affect the authority conferred on the Yuvaraj by his father.
The contention that the application of certain specified Articles of the Indian Constitution to the State by the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order (C. O. 10) issued by the President on January 26, 1950, affected the sovereign powers of the Yuvaraj was not correct.
Neither the scheme of article 370 nor the explanation to cl.
(1) of that Article Contemplated that the Maharaja was to be a constitutional ruler.
The temporary provisions of that Article were 272 based on the assumption that the ultimate relationship between India and the State should be finally determined by the Constituent Assembly of the State itself.
So, that Article could not, either expressly or by implication, be intended to limit the plenary legislative powers of the Maharaja.
Till the Constituent Assembly of the State, therefore, made its decision, the Instrument of Accession must hold the field.
The initial formal application of article 385, which was sub sequently deleted from the list of Articles applied to the State, could not justify the conclusion that it had adversely affected the legislative powers of the Yuvaraj.
There was no substance in the contention that the decision of the Constituent Assembly not to pay compensation was invalid as the Assembly itself was not properly called or constituted.
There could be doubt that the Yuvaraj was perfectly competent to issue the proclamation dated April 20, 1951 in variation of the Maharaja 's, under which the Assembly was ultimately constituted, and so the Assembly was properly convened.
