Petitioner claiming that he and other similarly placed Compositors working in the Government of India presses all over India were entitled to the status and salary of Compos itors, Grade I in the "highly skilled" category with effect from January 1, 1966 on the ground that the decision of the Himachal Pradesh High Court in Thakurs case was applicable in principle to all the Compositors, filed the present petition under Article 32 of the Constitution.
The High Court in Thakur 's case held that the categori sation as "highly skilled" and "skilled" on the basis of seniority alone was unreasonable and discriminatory.
As no special leave petition against the judgment of the High Court was brought to this Court the judgment became final.
Over ruling Thakur 's case and dismissing the petitions this Court, HELD: I.Academic pursuit and experience are two primary sources of learning.
A Compositor 's job in a printing press is a skilled job requiring special technique.
In such a job it would be reasonable to measure the standards of skill by length of experience.
The High Court fell into error in quashing the classification based on experience arising out of length of service.
[157 B] 2.
"Highly skilled" category was created to handle the nature work which involved higher skill than the original hand composition.
The Compositors with longer service and who were found fit 153 for promotion were appointed to Grade I and were categorised as "highly skilled".
Experience itself is merit and can be a valid basis for classification.
[157 C D] 3.
Keeping in view the large number of Compositors all over the country and to remove stagnation the ratio between the two cadres should be 33 1/3: 66 2/3 %.
[158 D] 4.
The respondents are directed to increase the strength of the cadre of Compositor Grade I 'highly skilled ' to 33 1/3 percent with effect from April 1, 1992.
[158 D] Thakur 's Case (Writ petition C.W. No. 61/69) dated 21.5.1971; overruled.
State of U.P.v.
J.P. Chaurasia; , ; re ferred to.
