The respondents assessees were engaged in the manufacture of mild steel rods, bars or rounds.
They claimed that as the articles manufactured by them fell under item 1 of the list set out in the Fifth Schedule, they were entitled to a higher rate of development rebate specified in section 33(1) (b) (B) (i) (a) and to relief under section 80 1 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the claim of the assessees, whereas the Appellate As sistant Commissioner, the Tribunal and High Court accepted their claim.
Hence the Revenue filed appeals before this Court.
The contentions of the appellant Revenue were that iron and steel ceased to be a metal when it came out of the furnace in the primary steel mills in the form of ingots.
In the next stage the ingots became semi finished products in the shape of billets, blooms and slabs.
It was said to be the stage where the raw materi als were converted into.
In different form or shape; that the expression "iron and steel (metal)" meant the iron and steel as it emerged in the form of billets, blooms and slabs from the steel mill and that all subse quent products whether in the form of rails, rods (including wire rods), bars, angles, channels, tees, sees, pipes, tubes, sheets, strips, plates and coils would constitute articles made of iron and steel, and that rolling mills making bars and rods were not covered by item 1 of the Fifth Schedule.
188 On the other hand, the respondents asses sees contended that in the steel industry the manufacture of ingots, billets, blooms, etc.
represented only an intermediate stage at which the iron and steel metal became semi finished steel.
When the semi finished steel was converted into plates, bars or rods, they became finished steel.
The bars, rods and rounds, which were continued to be iron and steel in a finished form, were used to manu facture the products of iron and steel by various processes, such as, rolling, cutting, shearing, forging, hammering, etc.
and that the products of iron and steel were different from that of iron and steel (metal).
Dismissing the appeals filed by the Revenue, this court, HELD: 1.
In interpreting the provisions in S.33(1)(b)(B)(i)(a), S.80 I of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Court would do well to keep in mind the background in which concessions to certain basic industries were introduced in the Income Tax Act.
The historical background reflects the intention of the legislature to grant progressively certain exemptions, re liefs and concessions for certain types of industries, which were considered important for national development.
The industry in iron and steel and other metals figured in all the lists.
[199 C, 200 B] 2.
The incentive concession or relief granted under the provisions has to be con strued in a broad and comprehensive manner so as to cover all manufacturing activities legitimately pertaining to the specified core industry with no limitation save what may be called for by the wording of a particular entry.
So far as items 1 and 2 are concerned, the wording points to a distinction between the metal which is used as the base and other articles manufactured therefrom.
Pig iron and iron scrap are fed into furnaces to produce ingots, billets and blooms.
But both are iron and steel in different forms, the latter being referred to as "semi finished steel".
Like wise, the bars, rods, rounds, wire rods and the like constitute the second stage in which one gets only "finished" forms of iron and steel.
Having regard to the nature and weight of the metal, it has to be "finished" to assume these forms before manufacturers of iron and steel articles can take over and proceed to manufacture articles from them by drawing wires or converting them into rails or shaping them into tees, zees, pipes, tubes and the like.
[200 C E] 3.
Whether the article produced is the raw material 01, an article made of iron and steel has to be decided on the basis of the 189 nature of the article and not the kind of mill which turns it out.
It is significant that these items do not draw distinction between basic steel mills, integrated steel mills and the various other types of mills that are used in the industry.
[200 G] 4.
The departmental instructions that machinery and plant in "rolling mills" will not be eligible for the higher development rebate would not seem to be justified if it intends to draw a distinction between the same machinery and plant when used in rolling mills and when used in other mills in the industry.
If machinery and plant installed in steel mills where the process includes not merely the production of ingots, billets and the like but also the production of bars and rods are eligible for the higher development rebate, it is difficult to see why the same, plant and machinery, when installed in rolling mills which proceed, from the stage of ingots or billets, to manufacture bars and rods should not be eligible for the higher rate of devel opment rebate.
[200 G 201 B] 5.
In considering the issue, the court should not be carried away be classifications of stages of manufacture that may be relevant for other purposes.
What the court should examine is not the nature of the mill which yields the article but the nature of the article or thing that is manufactured and ask the question whether such articles or things can be considered as raw material for manufac ture of other articles made of the metal or is it itself an article made of the metal.
[201 B C] 6.
The goods in the present case fail in the former category.
The mild steel rods, bars or rounds which are manufactured by the asses sees are only finished forms of the metal and not articles made of iron and steel.
They only constitute raw material for putting up arti cles of iron and steel such as grills or windows by applying to them processes, such as cutting or turning.
The rod or the wire rods are likewise not products of iron and steel but only certain finished or refined forms of the metal itself.
[201 C D] 7.
Forging and castings are not covered by item 1 being articles made of iron and steel but that since the legislature definite ly intended to give relief even in respect of such articles, item 11 and also item 21 were introduced.
Even if MS steel rods, bars and rounds cannot be taken as iron and steel (metal), they would fail under the category of "forgings and castings" referred to in item 11.
[201 G H] 190 8.
The conclusion drawn by the High Court that the assessee was entitled to the higher development rebate, though, it produced arti cles only from iron scrap, does not call for any interference.
[202 C, D] C.I. T. vs Mittal Steel Re tolling and Allied Industries (P) Ltd., ; CI.
West India Steel Co. Ltd., (Kerala); Addl.
Commissioner of Income Tax vs Trichy Steel Rolling Mills Ltd., ; C.I.T.v.
Krishna Copper Steel Roll ing Mills, & Har yana); CI.T.v.
Ludhiana Steel Rolling Mills, & Haryana) and Singh Engineering Works Pvt. Ltd. vs CI.T., , approved.
Indian Steel and Wire Products Lid vs Commissioner of Income tax, and Commissioner of Income Tax vs Kay Charan Pvt. Ltd., ; over ruled.
State of Madhya Bharat vs Hira Lal, (1966) 17 STC 313 (S.C.) Devi Dass Gopal Krishnan vs State of Punjab, (1967) 20 STC 430 (SC); Hindustan A1uminium Corporation Ltd. vs State of (U.P., (1981) 48 STC 411 (S.C.) State of Tamil Nadu vs Pyarelal Malhotra, (1976) 37 STC 319 (SC); C.I.T.v.
Rashtriya Metal Industries Co. Ltd., ; Indian A1uminium Co. Ltd vs
C.I.T, Cal.
and Cal; Jeewanlal vs CI.T., ; C.I.T vs Fitwell Caps P. Ltd., ; Hindustan Wire Products vs CI.T 1 ; Indian Steel and Wire Products Lid vs C.I.T. ; C.I.T.v.
Tensile Steel Lid, and CI.
Ludhiana Steel Rolling Mills, & H) referred to.
Speci 'fication and Glossary By Expert Products Sectional Committee of Bureau of India Standards, New Encyclopedia Brittanica Macropaedia, 15th Edn. Vol.21; Websters, Third New International Dictionary; Encyclopaedia of Chemical Technology By Kirk Othmer, 3rd.
Vol.21;// Book on Small Scale Steel Making By R.D.Walker, The Budget Speech of the Finance Minister, (1968) 48 ITR [Statutes] 34; (1965) 55 ITR [Statutes] 57 and 122 referred to.
