The appellant company was carrying on business of manu facture and sale of motor vehicles, spare parts of motor vehicles and excavators.
Their manufacturing units were located outside the municipal limits of the respondent corporation.
Pursuant to the permission granted by the Respondent Corporation under Rule 10(2) of 446 the Maharashtra Municipalities (Octroi) Rules, 1968 the appellant company was maintaining a bonded warehouse within the municipal limits of the Respondent Corporation.
The motor vehicles parts and excavators parts brought from the Company 's own factories as well parts imported from abroad were stored in this warehouse.
These products were brought in bulk and thereafter taken or sent out from the Municipal limits in smaller packings depending on the requirements of the customers in various parts of the country.
The appellants were also granted current account facilities without the requirement of immediate payment of octroi at the Octroi Naka.
Accordingly, the appellants were carrying out their activities of imports and exports under the current account procedure with facility of unpacking the bulk, repacking and exporting.
Under the Octroi Rules the octroi becomes refundable when the goods in respect of which octroi was paid are exported out of octroi limits within 6 months of their im port.
During the period 1st January, 1983 to 31st March, 1984 the appellant Company made 1182 claims for refund of octroi which were rejected by the Corporation on the grounds: (1) the Company had "sold" the spare parts within the octroi limits of the Corporation in contravention of Rule 25(3) (d) of the Maharashtra Municipalities (Octroi) Rules, 1968; (2) the procedure prescribed for export and the claim of refund had not been strictly followed.
The appellants filed a writ petition under Article 226 in the High Court of Bombay contending that the action of the Municipal Corporation in refusing refund was unconstitu tional and illegal.
The Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petition.
The Company filed an appeal in this Court against the decision of the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant (i) since the sales were not for consumption or use within the octroi limits and that the parts were sold to parties outside the octroi limits and also for consump tion or use outside such limits the rejection of the claims by the Respondent Corporation on the ground that the sales were within the municipal limits in contravention of rule 25(3) (d) of the Rules is illegal; (ii) Under Rule 62 of Chapter VIII of the Schedule to Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, prior intimation of the intention to 'break the bulk ' is enough and there is no necessity for the company to get the sanction 447 of Superintendent of Octroi or break the bulk in the presence of an officer deputed for the purpose as required under sub rule (2) of Rule 24 of the Maharashtra Municipali ties (Octroi) Rules, 1968; Rule 24(2) of the Octroi Rules is inconsistent with Rule 62 and to the extent of inconsistency it shall be deemed to be not applicable.
On behalf of the respondent Corporation it was contended (i) that the meaning of words "sales therein" in the defini tion of octroi in the Acts and in Entry 52 of List II of VII Schedule to the Constitution could not be limited to sales of the goods for purposes of consumption or use within the municipal limits; (ii) there was a change in the ownership of the goods since a sale in law had taken inside the octroi limits though the purchaser was residing and carrying on business outside the octroi limits and under the sale the goods were intended to be and in fact exported for the purpose of consumption and use outside the octroi limits; (iii) that while Rule 62 (c) deals with prior intimation Rule 24(2) deals with the sanction and breaking of the bulk in the presence of an officer deputed for that purpose and both the rules can stay together and operate and there is no inconsistency; (iv) since the appellants have recovered the amounts paid by them by way of octroi duty from their deal ers or customers they are not entitled to refund; ordering of refund would amount to allowing the appellants to unjust ly enrich themselves at the cost of the public to whom the burden had already been passed.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In the case of impost of octroi the taxable event is the entry of goods which are meant to reach an ultimate user or consumer in the area.
Mere physical entry into the octroi limits would not attract levy of octroi.
When the goods are brought in not for consumption within the area but for temporary detention and eventual export, octroi is not leviable.
The octroiable event in such a case shall be deemed not to have happened.
This is particularly so because in the case of goods not consumed or used within the octroi area but exported there is a constitutional bar for the levy of octroi.
In view of the constitutional bar, octroi is not leviable if the goods are not brought into the octroi area for purposes of consumption or use in the area but for export and in fact exported by the importer himself or the sale by him occasions the export.
[458 B C, 472 H, 473 A, 475 E] 1.1 Having regard to the nature and incidence of octroi unless the octroiable goods are consumed or used or are meant to reach an 448 ultimate user or consumer in the octroi area no octroi is leviable.
The words 'sale therein ' in the words 'consump tion, use or sale therein ' in the definition octroi means sale of octroiable goods to a person for the purpose of consumption or use by such person in the octroi area.
If sale was intended for consumption or use in the octroi area whether the purchaser actually consumed inside or outside octroi area is irrelevant.
Therefore octroi rules cannot be read as enabling the municipality to levy and collect octroi even in cases where the goods have not been imported for consumption or use.
[475 C, 474 B] Burmah Shell Co. vs Belgaum Municipal, ll963I Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 216; Hira Lal Thakur Lal Dalai vs Brash Broach Munic ipality, ; Municipal Council of Jodhpur vs Parekh Automobiles Ltd. & Ors., ; and H.M.M. Ltd. vs Administrator, ; , relied on.
Khandelwal Traders Akola vs The Akola Municipal Council, AIR 1985 Born.
218, approved.
1.2 Since the goods were sold by the Company to outside purchasers and the goods under the transactions of sale were intended to be exported and were in fact exported, for consumption or use outside the municipal limits no octroi duty was leviable and the octroi duty paid on entry into the municipal limits was, therefore, liable to be refunded.
Accordingly the rejection of the refund claims on the ground that Rule 25(3) (d) had not been strictly complied with is illegal and could not be sustained.
[457 G H] 2.
Once octroi is not leviable the deposit made by the importer pending export is in the nature of a trust and refundable in the event of the export of the goods.
[473 G H] 2.1 Under the octroi scheme, when the goods in respect of which octroi is paid are exported, the octroi becomes refundable.
Right to refund arises because the goods are not consumed inside the area but exported and the tax becomes not leviable.
[458 C] 2.2 If there is no consumption or use, octroi is not attracted and if any levy has been made and the amount collected, the same becomes legally refundable even when the goods are exported in parts and in smaller packages.
[472 H] 3.
The rules merely regulate the system on which refund shall 449 be allowed.
In a given set of facts, whether the rules have been complied with will have to be tested having regard to the nature of the particular transaction and whether the object of the procedure provided is otherwise fully satis fied.
[458 D, 473 H, 474 A] 3.1 The object of requiring intimation or sanction and presence of an officer when breaking the bulk in the scheme of octroi levy and refund is to ensure that dutiable goods do not escape the assessment and refunds are made only in respect of goods exported.
In other words the whole require ment relates to the identification of the goods.
In that sense if the same is otherwise complied with the right to refund cannot be denied.
[474 A B] 3.2 Rules 24 to 30 of the Maharashtra Municipalities (Octroi) Rules, 1968 and the forms in the system of levy of Octroi are intended to regulate the procedure for collection identification of dutiable goods and correlation of goods exported with the goods imported for the purpose of refunds of octroi collected.
[475 D] The rules do not contain any specific provision that an applicant for refund who has failed to follow the procedure would be disentitled to claim the refund.
[473 G] 3.3 Compliance with the procedure prescribed in the Rules for filing claims of refunds are not conditions prece dent for the right or eligibility for refund or the liabili ty to refund but are provisions regarding proof of export of the goods imported and are not meant to be exhaustive ei ther.
They are to be interpreted and understood in that sense.
[475 E F] Municipal Committee Khurari vs Dhannalal Nethi & Ors., ; ; Kirpal Singh Duggal vs Municipal Board, Ghaziabad, ; , applied.
3.4 Since the rejection of the claims for refund was merely on the ground that either form 4 and original in voices were not produced or columns 5 and 6 of Form 11 or the corresponding columns in Form 12 had not been filled with reference to an original invoice or Form 4 or deposit receipt and the refusal to issue export pass certificates on those very grounds are untenable the orders of rejection are invalid.
1475 G H] 4.
The object of the Rules fixing a period of limitation for 450 export however is different.
The export cannot be put in perpetual doubt and the goods may be considered to have come to a repose if they were not exported within a particular period provided in the rules.
[475 F] 4.1 However an equitable principle could be followed in this regard and it may be presumed that the goods which came in first have gone out first.
If the goods are mixed up and unidentifiable due to breaking bulk and repacking in smaller and assorted packages before export the principle that the first export was of the goods first imported, subject to any evidence available to the contrary, may be applied and the six months period prescribed under Rule 28(2) (b) for export may be determined accordingly.
[475 A B, H, 476 A] Clayton 's case; , , applied.
There is no inconsistency between Rule 62 and Rule 24(2).
The intimation contemplated in Rule 62 imply that the breaking the bulk shall be done with the knowledge of the octroi authorities.
But it cannot be said that the rules further provide that after intimation the breaking of the bulk shall be done in the presence of the officers and after sanction that would in any case be inconsistent.
Therefore, both the rules can stand together.
[471 F G] 6.
There in no evidence that any of the articles sold by the Company is subject to any price control by the Gov ernment or that the Company had charged any octroi separate ly in the bills.
Documentary evidence do not also show that any octroi was separately charged and collected by the Company.
Therefore the question of unjust enrichment does not arise.
[476 F H]
