The parties to the appeal were married on January 24, 1988 at Noida near Delhi.
They hardly lived as husband and wife at Pune for about seven months when on August 16, 1988 the husband Respondent filed a petition under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956 for dissolution of the marriage on the ground of cruelty.
He alleged that the wife had a habit of smoking and drinking and even once came drunk to the house and abused everybody.
The wife vehemently denied the allegations and claimed that she was a homely, vegetarian, non smoking, teetotaler and faithful house wife.
During the pendency of the aforesaid divorce proceeding before the Family Court,Pune, the wife filed a petition, on May 1, 1989, before this Court seeking transfer of the case from the Family Court, Pune to Delhi.
This Court granted ad interim stay of the proceedings which remained operative till September 11, 1989 when the Transfer Petition was dismissed 82 and the stay become vacated.
Thereafter, the husband appeared before the Family Court on September 15, 1989 whereas the wife remained absent.
Notice were sent by registered post to the wife on her address at Noida and also at her Delhi address given in the proceedings before this Court.
The notices having come back with the remarks "not found", the Family Court ordered sub stituted service, and a notice was published in a Delhi daily newspaper asking the wife to appear before the Family Court on November 16, 1989.
The wife not having appeared on the said date the Family Court ordered ex parte proceedings.
The issues were framed on November 21, 1989, evidence of the husband was recorded on November 25,1989 and the judgment was pronounced on November 30, 1989, granting the husband a divorce decree.
The wife filed an application dated December 18, 1989 for setting aside the ex parte divorce decree.
She contended that she was forced to leave the matrimonial home at Pune and was residing with her parents at Noida, and that in October/November, 1989 she had gone to reside with her brother at Delhi, that she applied to the Army Authorities claiming maintenance out of her husband 's salary, and that the Army Authorities sent a letter dated December 14, 1989 to her father informing that the application for maintenance could not be entertained as the husband had already obtained a divorce decree from the Court.
She further contended that for the first time on or about December 14, 1989 she came to know from her father that her husband had been granted an ex parte divorce decree by the Family Court.
The Family Court dismissed the application for setting aside ex parte divorce decree, and the High Court upheld the reasoning and conclusions reached by the Family Court and dismissed the appeals filed by the wife.
In the appeal to this Court by the wife it was contended that: (1) The Family Court and the High Court grossly erred in dismissing the application filed by the appellant for setting aside the ex parte proceedings; (2) the divorce petition should have been dismissed as not competent in terms of Section 14 of the Hindu Marriage Act as the Statutory period of one year had not lapsed since the date of marriage, (3) even on merits the divorce decree is based on no evidence, the allegations in the divorce petition 83 being wholly vague, and (4) the High Court acted illegally in substituting the decree of divorce to that of a decree for judicial separation.
Allowing the Appeal, this court, HELD: 1.
The appellant filed written statement before the Family Court,Pune denying the allegations made against her by the respondent.
She also raised preliminary objections regarding the maintainability of the divorce petition.
Though her transfer petitions before this Court were dismissed in September, 1989 and on April 12, 1990 and that she did not approach the High Court for transfer of her case, the fact remains that she has been seriously contesting the divorce proceedings and it would not be fair to assume that she deliberately chose to abstain from the Family Court, and was intentionally avoiding the summons.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, the appellant was justified in her assumption that the proceedings before the Family Court would be resumed after fresh notice to the parties.
The applicability of the Rules of natural justice depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Fair play and the interest of justice in this case required the issuance of a fresh notice to the parties after the stay order was vacated by this Court.
The Family Court, sent two Registered notice to the appellant at her Noida address and also at the address given by her in the proceedings before this Court.
Unfortunately, both the notices came back with the endorsements that the appellant could not be found on the given addresses.
On the record there is no material to reach a conclusion that the appellant refused to receive the notices, or to show whether the postal authorities made any efforts to deliver the registered letters to any of the appellants ' relations at the given addresses.
The Courts below are therefore wholly unjustified in holding that the appellant refused to receive the notices and further that the said notices could have been received by any of her relations on the given addresses.
After the notices sent by registered post were received back, the Family Court did not make any attempt to serve the appellant through the process of the Court.
The appellant was not stranger to the respondent.
She was his wife.
It could not have been difficult for him to find out the address where she was staying .
Under the circumstances resort to the 84 substitute service by way of publication in the newspaper was not justified.
There was, therefore,sufficient cause for the non appearance of the appellant in the matrimonial petition before the Family Court.
With a view to do complete justice between the parties it is directed that this case be transferred from the file of the Principal Judge, Family Court, Pune to the Principal Judge, Family Court, Bombay, and the parties are directed to appear before the Principal Judge, Family Court Bombay.
