A trust namely, "Ganga Bai Charities" was created on 13.9.1958, to construct and provide a building for the benefit of the public to be used for religious, charitable cultural and social purposes.
The founder of the trust contributed Rs. 34,000 to the trust fund.
With that fund a plot of land was purchased and the construction of a building was begun.
The fund was augmented by her son from his own contribution as well as from outside donations.
The building was completed at the cost of about Rs. six lakhs and it was let out as a marriage mandapam to be used by the members of the public.
The income derived from letting out the Kalyana Mandapam came to Rs.1,06,392.00 in the year ending March 31, 1963.
For the subsequent years also the income was substantial.
The trust was also running a printing press and seizable income was being from the press.
Income tax proceedings were initiated against the trust.
The appellant trust contended that the income derived from the property was being held wholly for religious and charitable purposes and as such was exempt under Section 11 of the Income Tax Act.
The Income tax Officer holding that the income earned by the trust was taxable, rejected the contention of the trust.
On appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner reversed the Income tax Officer 's order, holding that the trust was a charitable trust and its income was entitled to exemption under Section 11 of Act.
627 On further appeal by the department, the Tribunal upheld that decision of the Commissioner but remitted the assessment to the Income tax Officer to find out as to what extent in each year the trust income or accumulation were expended for charitable purposes.
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal referred the following question to the High Court under Section 256(1) of the Act: "Whether it had been rightly held that the income of the trust would be entitled to exemption under Section 11 of the Income Tax Act, 1961?" The High Court answered the question in the negative and in favour of the department, against which these appeals were filed by the assessee trust by special leave before this Court.
On the question, whether the Gengabai Charities, a trust was entitled to exemption under Section 11(1)(a) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, this Court dismissing the appeals of the assessee trust, HELD : 1.01.
The crux of the statutory exemption under Section 1(1)(a) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is not the income earned from property held under the trust but the actual application of the said income for religious and charitable purposes.
It is, therefore, necessary to indicate in the trust deed the broad objectives for which the income derived from the property is to be utilised.
There is no mention in the trust deed as to how the income derived from the trust property is to utilised.
The public uses the building on payment of rent to the trustees.
What is to be done with the money so collected has not been provided in the trust deed.
There is no mandate in the trust deed that the income derived from the trust property is to be spent on religious or charitable purposes.
[632 C D] 1.02.
On a careful reading of the trust deed it is not possible to cull out in clear terms a specific charitable/religious object to conclude that the trust was set up wholly for or religious purposes.
The "religious, charitable, cultural and social" purposes referred to in the deed are not avowed as the objectives of the trust itself.
What the founder of the trust intended to convey was that the building to be constructed out of the funds provided by her and supplemented from other sources, must be heed for the benefit of the public for being used by them for religious, charitable, cultural or social purposes.
[631 F G] 628 1.03.
The intention of the founders was to provide a building for the benefit for the benefit of the public to be used by them for religious, charitable and/or cultural and social purposes.
It is nowhere stated in the trust deed that the trust itself has been created for the purpose of carrying out any of such objectives.
The holding and conducting of religious discourses and the running of schools for the development of Sanskrit have also been mentioned from the point of view of the users of the trust property.
These are some of the purposes for which the public can be permitted to use the property.
[631H 632B] 1.04.
On a proper construction of the trust deed it does not meet the requirements of Section 11(1)(a) of the Act.
[632E]
