During the tenure of respondent 1 as Depot Manager of the Bihar State Cooperative marketing Union Ltd., a shortage of coal was detected.
The appellant Cooperative Union made a claim for the loss, and a reference was made to the Assistant Registrar, cooperative societies under section 48 of the Bihar and Orissa Cooperative Societies Act 1935.
section 48(1)(c) deals with disputes between the Society.
and a past or present officer or agent of the Society.
Section 40 provides for investigation by the Registrar where upon an audit or enquiry such officer has been found guilty of misappropriation or similar acts.
The Assistant Registrar in an enquiry under Section 48 absolved respondent 1.
This was reversed by the Joint Registrar and an award made accordingly.
The Patna High Court in a writ application under Article 226 by respondent 1 held that since the matter was covered by Section 40, Section 48 could not apply and set aside the award.
The High Court relied on the maxim generalia specialibus non derogant.
The claim under section 40 was rejected on the ground of limitation under second proviso to Section 40 which prescribe a period of six years.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.
Validity of plural remedies, if available under the law, cannot be doubted.
Even if the two remedies are inconsistent, they continue for the person concerned to choose from, until he elects one of them, commencing an action accordingly.
A matter which may attract Section 40 will continue to be governed by Section 48 also if the necessary conditions 893 are fulfilled.
In the present case no steps under Section 40 were ever taken by the appellant.
The provisions of Section 48 are available to the appellant for the recovery of the loss.
[896C D] Prem Jeet Kumar vs Surender Gandotra & Ors., [1991] Supp.
2 SCC 215 and Pentakota Srirakulu vs Co operative Marketing Society Ltd., ; , followed.
The claim of the appellant against respondent 1 is clearly covered by Section 48(1)(c) and therefore was validly referred to the Registrar under Section 48.
[895G] 3.
The six year rule of limitation in Proviso under Section 40(1) is limited for the purpose of Section 40, and cannot govern a reference under Section 48.
Even otherwise, on facts the claim is not barred by limitation.
[897B] Purnea Ministerial Government Officers ' Co operative Society Ltd. vs Abdul Quddus, , distinguished.
Matter remitted to the High Court for decision on the remaining issues.
[897F]
