While pronouncing its Judgment in Reserve Bank of India vs Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd., ; , this Court observed that it would be open to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to take such steps as were open to it in law to regulate 407 the savings schemes run by Residuary Non Banking Companies (RNBCs) to prevent exploitation of ignorant investors while at the same time taking care to protect the thousands of employees working in such companies.
This Court also expressed grave concern at the mushroom growth of financial investment companies offering staggering rates of interests to depositors leading to suspicion whether these companies were speculative ventures floated to attract unwary and credulous investors and capture their hard earned savings.
Pursuant to the said observations of this Court and keeping in mind the public interest, the RBI in exercise of its powers under sections 45J and 45K of the , and of all powers enabling it in that behalf, issued certain directions by way of Notification No. DFC 55/DG (O) 87 dated 15.5.1987.
A Writ Petition was filed before the High Court challenging the constitutional validity of the said directions issued by the RBI.
A Single Judge of the High Court passed certain interim orders.
Being aggrieved against the interim orders, the RBI preferred an appeal before the Division Bench.
The Division Bench disposed of the appeal as well as the Writ Petition.
It held that the RBI was empowered to issue directions to the Residuary Non Banking Companies in the interest of depositors; but to the extent such directions were found to be prohibitory or unworkable and as such unreasonable, would be beyond the powers of RBI.
Peerless which became a party respondent, filed an application for clarification of the judgment, as regards payment against discontinued certificates.
The High Court clarified that in such cases the depositors be allowed to take loan against payments made till discontinuance on such terms and conditions as the company may stipulate.
The present appeals were filed by RBI against the orders of the High Court.
A Writ Petition has been filed directly before this Court, challenging the directions as being ultra vires of sections 45J and 45K of the as also violative of the provisions of the constitution.
On behalf of the Writ Petitioners it was contended that since the 1987 directions issued by RBI were in the nature of subordinate legislation, it was clear that RBI overstepped the bounds of the 408 parent statute; that the source of power for issuing the directions as being derived from section 45L was only an after thought; that from the working results it appeared impossible to carry on the traditional business for any longer period without incurring huge losses; that from in the business carried on by Peerless and other similar RNBCs that the working capital is generated out of the subscriptions received from the certificate holders either in lump sum or in instalments and such deposits are paid back with the guaranteed accretions, bonus, interest etc.
in terms of contract at the end of the stipulated term; that the interest of the depositors has not been impaired in any manner whatsoever by the method of accountancy followed by Peerless and all similar companies, namely, appropriation of a part of the subscription to the profit and loss account and meeting the working capital requirements out of the same.
On behalf of the appellant RBI, it was contended that it had the power to issue the said directions, that the said directions were issued in pursuance to this Court 's observations, and in public interest; that the said directions had not imposed any restriction on the right to carry on business but only placed a restriction with respect to one of the modes of raising reserves i.e. through public deposits; that the directions cannot be condemned as being violative of Article 19(1) (g); and that formula laid down by the High Court was self defeating and deprived altogether the benefits of security provisions given to depositors under the 1987 directions.
On behalf of the Peerless Field Officers Association, it was contended that if the directions of 1987 were to be upheld, the undertakings of Peerless would face inevitable closure and almost 14 lac field officers would lose their only source of livelihood.
Allowing the appeals filed by RBI and dismissing the Writ Petition filed by the Finance Companies, this Court, HELD: Per Kasliwal, J 1.1 The Reserve Bank was competent and authorised to issue the impugned directions of 1987, in exercise of powers conferred under Section 45K(3) of the Act.
[431 C] 1.2 A combined reading of Section 45J, 45K and 45L of the unmistakably goes to show that the Reserve Bank if it considers necessary in the public interest so to do, can specify the conditions subject to which any prospectus or advertisement soliciting deposits of money from the public may be 409 issued.
It can also give directions to non banking institutions in respect of any matters relating to or connected with the receipt of deposits, including the rates of interest payable on such deposits, and the periods for which deposits may be received.
This latter power flows from sub section (3) of Section 45K of the Act.
The Bank under this provision can give directions in respect of any matters relating to or connected with the receipt of deposits.
Thus a very wide power is given to the RBI to issue dirctions in respect of any matters relating to or connected with the receipt of deposits.
It cannot be considered as a power restricted or limited to receipt of deposits only.
Such an interpretation would be violating the language of section 45K (3) which furnishes a wide power to the Reserve Bank to give any directions in respect of any matters relating to or connected with the receipt of deposits.
The Reserve Bank under this provision is entitled to give directions with regard to the manner in which the deposits are to be invested and also the manner in which such deposits are to be disclosed in the balance sheet or books of accounts of the company.
The word `any ' qualifying matters relating to or connected with the receipt of deposits in the above provision is of great significance and directions of 1987 are fully covered under Section 45K (3) of the Act, which gives power to the Reserve Bank to issue such directions.
[430 D H; 431 A] 1.3 When an authority takes action which is within its competence, it cannot be said to be invalid merely because it purports to be made under a wrong provision, if it can be shown to be within its power under any other provision.
[431 B] Indian Aluminium Company etc.
vs Kerala State Electricity Board; , , relied on.
2.1 The function of the Court is to see that lawful authority is not abused but not to attain itself the task entrusted to that authority.
It is well settled that a public body invested with statutory powers must take care not to exceed or abuse its power.
It must keep within the limits of the authority committed to it.
It must act in good faith and it must act reasonably.
Courts are not to interfere with economic policy which is the function of experts.
It is not the function of the Courts to sit in Judgment over matters of economic policy and it must necessarily be left to the expert bodies.
The function of the Court is not to advice in matters relating to financial and economic policies for which bodies like Reserve Bank are fully competent.
It would be hazardous and risky for the Courts to tread an 410 unknown path and should leave such task to the expert bodies.
[442 C D] 2.2 Reserve Bank of India which is banker 's bank is a creature of Statue.
It has large contingent of expert advice relating to matters affecting the economy of the entire country and nobody can doubt the bonafides of the Reserve Bank in issuing the impugned directions of 1987.
The Reserve Bank plays an important role in the economy and financial affairs of India and one of its important functions is to regulate the banking system in the country.
It is the duty of the Reserve Bank to safeguard the economy and financial stability of the country.
In fact the directions of 1987 were issued by RBI after mature consideration with the help and advice of experts.
[441 B D, 443 D E] Delhi Cloth and General Mills etc.
vs Union of India etc.
; , ; M/s Prag Ice & Oil Mills and Anr.
vs Union of India; , ; Shri Sitaram Sugar Company Limited and Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; R.K. Garg vs Union of India & Ors. etc.; , , relied on.
The Reserve Bank was right in taking the stand that if the companies want to do their business, they should invest their own working capital and find such resources elsewhere with which the Reserve Bank has no concern.
[445 C] 4.
It is not the concern of this Court to find out as to whether actuaial method of accounting or any other method would be feasible or possible for the companies to adopt while carrying out the conditions contained in paragraphs 6 and 12 of the directions of 1987.
The companies are free to adopt any mode of accounting permissible under the law but it is certain that they will have to follow the entire terms and conditions contained in the directions of 1987 including those contained in paragraphs 6 and 12.
[445 E F] 5.1 It is not possible for the Court to determine as to how much percentage of deposit of first instalment should be allowed towards expenses which may consist of commission to agents, office expenses etc.
It would depend from company to company based on various factors such as paid up capital, percentage of commission paid to the agents, rate of interest paid to the depositors, period of maturity for repayment, office expenses and various other factors necessary to mop up working capital out of the depositors money.
411 One cannot ignore the possibility of persons having no stake of their own starting such business and after collecting huge deposits from the investors belonging to the poor and weaker sections of the society residing in rural areas, and to stop such business after a few years thus devouring the hard earned money of the small investors.
In such kind of business, the agents always take interest in finding new depositors because they get a high rate of commission out of the first instalment, but they do not have same enthusiasm in respect of deposit of subsequent instalments.
In these circumstances if the Reserve Bank has issued the directions of 1987 to safeguard the larger interest of the public and small depositors it cannot be said that the directions are so unreasonable as to be declared constitutionally invalid.
[447 E H, 448 A] 5.2 It cannot be said that the directions of 1987 amount to prohibition of the business in a commercial sense and without reasonable basis.
Nor are the directions violative of Article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution of India.
[442 G H, 443 A B] Mohammad Yasin vs The Town Area Committee, Jalalabad and Anr., ; ; Premier Automobiles Ltd. and Anr vs Union of India, ; ; Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
So far as Peerless is concerned there is no possibility of its closing down such business.
It has already large accumulated funds collected by making profits in the past serveral years.
Thus it has enough working capital in order to meet the expenses.
It cannot be said that after some years Peerless will have to close down its business if the directions contained in paragraphs 6 and 12 are to be followed.
The working capital is not needed every year as it can be rotated after having invested once.
If the entire amount of the subscriptions is deposited or invested in the proportion of 10% in public sector banks, 70% in approved securities and 20% in other investments, such amounts will also start earning interest which can be added and adjusted while depositing or investing the subsequent years ' deposits of the subscribers.
In any case it lies with the new entrepreneurs while entering such field of business to make arrangement of their own resources for working capital and for meeting the expenses and they cannot insist in utilising the money of the depositors for this purpose.
So far as the companies already in this field they must have earned profits in the past years which can be utilised as their working capital.
It is important to note that the direc 412 tions of 1987 have been made applicable from 15th May, 1987 prospectively and not retrospectively.
[447 H; 448 C F] 7.
The directions of 1987 as well as any other directions issued from time to time by the Reserve Bank relating to economic or financial policy are never so sacrosanct that the same cannot be changed.
Even the financial budget for every year depends on the economic and financial policy of the Government existing at the relevant time.
So far as the impugned directions are concerned if it is found in future that the same are not workable or working against the public interest, the Reserve Bank is always free to change its policy and scrap or amend the directions as and when necessary.
If at any time, the Reserve Bank feels that the business of the kind run at present by the Peerless and other companies in terms of the directions of 1987 are not yielding the result as envisaged by the Reserve Bank, it will always be prepared to consider any new proposals which may be conductive both in the interest of the large multitude of the investors as well as the employees of such companies.
[448 G H, 449 A B] Per Ramaswamy, J. (Concurring) : 1.
The directions of 1987 issued by RBI are within the power of the RBI to provide tardy, stable, identifiable and monitorable method of operations by each RNBC and its compliance of the directions.
This will ensure security to the depositors at all times and also make the accounts of the company accurate, accountable and easy to monitor the working system of the company itself and continuance of its workmen.
The directions in paragraphs 6 and 12 are just, fair and reasonable not only to the depositors, but in the long run to the every existence of the company and its continued business itself.
Therefore, they are legal, valid and constitutionally permissible.
[464 G H, 465 A] 2.
Section 45K of the empowers the RBI to collect information from non banking institutions as to deposit and to give directions that every non banking institution shall furnish to the Bank, in such form, at such intervals and within such time, such statements, information or particulars relating to or connected with deposits received by the non banking institution, as may be specified by RBI by general or special order including the rates of interest and other terms and conditions on which they are received.
Under sub section (3) thereof the RBI is entitled to issue 413 in the public interest directions to non banking institutions in respect of any matter relating to or connected with the receipt of deposits including the rates of interest payable on such deposits and the periods for which deposits may be received.
The use of the adjective `any ' matter relating to or connected with the receipt of deposits is wide and comprehensive to empower the RBI to issue directions in connection therewith or relating to the receipt of deposits.
But exercise of the power is hedged with and should be `in the public interest '.
[450 C F] 3.1 The State can regulate the exercise of the fundamental right to save the public from a substantive evil.
The existence of the evil as well as the means adopted to check it are the matters for the legislative judgment.
But the court is entitled to consider whether the degree and mode of the regulation is in excess of the requirement or is imposed in an arbitrary manner.
The Court has to see whether the measure adopted is relevant or appropriate to the power exercised by the authority or whether it over stepped the limits of social legislation.
Smaller inroads may lead to larger inroads and ultimately result in total prohibition by indirect method.
If if directly transgresses or substantially and inevitably affects the fundametal right, it becomes unconstitutional, but not where the impact is only remotely possible or incidental.
The Court must life the veil of the form and appearance to discover the true character and the nature of the legislation, and every endeavour should be made to have the efficacy of fundamental right maintained and the legislature is not invested with unbounded power.
The Court has, therefore, always to guard against the gradual encroachments and strike down a restriction as soon as it reaches that magnitude of total annihilation of the right.
[453 F H, 454 A] 3.2 In the interest of the general public, the law may impose restrictions on the freedom of the citizen to start or carry on his business.
Whether an impugned provision imposing a fetter on the exercise of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 19(1) (g) amounts to a reasonable restriction imposed in the interest of general public, must be adjudged not in the background of any theoretical standard or pre determinate patterns, but in the light of the nature and the incidence of the right, the interest of the general public sought to be secured by imposing restrictions and the reasonableness of the quality and the extent of the fetters imposed by the directions.
The credit worthiness of RNBCs undoubtedly would 414 be sensitive.
It thrives upon the confidence of the public, on the honesty of its management and its reputation of solvency.
The directions intended to promote `freedom ' and facility which are required to be regulated in the interest of all concerned.
[457 E F] Hatisingh Mfg. Co. Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Latafat Ali Khan & Ors.
vs State of U.P., [1971] Supp.
SCR 719, relied on.
There is presumption of constitutionality of every statute and its validity is not to be determined by artificial standards.
The court has to examine with some strictness the substance of the legislation to find what actually and really the legislature has done.
The court would not be over persuaded by the mere presence of the legislation.
In adjudging the reasonableness of the law, the court will necessarily ask the question whether the measure or scheme is just, fair, reasonable and appropriate or unreasonable, unnecessary and arbitrarily interferes with the exercise of the right guaranteed in of the Constitution.
The Court has to maintain a delicate balance between the public interest envisaged in the challenged provision and the individual 's right taking into account the nature of his right said to be infringed, the underlying purpose of the restriction, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied thereby, the disproportion of the restriction imposed, the prevailing condition at the time, the surrounding circumstances, the larger public interest which the law seeks to achieve and all other relevant factors germane for the purpose.
All these factors should enter into the zone of consideration to find the reasonableness of the impugned restriction.
The Court weighs in each case which of the two conflicting public or private interest demands greater protection and if it finds that the restriction imposed is appropriate, fair and reasonable, it would uphold the restriction.
The court would not uphold a restriction which is not germane to achieve the purpose of the statute or is arbitrary or out of its limits.
[454 B C, E G] 5.
The directions are incorporated and became part of the Act itself.
They must be governed by the same principles as the statute itself.
The statutory presumption that the legislature inserted every part thereof for a purpose and the legislative intention should be given affect to, would be applicable to the directions of 1987 as well.
[445 E] 6.1 The RBI issued the directions to regulate the operations 415 of the RNBCs, to safeguard the interest of the depositors.
Payment of interest, bonus, premium or other advantage, in whatever name it may be called is reward for waiting or parting with liquidity.
It is paid because of positive time preference (one rupee today is preferred to one rupee tomorrow) on the part of the depositor.
Therefore, the directions avowed to preserve the right of the depositors to receive back the amount deposited with the contracted rate of interest; it aims to prevent depletion of the deposits collected from the weaker segments of the society and also tends to affect free flow of the business of the RNBCs who would desire to operate in their own way.
[455 F H] 6.2 Mushroom growth of non banking agencies put afloat diverse schemes with alluring offers of staggering high rate of interest and other catchy advantages which would generate suspicion of the bona fides of the offer.
But gullible depositors are lured to make deposits.
It is not uncommon that after collecting fabulous deposits, some unscrupulous people surreptiously close the company and decamp with the collections keeping the depositors at bay.
Therefore, the need to regulate the deposits/subscriptions, in particular in private sector became imperative to prevent exploitation or mismanagement as a social justice strategem.
[457 A B] 6.3 RBI occupies place of `pre eminence ' to ensure monetary discipline and to regulate the economy or the credit system of the country as an expert body.
It also advises the Government in public finance and monetary regulations.
The banks or non banking institutions shall have to regulate their operations in accordance with not only as per the provisions of the Act but also the rules and directions or instuctions issued by the RBI in exercise of the power thereunder.
Chapter 3B of the expressly deals with regulations of deposit and finance received by the RNBCs.
The directions, therefore, are statutory regulations.
[455 B D] Joseph Kuruvilla Vellukunnel vs Reserve Bank of India & Ors., [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 632; State of U.P. vs Babu Ram, ; ; D.V.K. Prasada Rao vs Govt.
of A.P., AIR 1984 A.P. 75, relied on.
The objects of the direction are to preserve the ability of the RNBC to pay back to subscribers/depostitors at any given 416 time; safety of the subscribers ' money and his right to unencumbered repayment are thus of paramount public interest and the directions aimed to protect them.
The directions cannot and would not be adjudged to be ultra vires or arbitrary by reasons of successful financial management of an individual company.
An overall view of the working system of the scheme is relevant and germane.
[460 C D] 8.
The obligation in paragraph 12 of periodical disclosure in the accounts of a company of the deposits together with the interest securd thereon, whether or not payable, but admittedly due as a liability, is to monitor the discipline of the operation of the schemes and any infraction, would be dealt with as per law.
The certificate by a qualified Chartered Accountant is to vouchsafe the correctness and authenticity of accounts and would and should adhere to the statutory compliance.
[460 D E] 9.
The settled accounting practice is that a loan or deposit received from a creditor has to be shown as a liability together with accrued interest whether due or deferred.
The actuarial accounting applies to revenues and costs to which the concept of the `going concern ' can be adopted.
Therefore, in providing the costs of the company it can set apart its costs on the basis that liability is created for interest, bonus etc.
payable in foreseeable future.
Undoubtedly the actuarial principle applied by the LIC or the gratuity schemes are linked with life of the assured or the premature death before retirement of an employee, but RNBC in its contract does not undertake any such risk.
The deposit or loan is a capital receipt but not a revenue receipt and its full value shall be shown in the account books or balance sheet as liability of the company.
It cannot be credited to the profit and loss account.
of Schedule I of the requires that the amount shown in the profit and loss account should be confined to the income and expenditure of the company.
Para 12 of the directions is, thus, in consonance with the .
Paragraph 6 only elongates the contract in the public interest to safeguard the interest of the vulnerable sections of the depositors.
The RBI cannot be expected to constantly monitor the working of the RNBC in its day to day function.
The actuarial basis cannot be adopted by the RNBCs.
and the liability must always be reflected in its balance sheet at its full value.
Compliance of the direction in para 12, dehors any method of accountancy adopted by a company, intended to discipline its operations.
[460 E H, 461 A C] 417 10.
Regulation includes total prohibition in a given case where the mischief to be remedied warrants total prohibition.
The directions of 1987 are neither palpably arbitrary nor unjust nor unfair.
The mechanism evolved in the directions is fool proof, to secure the interest of the depositors, as well as capable of monitoring the business management of every RNBC.
It also protects the interest of the employees/field staff/commission agents etc.
on permanent basis over coming initial convulsion.
It was included, in the best possible manner, to subserve the interest of all without putting any prohibition in the ability of a company to raise the deposit, even the absence of any adequate paid up capital or reserve fund or such pre commitment of the owner, to secure such deposits.
[462 E G] Narendra Kumar vs Union of India, ; , relied on.
Reserve Bank of India etc.
vs Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. & Ors.
; , , referred to.
So long as the power is traceable to the statute, mere omission to recite the provision does not denude the power of the legislature or rule making authority to make the regulations, nor consiered without authority of law.
The asbsence of reiteration of objective satisfaction in the preamble as of one under Section 45L does not denude the powers; the RBI admittedly has the power under Section 45L, to justify the actions.
Though Section 45L was neither expressly stated nor mentioned in the Preamble of the directions of the required recitation or satisfaction of objective facts to issue the directions, from the facts and circumstances it is demonstrated that the RBI, had such satisfaction in its consideration the power under Section 45L, when the directions were issued.
Even otherwise Section 45K (3) itself is sufficient to uphold the directions.
[464 F H] 1.2.
The court has to see whether the scheme, measure or regulation adopted is relevant or appropriate to the power exercised by the authority.
Prejudice to the interest of depositors is a relevant factor.
Mismanagement or inability to pay the accrued liabilities are evils sought to be remedied.
The directions of 1987 designed to preserve the right of the depositors and the ability of RNBC to pay back the contractual liability.
It also intended to prevent mismanagement of the deposits collected from vulnerable social segments who have no knowledge of banking operations or credit system and repose unfounded blind faith on the company with fond hope of its ability to pay back the contracted amount.
Thus the directions maintain 418 the thrift for saving and streamline and strengthen the monetary operations of RNBCs.
[463 E G]
