Twelve persons, including the appellants, were challaned for the murder of Sarpanch of a village.
Relying on the evidence of P.Ws. 1,2 and 7 in toto and that of P.W.3 to some extent, the Sessions Judge convicted all the accused persons for the offences under Section 302 read with Section 149 I.P.C. and awarded sentence of imprisonment for life and other minor terms of imprisonment for other offences.
On appeal, the High Court set aside the conviction and sentence of seven accused persons, namely, A 4, A 5, A 8 to 12 and confirmed the conviction of the remaining five accused persons, A 1, A 6 and A 7 under Section 302 read with Section 149 I.P.C. and sentenced them to imprisonment for life.
These five accused filed an appeal, by special leave, before this Court.
During the pendency of the appeal one of the accused appellants died and as such appeal filed by him was dismissed as having abated.
On behalf of the accused persons it was submitted that even if the statement of P.W. 2 was taken to be correct no offence was made out so far as accused A 3 was concerned, inasmuch as P.W.2 had admitted in the cross examination that he did not state the name of A 3 in his statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.
P.C., and that the name of A 3 was also not found in Exhibit D 7, the statement of P.W.2 recorded at the inquest, and that since P.W.2 had gone to police station seven or eight times after the incident, there was a possibility of his seeing the accused, A 2 and A 7 in the police lock up and hence the identification parades held had no value.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
There is no infirmity at all in the reasoning and conclusions arrived at by the High Court so far as accused A 1, A 2 and A 7 are concerned.[24 B] 1.2 It is established beyond any manner of doubt that there were two factions and long standing rivalry in between the two groups in the village.
The accused persons belonged to the group headed by A 6, A 7 and the deceased was the leader of the other group.
The deceased was given merciless beatings and was done to death in the midnight.
He was found to have 26 external injuries as recorded in the autopsy of his dead body conducted by the Doctor.
It has also been found established by the trial court as well as by the High Court that A 1 inflicted injuries by an axe and A 2 by a spear and A 7 was among the other persons who inflicted injuries buy a stick.
It has also come in the evidence of P.W.19, Inspector of Police, that the accused persons had absconded and after a few days of the incident, on information, he, alongwith mediators, visited the village and the absconded accused were hiding in the house of A 7.
He surrounded the house with hes staff, guarded it and found therein, the twelve persons against whom the case was challaned.
It has also been proved by the prosecution that A 7 was the leader of the rival faction against the deceased.
[23 F H, 24 A] 1.3.
The High Court has considered the prosecution evidence in detail and has placed reliance on the statements of P.Ws.1 to 4 as eye witnesses of the incident.
The High Court has placed implicit reliance on the testimony of P.W.2.
a clerk in the deceased 's office, and who had accompanied the deceased in an autorickshaw and seen the incident.
There is no infirmity in the Statement of P.W.2 and the High Court has rightly placed reliance on his evidence.
[22 D,E] 1.4.
P.W.2 himself admitted at the time of holding the identification parade that he had prior acquaintance with A 2 and A 7.
P.W.2 is a witness of sterling worth and both the trial court and the High Court have placed reliance on his testimony.
He had identified A 1, A 2 and A 7 in the Court.
Their conviction is not based on the identification parade but on the statement of P.W.1 and P.W.2 made during the trial as eye witness.
[23 E] 1.5.
A perusal of the statement of P.W.2 shows that he did not make a mention of the name of A 3 in his statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.
and also in his statement, Exhibit D 7, recorded at the inquest.
In the circumstances, the circumstances, the accused A 3 is also entitled to the benefit of doubt.
[22 G] 1.6.
In the result, A 3 is acquitted of all the charges levelled against him, and the conviction and sentence of the other appellants, A 1, A 2 and A 7 are confirmed.
[24 c]
