The petitioner, a diploma holders in Engineering, was Executive Engineer in the respondent Corporation.
He would have been promoted as superintending Engineer, but for a Resolution passed in 1988 making 75% of the posts of Superintending Engineers available to Executive Engineers with diploma in Engineering degrees and 25% to Executive Engineers with diploma in Engineering Respondent No.2 who junior to petitioner but had engineering degree was promoted as superintending Engineer.
The petitioner challenged the promotion of Respondent No. 2 before the High court by way of a writ petition.
The High court having dismissed the same, the petitioner preferred the present special Leave petition.
On behalf of the petitioner, it was contended that since there was a common seniority list of Executive Engineers, any classification on the basis of education qualification was discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution; and that in the absence of any statutory rule or regulation, a mere resolution could not effect such discrimination.
Dismissing the petition, this court, HELD: 1.1.
It is now well settled that for the purpose of promotion, a valid classification can be made among the members holding the same post on the basis of their qualification.
Such a classification is permissible and does not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[99 A B] 1.2.
It is for the authorities if they so desire, taking into consideration the nature of work, the requisite qualification for the work, and the necessity for making a classification, to prescribe quotas on the basis of educational qualification.
[99 D] State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa & ors., [1974]1 SCR 771, followed.
H.C. Sharma & ors.
vs municipal corporation of Delhi & ors.
; , , referred to.
In the instant case, admittedly neither the practice followed till 1988, nor the resolution passed by the respondent Corporation in 1988 was a regulation passed in accordance with section 64 of the Act.
However, it is well settled that in the absence of a rule or regulation, the authority can prescribe service conditions by executive instructions and this is what was done till year 1988 and is also sought to be done since 1988 by the resolution under challenge.
[100 A,B] Mysore state Road Transport Corporation vs Gopinath Gundachar char; , and V. Balasubramaniam and others vs Tamil Nadu Housing Board and others, [1987]4 SCC 738, relied on.
