The respondent was appointed as a Lecturer in the appellant Institute and was put on probation for one year.
During the probation period his services were terminated.
The respondent challenged the same before the High Court by way of a Writ Petition contending that actually order of dismissal has been passed in the garb of an order of termination; and that the Director of the institute instead of initiating a departmental proceeding on the basis of some charges levelled against him, placed the matter before the governing council of the Institute termination of his services.
The High Court gave its finding that since the service of the petitioner had been terminated because of the complaints made against him, it really amounted to his removal for alleged misconduct and so the institute should have initiated a departmental proceeding and only after due enquiry any action should have been taken.
Being aggrieved by the High Courts order, the appellant Institute has preferred the present appeal.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
When an appointment is made on probation, it pre supposes that the conduct, performance, ability and the capacity of the employee concerned have to be watched and examined during the period of probation.
He is to be confirmed after the expiry of probation only when his service during the period of probation is found to be satisfactory and he is considered suitable for the post against which he has been appointed.
The principle of tearing of the veil for finding out the real nature of the order shall be applicable only in a case where the Court is satisfied that there is a direct nexus between the charge so levelled and the action taken.
If the decision is taken to terminate the service of an employee during the period of probation, after taking into consideration the overall performance and some action or inaction on the part of such employee then it cannot be said that it amounts to his removal from service as punishment.
The appointing authority at the stage of confirmation or while examining the question as to whether the service of such employee be terminated during the continuance of the period of probation, is entitled to look into any complaint made in respect of such employee while discharging his duties for purpose of making assessment of the performance of such employee.
[254 E H; 255 A] 1.2.
Even if such employee while questioning the validity of an order of termination simpliciter brings on the record that some preliminary inquiry or examination of some allegations had been made, that will not vitiate the order of termination.
[255 B] Oil and Natural Gas Commission vs Dr. Mohd section Iskender Ali ; ; Ravindra Kumar Misra vs U.P. State Handloom Corpn.
Ltd., [1987] suppl.
SCC 739; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Kaushal Kishore Shukla, ; and Triveni Shankar Saxena vs State of U.P., J.T. 1992 (1) S.C. 37, relied on.
Anoop Jaiswal vs Government of India, ; distinguished.
