The appellant was convicted under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and was sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 200.
He filed an appeal under Section 374 of the Criminal Procedure Code before the Allahabad High Court which was dismissed for default of the appearance of the appellant and his counsel.
An application for restoration of the appeal made thereafter was also dismissed.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the appeal could not have been dismissed for default on the ground of absence of the appellant or his counsel to appear and press the appeal.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the orders of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court was not right in dismissing the appeal on the ground of non appearance of the appellant or his counsel and it should have allowed the prayer of restoration of the criminal appeal under its inherent power.
[310 C] 2.
Under Section 384 of the Criminal Procedure Code it is the duty of the appellant court to examine the petition of appeal and the judgment under challenge and to consider the merits of the case before dismissing the appeal summarily.
The said duty is not dependent on the appellant or his counsel appearing before the Court to press the appeal.
As soon as a petition of appeal is presented under Section 382 or 383 it becomes the duty of the appellate court to consider the same on merits, even in the absence of the appellant and his counsel before dismissing the same summarily.
Therefore, the High Court should have either examined the appellant 's petition of appeal and the judgment under challenge, itself or appointed a counsel to assist the Court, but could not have proceeded to dismiss the same on the ground that the advocate for the appellant was not present.[308 H; 309 A, C] 3.
The position of a criminal appeal is not be same as that of a civil appeal.
A comparison of the provisions of Section 384 of Criminal Procedure Code with those of Order 41, Rules 11 and 17 of the Civil Procedure Code clearly brings out the difference.
Rule 17, Order 41 of Civil Procedure Code in express terms provides that an appeal may be dismissed on the ground of absence of the appellant when the appeal is called out, and Rule 19 provides for its restoration on the appellant offering sufficient cause for his non appearance.
However, in the case of a criminal appeal the corresponding provisions are not to be found in the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On the other hand the Code in express terms requires the matter to be considered on merits.
Thus a criminal appeal cannot be dismissed for non prosecution.
[309 D, E] Ram Naresh Yadav & Ors vs State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1987 S.C. 1500, dissented form.
Shyam Deo Pandey & Ors.
vs state of Bihar, [1971 Suppl.
S.C.R. 133, relied on.
Emperor vs Balumal Hotchand and Ors., and Ramesh Nanu vs State of Gujarat, 17 Gujarat Law Reporter 350, referred to.
