The prosecution case was that the complainant was running a shop and dealing in Kimam and that on 7th January, 1984, the Chief Inspector in the Health Department (accused No.1) and accused No. 2 (appellant in the appeal), accused No. 3 and accused No. 4 who were working as Food Inspectors had approached the complainant at his shop and stated that a they had been inspecting food articles for adulteration, and took a bottle of Kimam and opened it for sample and when the complainant told them that it may be taken in sealed condition, they refused to do so and stated that the sample would not be passed and the complainant would be put to difficulties, unless he paid Rs. 5,000.
The complainant was not wiling to make such payment but he was pressurised.
On the next day, 8th January, 1984 accused No. 4 came to the shop to enquire whether the money had been arranged.
He was given Rs. 500 and the balance was promised to be given on 30th January, 1984.
On 30th January, 1984 the complainant approaehed the office of the Anti Corruption Bureau and gave his complaint.
Two Panchas were called by the A.C.B., the number of 40 currency notes of Rs. 100 each were noted done in two batches of 20 each, the currency notes were treated with anthracene powder, a demonstration was made and shown to the complainant and the Panchas.
Panch No.1 was to remain with the complainant and Panch No. 2 was to remain with the raiding party.
The complainant and Panch No.1 went to the stop at about 6.00 p.m. and when accused No. 2 demanded the money, the complainant gave it to him, when he was apprehended by the raiding party.
The hands of accused No. 2 (appellant) were seen in the ultra violet light and the four fingers and thumb of the right hand showed the light blue colour and white sparkle.
The currency notes also showed the anthracene powder in the ultra violet light.
Thereafter, the complainant and Panchas went to the residence of accused No. 1.
The complainant offered money to accused No. 1.
He, however, refused to accept the same, and, therefore no raid was made.
All the four accused were tried by the Special Judge for offences under section 161 of the Indian Penal Code read with Sections 5(1) (d) and 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Accused Nos. 1, 3 and 4 were acquitted while accused No. 2 was convicted and sentenced by the Special Judge.
The State filed an appeal against the acquittal of the three accused whereas accused No. 2 filed an appeal against his conviction and sentence.
The High Court dismissed both the appeals.
It noticed that: the Panchas did not recognise any of the accused persons; there is no corroboration as to what had happened in the meetings preceding the raid on 30th January, 1984; the evidence of the complainant was disinterested and did not require any corroboration; and the hands of accused No. 2 when seen in ultra violet light the four fingers and thumb of the right hand showed the light blue colour and white sparkle.
Allowing the appeal, and setting aside the conviction and sentence, this Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court had acquitted the accused No. 3 and did not find it safe to convict him on the sole testimony of the complainant supported by the test of seeing anthracene powder on the hands and fingers of accused No. 3 in ultra violet light, but on the same evidence upheld the conviction of accused No. 2 relying on the same evidence which was rejected vis a vis accused No. 3.
[272 G] 2.
When the High Court could not find it safe to rely on the uncorroborated statement of the complainant while upholding the acquittal of accused No.3 it is unsafe to rely on the ipse dixit of the complainant which is unsupported by both the Panch witnesses and the police officials who formed the raiding party for upholding the conviction of accused No. 2, appellant.
[273 E] 3.
Not only the two Panchas could not recognise any of the accused persons but there is no corroboration to the various statements of the complainant vis a vis accused Nos.
1 to 4 by the police officials who constituted the raiding party either.
The raiding party including the police officials reached the spot at a time when they could neither hear the talk, if any, between the accused No. 2 and the complainant nor could see the alleged acceptance of money by accused No. 2 and passing it on to accused No. 3.
[272 E] 4.
The High Court totally ignored the statement of the 2complainant made during cross examination on behalf of accused No. 2, that he had thought of teaching accused No. 2 a lesson for harassing businessmen selling Pan and Masalas.
[273 A] 5.
It is clear that this is not a case merely of a complainant from whom bribe was demanded and he was forced to pay the same but the complainant had thought of teaching a lesson to accused No. 2 for harassing the businessmen selling Pan Masalas and therefore, it could not be said that the complainant was not interested in success or otherwise of the raid.
[273 D]
