Section 32 (1) (ii) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 provided for depreciation, while computing business income for purpose of income tax.
It was allowed at a percentage of the written down value of certain capital assets employed in the business.
Section 35(1) provided for the deduction of four types of expenditure on scientific research and the deduction provided under 35 (1 ) (iv) was to the effect that in respect of any expenditure of a capital nature on scientific research related to the business carried on by the assessee, such deduction as may be admissible under the provisions of sub section (2).
Sub Section (2) provided that, for the purposes of clause (iv) of sub section (1), one fifth of the capital expenditure incurred in any previous year should be deducted for that previous year; and the balance of the expenditure should be deducted in equal instalments in each of the four immediately succeeding previous years.
It further provided in clauses (iv) and (v) that where a deduction was allowed for any previous year under this section in respect of expenditure represented wholly or partly by an asset, no deduction should be allowed under clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of sub section (1) of section 32 for the same previous year in respect of that asset; and where the asset mentioned in clause (ii) was used in the business after it ceased to be used for scientific research related to that business, depreciation should be admissible under clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of sub section (1) of Section 32.
Explanation 1 to Section 43(1) also provided that where an asset was used in business after it ceased to be used for scientific research related to that business and a deduction had to be made under clause (i), clause (ii) or clause (iii) or sub section (1) or sub section (1A) of Section 32 in respect of that asset, the actual cost of the asset to the assessee, as reduced by the amount of any deduction allowed under clause (iv) of sub section (1) of Section 35.
The provisions of Section 32(1) (ii) and Section 35(2) (1) (iv) and (v) read with Explanation 1 to Section 43(1) virtually repeated the provisions contained in Section 10(2) (vi) and 10(2) (xiv) of the 1922 Act.
In 1968, there was an amendment in the provisions of Section 35(2).
The effect of the amendment was that the entire amount of capital expenditure incurred in relation to scientific research was allowed as a deduction in one year, instead of being spread over a period of five years as was the position earlier.
Thereafter, the Finance Act, 1980 made an amendment with retrospective effect from 1.4.1962, i.e. from the date of commencement of Act of 1961 which provided under clause (iv) of Section 35(2), that where a deduction was allowed for any previous year under this section in respect of expenditure represented wholly or partly by an asset, no deduction should be allowed under clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of sub section (1) of Section 32, for the same or any other previous year in respect of that asset.
In the Writ Petitions filed before this Court on behalf of the asses sees it was contended that the allowances in respect of depreciation on the one hand and of capital expenditure on scientific research on the other are two totally different and independent heads of allowances; one was a notional allowance to provide for the wear and tear of a capital asset employed in the business as the years rolled by; and the other was an allowance for actual expenditure of a capital nature granted to give fillip to new industrial innovations and development of indigenous know how and techniques by proper planning on research and development by various business houses; and therefore there was nothing wrong in construing the statute as providing cumulatively for both types of deductions in respect of the same capital asset; that both the types of allowances were permissible under the statute except to the extent limited by clauses (iv) and (v) of Section 35 of the Act/Clauses (d) and (e) of the proviso to Section 10(2) (xiv) of the 1922 Act; that this interpretation of the statutory provisions was very clear.
patent and unambiguous; that the retrospective amendment of the provision would impose unexpected and impossible burden on them over the years, jeopardise their solvency and lay them open to action by creditors and financial institutions and such an onerous burden was unreasonable and oppressive and the provision imposing such a burden violated the fundamental rights of the assessees under Articles 14 and 19(1) (g) of the Constitution that retrospective provisions may be permissible even in taxing statutes in certain special circumstances such as in the case of provisions clarifying the impact of a statute provision curing defective legislations in the light of the judicial decisions and the like but if the legislature chose to impose a totally new burden which was not at all in contemplation earlier and proceeded to give full retrospective effect thereto such an attempt should be struck down as unreasonable and discriminatory.
that the amendment was not in the nature of a statutory clarification of an ambiguity but a totally new and fresh imposition sought to be unjustifiably given retrospective effect and that the statute did not intend one deduction to preclude other.
On behalf of the Revenue it was contended that the deduction provided by Section 35 (1) (iv) was in the alternative to the deduction provided by clauses (i) (ii) and (iii) of sub section (1) and sub section (1A) of Section 32; if one was availed of the other was not available not only during the year or years in which the deduction under Section 35(1) (iv) was availed of but permanently; for the reason that if both were allowed to be availed of; it amounted to grant of 200% deduction viz., 100% under Section 35(1) (iv) and another 100% under sub sections (1) and (1A) of Section 32, and this was totally outside the contemplation of the Act.
Dismissing the writ petitions, this Court, HELD: Per Ranganathan J. (For himself and Ramaswami, J.) 1.1.
There is a fundamental, though unwritten, axiom that no legislature could have at all intended a double deduction in regard to the same business outgoing; if it is intended it will be clearly expressed.
In other words, in the absence of clear statutory indication to the contrary, the statute should not be read so as to permit an assessee two deductions both under Section 10(2) (vi) and section 10(2) (xiv) under the 1922 Act or under Section 32 (i) (ii) and 35(2) (iv) of the 1961 Act qua the same expenditure.
The use of the words "in respect of the same previous year" in clause (d) of the proviso to Section 10(2) (xiv) of the 1922 Act and Section 35 (2) (iv) of the 1961 Act is not a contra indication which permits a disallowance of depreciation only in the previous years in which the other allowance is actually allowed.
The purpose of the words above referred to is totally different.
That the two allowances cannot be and are not intended to be granted in respect of the same asset or expenditure, can be easily seen from the limitation imposed by these words.
Where the capital asset is one of the nature specified, the assessee can get only one of the two allowances in question but not both.
For determining which of the two allowances should be granted that which the assessee chooses or that which the assessing officer might prefer, it is necessary for the statute to define this and this is what has been done by the rider in clause (d) of the proviso to Section 10(2) (xiv) of the 1922 Act Section 35(2) (iv) of the 1961 Act.
It mandates that the asssessee should, in such a case, be granted the special allowance for scientific research and not the routine and annual one for depreciation.
Clause (d) of the proviso to Section 10(2) (xiv) of the 1922 Act and Section 30(2)(iv) of the 1961 Act thus fall into place as an appropriate and necessary provision.
The provision contained in clause (e) of the proviso to Section 10(2) (xiv) of the 1922 Act, re enacted in Explanation to Section 43(1) of the 1961 Act, also reinforces this line of approach.
Therefore, it is not correct to say that the allowances under the two provisions are by nature unconnected with, and indpendent of, each other.
[171 D H; 172 A E] 1.2.
Under the provisions of the statute as they stood earlier, the assessees could not have claimed continued grant of depreciation after the expiry of five previous years before the 1968 amendment and after the expiry of the first year after the 1968 amendment, even though the entire cost of the capital asset in question had been allowed to be written off completely against the business profits of those five previous years or one previous year as the case may be.
It is impossible to conceive of the legislature having envisaged a double deduction in respect of the same expenditure even though it is true that the two heads of deduction do not completely overlap and there is some difference in the rationale of the two deductions under consideration.
The last few words of the English statute, viz., "assets for any year of assessment during any part of which they were used by the person carrying on the trade for scientific research related to the trade" show that there is really no difference between the English and Indian Acts; the former also in terms prohibits depreciation only so long as the assets are used for scientific research.
[169 F H; 171 B, C] 1.3.
In the circumstances, it is clear that, even before the 1980 amendment, the Act did not permit a deduction for depreciation in respect of the cost of a capital asset acquired for purposes of scientific research to the extent such cost has been written off under Section 10(2) (xiv) of the 1922 Act/35(1) & (2) of the 1961 Act.
Prior to 1968, such assets qualified for an allowance of one fifth of the cost of the asset in five previous years starting with that of its acquisition and during these years the assessee could not get any depreciation in relation thereto.
In respect of assets acquired in previous year relevant to assessment year 1968 69 and thereafter, their cost was written off in the previous year of acquisition and no depreciation would be allowed in that year.
This is clear from the statute.
Equally, it is not envisaged, that depreciation could be allowed on them thereafter and also that it could be allowed starting with the original cost of the asset despite its user for scientific research and the allowances made under the 'scientific research ' clause.
There was no difficult at all in the interpretation of the provisions.
The mere fact that a baseless claim was raised by some over enthusiastic assessees who sought a double allowance or that such claim may perhaps have been accepted by some authorities is not sufficient to attribute any ambiguity or doubt as to the true scope of the provisions as they stood earlier.
[173 E H; 174 A] C.I.T. vs Indian Telephone Industries Ltd., and C.l.T. vs Hico Products, (1991) 187 I.T.R. 517, overruled.
Lohia Machines limited V. Union of India, S.C.; Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, vs C.l.T., Cal.; C.l.
T vs Indian Explosive Ltd., Cal.; C.I.T vs International Instruments P. Ltd., Kar.
and Warner Hindustan Ltd. vs C.l.T., (1988) 171 I.T.R. 224 A.P., referred to.
The assessees may have some possible case only if the earlier statutory provisions can be said to have been unambiguously in favour of the assessee and the 1980 amendment had radically altered the provisions to cast a new and substantial burden on the assessee with retrospective effect but there is no ambiguity.
The 1980 amendment has effected no change at all in the provisions except to set out more clearly and categorically what the provision said even earlier.
Thus, even without the amendment, the assessees cannot claim the depreciation allowance in question.
Even if it is assumed that there was an ambiguity or doubt as to interpretation, that was retrospectively clarified by the legislature.
Therefore, the validity of the amendment cannot be challenged.
This is indeed beyond all doubt.
[174 C G] Rai Ramkrishna vs State of Bihar, [1964] 1 S.C.R. 897;Asst.
Commissioner of Urban Land Tax vs Buckingham & Carnatic Co. Ltd., ; ; Krishnamurthi & Co. vs State of Madras; , ; Hira Lal Rattan Lal vs Sales Tax Officer and Anr., (1973) 31 S.T.C. 178 and Shiv Dutt Rai Fateh Chand vs Union of India, (1984) 148 I.T.R. 644, referred to.
Per Jeevan, Reddy, J. (Concurring) 1.1.
A double deduction cannot be a matter of inference; it must be provided for in clear and express language, regard having to its serious impact on the revenues of the State.
If the Legislature/Parliament wanted to provide for more than 100% deduction they would have said so, as they done in cases where they have provided for what is called "weighted deduction", vide Section 35(B) of the Act of 1961.
It is not possible to agree that while introducing clause (xiv) in sub section (2) of Section 10 of the 1922 Act consequent on the introduction of Section 20(4) in the U.K. finance Act, 1944, the Indian Legislature as also the Parliament made a conscious departure from the English Amendment with the idea of providing an additional incentive over and above the deduction on account of depreciation, to induce the Indian assessees to invest more in scientific research.
The underlying reason in clause (iv) of Section 35(2) of Act of 1961 providing that during the years or year in which the assessee avails of the deduction under Section 35(1) (iv) he should not avail of the deduction on account of depreciation provided by clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of sub section (1) and sub section (1A) of Section 32 is to ensure that the assessee does not get double deduction for example, where the asset was acquired prior to April 1, 1957, the deduction under Section 35(1) (iv) would be allowed in five consecutive years.
If during the very five previous years, depreciation under the aforementioned provisions is also allowed, the assessee would obtain, at the end of five years, a double depreciation i.e., 100% under Section 35 and almost 100% under Section 32.
(In many cases, the rate of depreciation under Section 32 is 20% or even higher).
If such a course was barred by clause (iv) during the initial five years, it would not be reasonable to say that same thing can be achieved by claiming the deduction after the expiry of five years.
If both the deductions are in the alternative, as indicated by clause (iv), they must be understood as being in the alternative and not consecutive.
It would be a rather curious thing to say (in the case of an asset acquired prior to April 1, 1967) that Parliament barred claim for depreciation under Section 32 even in the first year when only 20% of the cost of the asset is allowed as deduction under Section 35(1) (iv), it barred it in the second, third and fourth years, when the deduction had reached 40, 60 and 80 per cent but permitted it be claimed after the fifth year, by which year the entire 100% cost was allowed as a deduction.
No express provision was necessary to say what is so obvious.
The position after April 1.
1967 is no different.
That the aforesaid view is the correct one is indicated by Explanation (1) to clause (1) of Section 43 [the corresponding provision in the 1922 Act being sub clause (e) of clause (xiv) of Section 10(2) of 1922 Act].
[177 H; 178 A E] 13.
The amendment of Section 35(2) in 1980 is merely clarificatory in nature.
It makes explicit what was implicit in the provisions.
question of its constitutionality, therefore, does not arise.
Though purporting to be retrospective, it does not take away any rights which had legally vested in the assessees.
[180 B] Commissioner of Income Tax vs Hico Products Pvt. Ltd, , overruled.
None of the assessments relating to any of the assessment years in question has become final.
They are pending at one or the other stage and in one or the other forum.
Since the amendment under challenge merely makes explicit which was implicit in the unamended clause, there is no question of any right vesting in the assessee and its being taken away.
[180 H; 181 A]
