The petitioner in Petition No. 143 was the Moopil Nair of the Kavalappara sthanam and, as the sthanee, claimed to be the sole proprietor of the sthanam properties.
The respondents Nos. 2 to 17, who were the junior members of the Kavalappara tarward or family, resisted the claim on the ground that the properties were tarward properties and they had rights in them.
There was litigation between the parties and ultimately the Privy Council held in favour of the petitioner.
The petitioner transferred some of the properties to his wife and two daughters and son and they were the petitioners in the two other petitions.
The parties were governed by the Marumakkathayam Law and in 1955 the Madras Legislature, purporting to remove certain misapprehensions evident in decisions of courts, passed the Madras Marumakkathayani (Removal of Doubts) Act, 1955 (Act 32 of 1955) which by section 2 provided as follows: " 2.
Certain kinds of sthanam properties declared to be tarward properties : Notwithstanding any decision of Court, any sthanam in respect of which (a)there is or had been at any time an intermingling of the properties of the sthanam and the properties of the tarward, or (b)the members of the tarwad have been receiving main tenance from the properties purporting to be sthanam properties as of right, or in pursuance of a custom or otherwise, or (c)there had at any time been a vacancy caused by there being no male member of the tarwad eligible to succeed to the sthanam, shall be deemed to be and shall be deemed always to have been a Marumakkathayam tarwad and the properties appertaining to such a sthanam shall be deemed to be and shall be deemed always to have been properties belonging to the tarwad to which the provisions of the Madras Marumakkathayam Act, 1932, (Madras Act XXII Of 1932), shall apply." 317 Immediately after the publication of the Act, the respondents Nos. 2 to 17, published notices in the press that by reason of the passing of the Act, Kavalappara estate had become their tarwad property and that rents could be paid to the sthanee only as the Karnavan of the properties and not otherwise.
The notices further stated that the donees under the two deeds of gift executed by the sthanee were not entitled to the properties conveyed to them and should not be paid any rents at all.
One of the respondents filed a partition suit and others also contemplated doing the same.
The petitioners sought for a writ of mandamus or any other writ or order directing the respondents to forbear from enforcing the impugned Act against the sthanee and the sthanam estate and declaring the Act to be unconstitutional and invalid.
Preliminary objection was raised on behalf of some of the respondents as to the maintainability of the petitions and it was contended that (1) the prayer for a writ of mandamus Was not maintainable since there was an adequate remedy in the partition suit filed by one of the respondents ; (2) that violation of right of property by private individuals was not within the purview of article 19(1)(f) or article 31(1) and the remedy was not by way of application under article 32; (3) that no application under article 32 could be maintained until the State had taken or threatened to take any action under the impugned law that would infringe fundamental rights; (4) that the proceeding under article 32 could not be converted into or equated with a declaratory suit under section 42 Of the Specific Relief Act in and (5) that this court could not, on an application under article 32, embark upon an enquiry into disputed questions of fact.
Held (per Das, C. J., Bhagwati, Sinha and Subba Rao, jj.), that all the contentions must be negatived and all the preliminary objections must fail.
The right to enforce a fundamental right conferred by the Constitution was itself a fundamental right guaranteed by article 32 of the Constitution and this court could not refuse to entertain a petition under that Article simply because the petitioner might have any other adequate, alternative, legal remedy.
Rashid Ahmed vs Municipal Board, Kairana, ; and Romesh Thappar vs The State of Madras, [1950] S.C.R. 594, referred to.
In the instant cases as the grievance of the petitioners was primarily against the impugned Act passed by the Madras Legislature, which was a State as defined by article 12 of the Constitution and the dispute was not one between two sets of private individuals but between the petitioners on the one hand and the State and persons claiming under a law made by the State on the other, article 32 must apply.
P.D. Shamdasani vs Central Bank of India Ltd., [1952] S.C.R. 391, distinguished and held inapplicable.
Where an enactment such as the impugned Act, unlike 318 others that contemplated some further action to be taken by the State after the enactment had come into force, automatically took away or abridged a person 's fundamental rights immediately it came into force, there was no reason why the aggrieved person should not immediately be entitled to seek the ' remedy under article 32 Of the Constitution.
State of Bombay vs United, Motors (India) Limited, ; and Himmatlal Harilal Mehta vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, , referred to.
In view of the language used in section 2 of the impugned Act and its effect, there could be no doubt that the petitioners could legitimately complain that their fundamental right to hold and dispose of the sthanam properties have been violated by the action of the Legislature.
Article 32 of the Constitution conferred wide powers on this Court and such powers were not confined to the issuing of prerogative writs alone.
In appropriate cases, this court had the right in its discretion to frame its writs or orders suitable to the exigencies created by enactments.
It was clear on the authorities that this Court could, where the occasion so required, make even a declaratory order with consequential relief under article 32 of the Constitution.
Chiranjit Lal Chowdhury vs The Union of India, [1950] S.C.R. goo, Rashid Ahmed vs Municipal Board, Kairana, [1950] S.C.R. 566, T. C. Basappa vs T. Nagappa, ; and Ebrahim Vazir Marat vs The State of Bombay, [1954] S.C.R. 933, relied on.
Maharaj Umeg Singh vs The State Of Bombay, [1955] 2 S.C.R. 164, considered.
This court would fail in its duty as the custodian and pro tector of the fundamental rights if it were to decline to entertain a petition under article 32 simply because it involved the determination of disputed questions of fact.
Clause (2) of article 32 conferred on this court the power to issue directions or orders or writs of various kinds mentioned therein and in dismissing a petition, it had either to hold that any particular writ asked for was not appropriate to the occasion or that the petitioner had failed to establish a fundamental right or its breach .
In either case, however, it had to decide the petition on merits.
Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri vs The Union of India, [1950] S.C.R. 869,Kathi Raning Rawat vs The State of Saurashtra, ; and Ramkrishna Dalmia vs Shri ' justice section R. Tendolkar; , , referred to.
In appropriate cases opportunity might also be given to the parties to establish their cases by further affidavits, or by issuing a commission or even by setting the application down for trial on evidences.
Per Wanchoo, J. If the petitions were based solely on the infringement of article 14, there could be no doubt that they would not be maintainable.
Even though they were based on the 319 infringement of article 19(1)(f) also, their maintainability would still be in doubt in the absence of any further provision in the impugned Act for its direct enforcement by the State.
