On 19.1.1984, the Association [petitioner No. 1 in W.P. (C) No. 499 of 1991] requested the Union Government (Respondent) to remove the disparity prevailing in different states of promotional avenues from State Civil Services to All India Administrative Service.
A Committee of Senior Secretaries, constituted by the Union Government, recommended an equitable principle of comparable seniority from different States for promotion to the Indian Administrative Service.
The I.A.S. (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1987 came into force with effect from 6.11.1987, repealing the old Rules.
In a Circular dated 9.9.1986 issued by the respondent Union Government directed the State Governments to give weightage over and above four years the assignment of year of allotment as per the existing rules, namely, four years for the first 12 years State service with additional weightage one year for every two to the years completed service subject to a maximum of five years.
Union Government amended and published the New Seniority Rules, 1987, after considering the suggestions from the State Governments.
The First Amendment Rules was published in the Gazette of India on 32.1989 which was given prospective operation from 3.2.1989.
The appellants in C.I. No. 4794 of 1992 questioned Rule 3(3) (ii) proviso of the First Amendment Rules, in an application before the CAT.
at Patna.
They contended that though they were found to be entitled to the total weightage of 9 years since the juniors were given 1983 as the year of allotment by operation of proviso to Rule 3(3)(ii) of the First Amendment Rules, were given 1983 as the year of allotment and thereby the appellants were denied the 3 years weightage.
The Tribunal upheld the Rules and dismissed the application, against which appeal C.A. No. 4794 of 1992 was filed in this Court.
The appellants in C.A. No. 4788 of 1992, some members of the Association petitioner No. 1 of the W.P. (C) No. 499 of 1991 filed an application before the Central Administrative Tribunal at Lucknow contending that they were promoted in 1980 onwards, and they were discriminated in fixation of their seniority.
The Tribunal held that the prospective operation of the 1987 Rules discriminated the Senior State Civil Service Officers, but refused to direct the Union Government to amend the Rules but retrospective effect.
However, it requested the Government of India to reconsider the matter and to give retrospective operation to the First Amendment Rules.
This decision was questioned hl an appeal C.A. No. 4788 of 1992.
In WP(C)No. of 499 of 1991, Petitioner No. 1 An Association representing the officers of the U.P. State Civil Service and petitioners 2 17, its members filed the writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution to quash the order of the respondent Union Government dated 12.12.1990, and for a direction to extend the benefit flowing from the First Amendment Rules to its members promoted prior to January 1988.
It was contended that the First Amendment Rules operated with effect from 1992, whereas the promotee Officers were promoted between 1988 to 1991 and that they would get only partial benefit.
As these cases raised common questions of law, they were heard together.
Dismissing WP(C)No.
499/1991 and CA No. 4794 of 1992, and allowing C.A No. 4788 of 1992, this Court, HELD: 1.01.
The entry into the service is from different streams and predominantly by direct recruitment and promotion.
The direct recruit gets his year of allotment from the succeeding year of his recruitment.
The direct recruit officers appointed earlier to 1988 also would be adversely affected in their seniority.
[403 D] 1.02.
Rule 3(31 manifests the Central Govt 's intention that the year of allotment of a direct recruit officer shall be the year following the year in which the competitive examination was held.
If any such officer was permitted to join probationary training with direct recruit officers of a subsequent year of allotment then he shall be assigned that subsequent year as the year of allotment.
[400 G H] 1.03.
In determining the seniority of a promotee officer in assigning year of allotment, the service rendered in the State Civil Service upto 12 years as Dy.
Collector, or equivalent posts, weightage of 4 years shall be given.
In addition he/she shall also be given, further benefit of one year weightage of every completed 3 years of service.
beyond the period of 12 years, subject to a maximum weightage of 5 years.
In its calculations fractions are to be ignored.
The weightage shall be computed from the year G of appointment of the officer to the service.
[402 E] 1.04.
The offending proviso limits the operation of Rule 3(3) (ii) (a) and (b) that such an officer shall not be assigned an year of allotment earlier than the year of allotment assigned to the officer senior to him in that select list or appointed on the basis of an earlier select list.
[1402 F] 105.
The proviso aims that the State Civil Service senior officer ' though had varied length of services, but because of late promotion to Indian Administrative Service, would receive and forego proportionate weightage of past service for a short period till the rules fully become operational.
[406 B] 1.06.
The first amendment rules doubtless provided the remedy to remove existing discriminatory results by giving graded weightage to a maximum of 9 years and would track back the year of allotment anterior to the date of inclusion in the select list under the Recruitment Rules read with Promotion Regulations.
[406 C] 1.07.
The Proviso intended to protect the seniority of the officers promoted/appointed earlier than the appellants and its effect would be that till rule 3 (3) (ii) fully becomes operational graded weightage was given to the promotees.
In other words it prevented to get seniority earlier to the date of his/her appointment to the Indian Administrative Service.
Equally it in tended not to let endless chain reaction occur to unsettle the settled interests in seniority.
These compulsive circumstances denied the benefits of full 9 years weightage to officers promoted during 1987 to 1992.
The discrimination, though is discernible, but inevitable to ensure just results.
In other words the proviso prevented unequals to become equals.
[406 D E] 1.08.
The new Seniority Rules were to be operative from November 6, 1987 and the First Amendment Rules from February 3, 1989 with the result that in assigning the year of allotment, full weightage of 9 years ' eligible service was given to the promotee State Civil Service Officers.
However, the senior officer to him/her appointed from the State Civil Service earlier in the same select list or one above him in the previous select list shall remain senior to him.
Thereby the proviso averted the effect of pushing an officer who gained entry into IAS service by application of rule of weightage in Rule 3(3) (ii) of the Rules down in seniority.
[402 H, 403 A B] 1.09.
By dint of merit, ability and suitability junior officer could steal a march over the senior officers in the State Civil Service and get entry into the Indian Administrative Service earlier to the senior officers and thus becomes a member of the Indian Administrative Service.
Thereby he becomes senior in service.
The senior State Civil Service officer, who was superseded and subsequently became qualified tor inclusion in the select list, after the new Seniority Rules or the First Amendment Rules came into force, indisputably would be junior in I.A.S. cadre to his erstwhile junior officers in State Civil Service.
If he gets the benefit of the free play of the First Amendment Rules, it would have the inevitable effect of depriving the promoted erstwhile junior officer of the benefit of early promotion and he would be pushed down and would again become junior to him in the Indian Administrative Service.
[405 G H; 406 A B] 1.10.
A junior officer who superseded a senior State Civil Officer became entitled to carry his year of allotment and became senior to him in the cadre of I.A.S. But for the proviso, the operation of Rule 3(3)(ii), the senior officer would have been saddled with the disability to be pushed down in seniority which would have nullified and frustrated the hard earned earlier promotion and consequential effect on seniority earned by dint of merit and ability.
[403 E] 2.01.
No statute shall be construed so as to have retrospective operation unless its language is such as plainly to require such a construction.
The legislature, as its policy, give effect to the statute or statutory rule from a specified time or from the date of its publication in the State Gazette.
1404 A] 2.02.
Court would issue no mandamus to the legislature to make law much less retrospectively.
It is the settled cannons of construction that every word, E phrase or sentence in the statute and all the provisions read together shall be given full force and effect and no provision shall be rendered surplusage or nugatory.
[404 B] 2.04.
The mere fact that the result of a statute may be unjust, does not entitle the court to refuse to give effect to it.
However, if two reasonable interpretations are possible, the Court would adopt that construction which is just, reasonable or sensible.
Courts cannot substitute the words or phrases or supply casus omissus.
The court could in an appropriate case iron out the creases to remove ambiguity to give full force and effect to the legislative intention.
But the intention must be gathered by putting up fair construction of all the provisions reading together.
This endeavour would be to avoid absurdity or unintended unjust results by applying the doctrine or purposive construction.
1404 C D] 2.05.
Where the intention of statutory amendment is clear and expressive, words cannot be interpolated.
In the first place they are not, in the ease, needed.
If they should be added, the statute would more than likely fail to carry out the legislative intent.
The words are the skin of the language which the legislature intended to convey.
[405 B] 2.06.
Where the meaning of the statute is clear and sensible, either with or without omitting the words or adding one, interpolation is improper, since the primary purpose of the legislative intent is what the statute says to be so.
If the language is plain, clear and explicit, it must be given effect and the question of interpretation does not arise.
[405 C] 2.07.
If found ambiguous or unintended, the court can at best iron out the creases.
Any wrong order or defective legislation cannot be righted merely because it is wrong.
At best the court can quash it, if it violates the fundamental rights or is ultra vires of the power or manifestly illegal vitiated by fundamental laws or gross miscarriage of justice.
[405 D] 2.08.
The Legislature intended that the First Amendment Rules would operate prospectively from February 3, 1989, the date of their publication in the Gazette of India.
Its policy is explicit and unambiguous, Rule 3(3)(ii) intended to remedy the imbalances while at the same time the proviso intended to operate prospectively to avert injustice to the officers recruited/promoted earlier than the officer promoted later to that date.
The proviso carved out an exception to ward off injustice to the officers that became members of I.A.S. earlier to those dates.
[405 E] Smt.
Hire Devi & Ors.
vs District Board, Shahjahanpur, ; Nalinakhaya Bysck vs Shyam Sunder Haldar & Ors., ; at 545 and Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. vs Auriya Chamber of Commerce, Allahabad, 119861 2 SCR 430 at 438, referred to. 3.01.
The application of the First Amendment Rules has the inevitable and insiduous effect of doing injustice to the direct recruit promotee officer or officers promoted earlier to Feb. 3, 1989 and the proviso avoided such unjust results.
Giving retrospective effect or directing to apply the rule to all the seniors irrespective of the date of promotion to I.A.S. cadre would land in or lead to inequitous or unjust results which itself is unfair, arbitrary and unjust.
offending article 14 of the Constitution.
To avoid such unconstitutional consequences the proviso to Rule 3(3)(ii) of the First Amendment Rules was made.
[407 C] 3.02.
But for the proviso the operation of Rule 3(3)(ii) would be inconsistent with Sec. 3(1A) of the Act.
Equally though the doctrine 'Reading down ' is a settled principle of law, its application to the facts of the case would lead to injustice to the officers promoted earlier to the appellants.
A writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to give full benefit of weightage of Rule 3(3)(ii)(a)&(b) of the First Amendment Rules would amount to direct the executive to disobey the proviso which is now held to be intra vires of the Constitutions.
[407 D] 3.03.
The proviso to Rule 3(3)(ii) of the First Amendment Rules is consistent with section 3(1A) of the Act and it is not ultra vires of the power the Central Govt.
nor it offends articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
[409 A] 3.04.
There is a distinction between right and interest.
No one has a vested right to promotion or seniority, but an officer has an interest to seniority acquired by working out the rule.
Of course, it could be taken away only by operation of valid law.
[408 E] 3.05.
Law itself may protect the legitimate interest in seniority while granting relief to persons similarly circumstanced like the one under sec.
3(1A) of the Act read with proviso to Rule 3(3) (ii) & (iii) of the First Amendment Rules.
It was neither void nor ultra vires offending articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
[410 C] State of Jammu & Kashmir vs T.N. Khosa, ; at 779; J. Kumar vs Union of India, ; at 463 and Union of India vs P.K Roy, 11968] 2 SCR 186 at 201 202, distinguished.
D.S. Nakara vs Union of India,.
; ; B. Prabhakar Rao vs State of A.P., [1985] 2 Supp.
SCR 379 and A.K Bhatnagar vs Union of India, [1991] 1 SCC 544, referred to.
Consultation is a process which requires meeting of minds between the parties involved in the process of consultation on the material facts and points involved to evolve a correct or at least satisfactory solution.
There should be meeting of minds between the proposer and the persons to be consulted on the subject of consultation.
There must be definite facts which constitute foundation and source for final decision.
[415 E] 4.02.
The object of the consultation is to render consultation meaningful to serve the intended purpose.
Prior consultation in that behalf is mandatory.
[415 E] 4.03.
When the offending action effects fundamental rights or to effectuate built in insulation, as fair procedure, consultation is mandatory and non consultation renders the action ultra vires or invalid or 4.04.
When the opinion or advice binds the proposer, consultation is mandatory and its infraction renders the action or order illegal.
1415 F] 4.05.
When the opinion or advice or view does not bind the person or authority, any action or decision taken contrary to the advice is not illegal, nor becomes void.
[415 G] 4.06.
When the object of the consultation is only to apprise of the proposed action and when the opinion or advice is not binding on the authorities or person and is not bound to be accepted, the prior consultation is only directory.
The authority proposing to take action should make known the general scheme or outlines of the actions proposed to be taken, be put to notice of the authority or the persons to be consulted, have the views or objections, taken them into consideration, and there after, the authority or person would be entitled or has/have authority to pass appropriate orders or take decision thereon.
In such circumstances it amounts to an action "after consultation".
[415 H, 416 A B] 4.07.
No hard and fast rule could be laid, no useful purpose would be served by formulating words or definitions nor would it be appropriate or lay down the manner in which consultation must take place.
It is for the Court to determine in each case in the light of its facts and cir cumstances whether the action is "after consultation", "was in fact consulted" or was it a "sufficient consultation".
[416 C] 4.08.
Where any action is legislative in character, the consultation envisages like one under Sec.
3 (1) of the Act, that the Central Govt.
is to intimate to the State Governments concerned of the proposed action in general outlines and on receiving the objections or suggestions, the Central Govt.
or Legislature is free to evolve its policy decision, make appropriate legislation with necessary additions or modification or omit the proposed one in draft bill or rules.
The revised draft bill or rules, amendments or additions in the altered or modified from need not again be communicated to all the concerned State Governments nor have prior fresh consultation.
Rules or Regulations being legislative in character, would tacitly receive the approval of the State Governments through the people 's representatives when laid on the floor of each House of Parliament.
The Act or the Rule made at the final shape is not rendered void or ultra vires or invalid for non consultation.
[416 D F] 4.09 The proposal for amending the new Seniority Rules in the draft was only for inviting discussion and suggestions on the scope and ambit of the proposed law and the effect of the operation of the First Amendment Rules.
Keeping the operational effect in view the proposed amendment could be modified or deleted or altered.
[416 G] 4.10 The Central Govt.
is not bound to accept all or every proposal or counter proposal.
Consultation with the Ministry of Law would be sufficient.
Thereby the Central Govt.
is not precluded to revise the draft rules in the light of the consultation and advice.
[416 H] 4.11 The general consultation had by the Central Govt.
with the State Govts.
and Union Territories was sufficient and it was not necessary to have prior consultation again to bring the proviso on statutes as part of the First Amendment Rules.
[417 B] 4.12 By operation of sub sec.
(2) of Sec. 3 the rules were laid on the floor of each House of the Parliament.
There were no suggestions or alterations made by either House of Parliaments.
Thus the First Amendment Rules stood approved by the Parliament.
[417 C] 4.13 The failure to consult all the State Governments or Union Territories on the proviso to Rule 3(3) (ii) or (iii) of the First Amendment Rules does not render the proviso ultra vires, invalid or void.
[417 D] Union of India vs Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth & Anr., ; ; R. Pushpam vs State of Madras, AIR 1953 Madras 392; State of U.P. vs Manmohan Lal Srivastava, ; at 542; U.R. Bhatt vs Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 1344; Ram Gopal Chaturvedi vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; N. Raghavendra Rao vs Dy.
Commissioner, South Kanara, Mangalore, ; ; Mohd. Sujat Ali & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; at 469 471; Chandramouleshwar Prasad vs Patna High Court & Ors., ; at 674 675; Narain Sankaran Mooss vs State of Kerala & Anr, ; ; Naraindas Indurkhya vs State of M.P. & Ors., ; Hindustan Zinc Ltd. vs A.P. Electricity Board, Ors.; , ; Rollo & Anr.
vs Minister of Town & Country Planning, [1948] 1 All Eng.
Reports 13; Electher & Ors.
vs Minister of Town & Country Planning, [1947] 2 All.
Reports 496; Sinfield & Ors.
vs London Transport Executive, Law Reports 1970 Chancery Divn., Derham & Anr.
vs Church Commissioners for England, 1954 Appeal Cases 245 and Port Louis Corporation vs Attorney General of Mauritius, 1965 Appeal Cases 1111, referred to.
Union of India & Ors.
vs Dr. section Krishna Murthy & Ors.,[1989] 4 SCC 689, distinguished.
