These petitions relate to child employment, prevalence of contract labour system and the non implementation of .
This Court considered the petitions and appointed a Trust viz., Society for Community Organisation Trust for conducting appropriate investigation and to submit a report.
The Trust submitted its report, which was then circulated to the Respondent State Government and the beedi manufacturers.
On the direction of this Court for formulating a scheme, two Schemes cameto be formulated, one by the State Govern ment and the other by the petitioners.
This Court directed that the terms should be settled for one Scheme to be accept ed by the Court, and given time to the Union of India to respond to the same.
Union of India filed certain objec tions.
Rejecting the objections and disposing of the petitions, this Court, 358 HELD: 1.1 The Beedi and Cigar Workers (Condition of Employment) Rules, 1968 should be strictly implemented and once that is done the evil of not furnishing the books to the home workers would be eradicated.
[361 D, E] 2.
An establishment of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner with full equipment for the purpose of imple mentation of the Statute should be located within the area and the Regional provident Fund Commissioner should have directions to enforce the Act in all aspects.
This estab lishment should start functioning within three months from now.
[361 E, F] 3.
The labour laws as also the should be strictly enforced so that the workers get their legitimate dues and the conditions of employment improve.
[361 F G] 4.
Tobacco manufacturing has indeed health hazards.
Child labour in this trade should therefore be prohibited as far as possible and employment of child labour should be stopped either immediately or in a phased manner to be decided by the State Government but within a period not exceeding three years from now.
The provisions of Child Labour Abolition Act, 1986 should be strictly implemented.
[361 G, 11] 5.
The Union Government is directed to look into the aspect whether contract labour system is indispensable in this trade and take its final decision one way or the other within six months from now.
[362 A] 6.
Beedi trade is a flourishing one and exploitation of labour is rampant in this trade.
A governmental labour establishment should he located in the area with full com plement to answer the requiretenants of the matter.
[362 F] 7.
Sincc Beedi manufacturing process is carried more out side the factory than within, the system of maintaining the registers as a regulating practice has become necessary.
Great care should, there fore be taken to ensure the maintenance of the register system as the bulk of the employees outside the factories can be regulated through the record maintained in the registers.
[362 C] 8.
The and the Beedi 359 Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1976 which contain beneficial provision should be implemented in the true spirit and since they are legislations of the Central Government, the machin ery of the Central Government should be made operational in the area.
[362 D] 9.
It should be ensured that pass hooks are maintained in the names of actual workers.
[362 E] 10.
The Welfare Fund should be properly administered and in the case of death of workman appropriate assistance should be extended out of the Fund quickly.
[362 E, F] 11.
In view of the health hazard involved in the manu facturing process, every worker including children, if employed should be insured for a minimum amount of Rs.50,000 and the premium should be paid by the employer and the incidence should not be passed on to the workman.
[362 F] 12.
The implementation of the scheme within the State in an effective manner would require to be supervised by an independent external agency.
The Tamil Nadu State Legal Aid
