Two junior member of a Tarwad (somewhat like a joint family) redeemed a mortgage executed in 1870 by the Karnavan (akin to Manager) of the Tarwad.
They paid the amount in 1886, got the property released, obtained possession and they or their descendants continued in possession as such.
In 1967 a suit for partition was filed by sucessors, of other members of the Tarwad, in whose favour equity of redemption, of the suit land was transferred in a family partition in 1962.
The suit was resisted amongst others on acquisition of right of tenant under section 4A(1)(a) of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1964.
The trial court and first appellate court held that the junior members, as a result of getting the property released, were holders of special right under Marumakkathayam Law and they could not be held to be mortgages and, therefore, they did not acquire any right under the Land Reform Act.
The High Court, however, held that the junior member being assignee of mortgage in possession for fifty years, on the date the Kerala Land Reform Act, 1964, was amended and Section 4(1)(a) was added by Amendment Act of 1969, were entitled to rights as tenants, and thus, accepted the claim of junior members, because the members of the Tarwad treated the mortgage to be continuing on the date the suit was filed.
It also held that a junior member of the Tarwad, paying off the debt of Tarwad, became a mortgagee of the excess share in his own right.
Allowing the appeals of the sucessors of other members of Tarwad, this Court, HELD: 1.
A co mortgagor or a junior member of the Tarwad who continued in possession over the excess share, got redeemed by him, could not be deemed to be mortgagee so as to acquire right under Section 4A(1)(a) of the Kerala Land Reform Act, 1964.
This position does not alter either because during partition equity of redemption in respect of property redeemed by junior members was transferred or because in the plaint it was claimed that mortgages subsisted.
None of these actions could affect the operation of law.
[425 D E] 2.1 Mortgage is creation of an interest in the property for payment of debt.
Once the mortgage debt is discharged by a person beneficially interested in equity of redemption, the mortgage comes to an end by operation of law.
Consequently, the relationship of mortgagor and mortgagee cannot subsist.
[423 E, F] 2.2 In law, the status of a person paying off debt to secure the property either with consent of others or on own volition is that the becomes the owner, entitle to hold and possess the property.
But, in equity the right is to hold the property till he is reimbursed.
In other words, the may hold the property in surety or he may bring the claim for contribution.
Similarly, the co mortgagor whose share has been got redeemed is entitled, in equity, to get possession over his share of property on payment of the amount of his share.
But these rights in equity, either in favour of the person who discharge the debt or the person whose debt has been discharged, do not result in resumption of relationship of mortgagor and mortgagee.
[423 F, G; 424 B] 2.3 A plain reading of Section 92 of the does not warrant a construction that the substitutee become a mortgagee.
The expression is `right as the mortgagee ' and not right of mortgagee.
The legislative purpose was statutory recognition of the equitable right to hold the property till the co mortgagor was reimbursed.
And not to create relationship of mortgagor and mortgagee.
The section confers certain rights on co mortgagor and provides for the manner of its exercise as well.
The rights are of redemption, foreclosure and sale.
And the manner of exercise is as mortgagee.
The word, `as ' means, `in the manner prescribed '.
[425 B C] 2.4 A co mortgagor in possession of excess share redeemed by him can thus enforce his claim against non redeeming mortgagor by exercising rights or foreclosure or sale as is exercised by mortgagee under section 67 of the .
But that does not make him mortgagee.
[426 C D] Raghavan Nair vs Anandavally Amma, , approved.
Kochuni vs State of Madras Kerala, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 1080; Ganeshi Lal vs Joti Pershad, ; and Valliamma Champaka Pillay vs Sivathanu Pillay & Ors.
, ; , referred to .
