There was a dispute between the appellants and the first respondent, regarding the possession of a house.
On an application filed by the respondent under Section 145 of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, before the Sub Divisional Magistrate, claiming ownership of the suit property, the Magistrate passed a preliminary order under Section 145 of the Code, and thereafter, made an order of attachment under Section 146 directing that the attachment would continue till the competent civil court determined the rights of the parties.
On a revision riled by the appellants, the Sessions Judge granted an interim stay of Magistrate 's order.
Subsequently, the Revision application was dismissed.
Ile Magistrate passed a fresh attachment order under Section 146.
Once more in revision the Sessions Judge passed an order staying the fresh order of attachment.
Thereafter, the appellants riled a suit for permanent injuction and also an interim injunction.
The trial court dismissed the application for interim injunction.
On appeal, the District Court issued an interim injunction against 1st respondent and her husband.
Subsequently, the 2 Criminal Revision preferred by the appellant was dismissed by the Sessions Judge also on the ground that the civil suit was preferred by the appellant.
Once again, the Magistrate passed another order attaching the property but this third order of attachment was stayed by the Sessions Judge for a period of 15 days.
Thereafter, on an application by the appellants for withdrawal of attachment on the ground that there was no apprehension of a breach of the peace, the Magistrate order withdrawal of attachment.
The Revision filed by the 1st respondent against the Magistrate 's order was dismissed by the Sessions Judge.
On an application under Section 482 of the Code filed by Respondent No.1 for quashing the order withdrawing the attachment and for directing the attachment to continue, the High Court held that it was not open to the Magistrate to withdraw the attachment till the competent court had decided the matter finally and restored the attachment.
Hence the appeal.
Allowing the appeal, this Court HELD : 1.1.
The determination by a competent court of the rights of the parties spoken in Section 146(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, has not necessarily to be a final determination.
The determination may be even tentative at the interim stage when the competent court passes an order of interim injunction or appoints a receiver in respect of the subject matter of the dispute pending the final decision in the suit.
The moment the competent court does so, even at the interim stage, the order of attachment passed by the Magistrate has to come to an end.
Otherwise, there will be inconsistency between the order passed by the civil court and the order of attachment passed by the Magistrate.
The proviso to sub section (1) of Section 146 itself takes cognizance of such a situation.
When a civil court passes an order of injunction of receiver, it is the civil court which is seized of the matter and any breach of its order can be punished by it according to law.
Hence, on the passing of the interlocutory order by the civil court, there is no longer any likelihood of the breach of the peace with regard to the subject of dispute.
Under Section 146(2) the Magistrate can withdraw the order of attachment passed by him even during the pendency of the dispute in the civil court.
When the civil court appoints a receiver, the order of attachment passed by the Magistrate, necessarily 3 gives way to the order of the civil court appointing the receiver.
It is only when the civil court does not appoint the receiver that the Magistrate may make arrangements for looking after the property or even appoint a receiver himself However, even when such a receiver is appointed and the civil court subsequently appoints a receiver of its own, the Magistrate has to order the receiver appointed by him to hand over the possession of the subject in dispute to the receiver appointed by the civil court and discharge the receiver appointed by him.
He has also to pass such other incidental or consequential orders as he thinks just.
Such order may include an order of withdrawal of the attachment, in view of the seizure of the matter by the civil court and the consequent want of apprehension of breach of the peace.
It is, therefore, not correct to say that the property continues to remain under attachment of the Magisterial order till the rights of the parties are decided finally by the competent court of law.
[7G H, 8A C, D F] 1,2.
In tic present case, the Appellate Civil Court has already passed an order of injunction against the 1st respondent and her husband by virtue of which the possession continues to be with the appellants.
Therefore, the Magistrate had not erred in withdrawing the attachment.
The High Court has erred in holding that the order passed by the Sub Divisional Magistrate withdrawing attachment was without jurisdiction.
[8G H, 6E] 2.1.
Section 397 (3) bars a second revision application by the same party.
It is now well settled that the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code cannot be utilised for exercising powers which are expressly barred by the Code.
[6D] 2.2.
In the instant case, admittedly, the 1st respondent had preferred a Criminal Application to the Sessions Court against the order passed by the Magistrate, withdrawing the attachment.
The Sessions Judge had dismissed the said application.
Hence, the High Court had clearly erred in entertaining the second revision at the instance of 1st respondent.
[6C,E] 3.
The Magistrate had committed an error in passing the subsequent orders of attachment when the first attachment was never finally vacated and had revived the moment the revision application flied against It was dismissed by the Sessions Judge.
None of the parties, including the Sessions Judge, realised this error on the part of the Magistrate.
The Sessions Judge had also committed a patent mistake in entertaining 4 revision application against the fresh orders of attachment and granting interim stays when he had dismissed revision application against the order of attachment earlier.
[6A B]
