Aggrieved by an Award of 195, the employees placed before the Company a fresh charter of demands which was mutually settled by a written agreement which provided, inter alia, that the existing rate of dearness allowance should prevail which was adjustable to any future substantial change in the cost of living index of the working class.
As the cost of living increased disputes arose, and in spite of the said Award of 1951, 137 which was not terminated according to law, the dispute arising out of the said written agreement was referred for adjudication by the Government to the Second Industrial Tribunal, Calcutta, in September, 1956.
In April 1957, the Government transferred the dispute from the Second Industrial Tribunal to the Fifth Industrial Tribunal.
The Company, inter alia, contended that the Government had no power to transfer the dispute from one Tribunal to another and that the reference was bad as the 1951 Award had not been duly terminated.
The Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (36 of 1956) amending the Industrial Disputes Act (14 Of 1947) came into force on August 28, 1956, giving authority to the Government to transfer a reference from one Tribunal to another, which was followed by a further amending Act, being Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act (18 of 1957) whereunder among other things a new definition of 'Tribunal ' was given, whereby the Industrial Tribunal constituted prior to March 10, 1957, under section 7A of Act 14 Of 1947 was included.
Held, that as a result of the amendments to the , the Government had authority to transfer a case from one Tribunal to another. 'Tribunal ' as defined by section 2(r) of the , as amended by Act 36 of 1956, read with amending Act 18 of 1957, empowers the Government to transfer a reference from one Tribunal to another.
Where, in spite of a previous award, the employees after raising fresh demands entered into a new agreement with the employer which started a fresh chapter regulating the relationship of the parties, the previous award, though not terminated in accordance with the provisions of law, must be deemed to have been superseded.
Held, further, that though article 136 of the Constitution is couched in the widest terms and confers a discretionary power, (which cannot exhaustively be defined) on the Supreme Court to grant special leave to appeal from the order of a tribunal, but it is necessary for the Supreme Court to exercise its said discretionary jurisdiction only in cases (a) where there is a violation of the principle of natural justice, (b) raises an important principle of industrial law requiring elucidation and final decision by the Supreme Court, or (c) discloses such other exceptional or special circumstances which merit the final decision by the Supreme Court.
Such discretionary reserve power cannot obviously be so construed as to confer a right of appeal to any party from the decision of a Tribunal, where he has none under the law.
is intended to be a self contained one and it seeks to achieve social justice on the basis of collective bargaining, conciliation and arbitration.
Awards are given on circumstances peculiar to each dispute and the Tribunals are to a 18 138 large extent free from restrictions of technical considerations imposed on courts.
A free and liberal exercise of the discretionary powers by the Supreme Court may materially affect the fundamental basis of the decision, namely, quick solution to such disputes to achieve industrial peace.
Where an Industrial Tribunal on the consideration of the entire material placed before it and having regard to the overall picture, came to a conclusion of facts, the Supreme Court will not interfere with such finding of fact nor will it be justified to allow to make a new case for the first time before it.
Pritam Singh vs State of Madras, ; ; Hem Raj vs State of Ajmer, and Sadhu Singh vs State of PEPSU, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 272, referred to.
