On the evening of 27th February, 1990, informant 's younger brother was attacked by twenty persons including the present two appellants with sticks, etc.
First Information Report was lodged at about 9.30 pm.
on the same day in which all the twenty persons were named as the assailants.
The injured died in the hospital on the next day.
In course of investigation statements of the informant and others were recorded and a charge sheet was forwarded to the Court of the Magistrate wherein eighteen persons, were shown as the offenders.
The names of the present two appellants were not included In the report, as In the opinion of the investigating officer their involvement in the commission of the crime was not established.
The eighteen persons named in the report were committed to the Court of Session under Section 209 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to stand trial.
When the matter came up before the Sessions Judge, an application was presented under Section 319 of the Code praying to implead the appellants also as accused persons.
To the show cause notice issued to the appellants, they submitted that though they were not present at the place of occurrence, they falsely named in the First Information Report and the investigating officer had rightly omitted their names from the charge sheet filed in Court 32 The Sessions Judge rejected the plea of the appellants and impleaded them as co accused along with the eighteen others.
This was done before the commencement of the actual trial.
The appellants ' revision flied before the High Court was dismissed.
The appellants moved this Court by special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, against the High Court 's order contending that unless evidence was recorded during the course of trial, the Sessions Judge had no jurisdiction under Section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to take cognizance and implead the appellants as co accused solely on the basis of the material collected in the course of investigation and appended to the report forwarded under Section 173 of the Code in view of the clear mandate of Section 193 of the Code; that since the trial had not commenced and the prosecution had not led any evidence, the stage for the exercise of the power had not reached.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD : 1.01.
On a plain reading of sub section (1) of Section 319 there can be no doubt that it must appear from the evidence tendered in the course of any Inquiry or trial that any person not being the accused has committed any offence for which he could be tried together with the accused.
This power, can be exercised only if it so appears from the evidence at the trial and not otherwise.
Therefore, the sub section contemplates existence of some evidence appearing in the course of trial wherefrom the Court can prima facie conclude that the person not arraigned before It Is also involved in the commission of the crime for which he can be tried with those already named by the police.
Even a person who has earlier been discharged would fall within the sweep of the power conferred by Section 319 of the Code.
Therefore, stricto sensu Section 319 of the Code cannot be invoked in a case where.
no evidence has been led at a trial wherefrom It can be said that the appellants appear to have been involved In the commission of the crime along with these already sent up for trial by the prosecution.
Section 319 covers the post congnizance stage where in the course of an inquiry or trial the involvement or complicity of a person or 33 persons not named by the investigating agency has surfaced which necessitates the exercise of the discretionary power conferred by the said provision. 1.05.
Section 319 can be invoked both by the Court having original jurisdiction as well as the Court to which the case has been committed or transferred for trial.
The sweep of Section 319 is, therefore, limited in that, it is an enabling provision which can be invoked only if evidence surfaces in the course of an inquiry or a trial disclosing the complicity of a person or persons other than the person or persons already arraigned before it 1.06.
Section 319 deals with only one situation, namely, the complicity coming to light from the evidence taken and recorded In the course of an Inquiry or trial.
This may happen not merely In cases where despite the name of a person figuring in the course of investigation the investigatIng agency does not send him up for trial but even in cases where the complicity of such a person comes to light for the first time in the course of evidence recorded at the inquiry or trial.
The scope of Its operation or the area of its play would also be limited to cases where after cognizance the involvement of any person or persons in the commission of the crime comes to light in the course of evidence recorded at the Inquiry or trial.
Thus the Section does not apply to all situations and cannot be Interpreted to be the repository of all power for summoning such person or persons to stand trial along with others arraigned before the Court 1.08.
Once the case is committed to the Court of Session by a magistrate under the Code, the restriction placed on the power of the Court of Session to take cognizance of an offence as a court of original jurisdiction gets lifted.
On the magistrate committing the case under Section 209 to the Court of Session the bar of section 193 is lifted thereby investing the Court of Session complete and unfettered jurisdiction of the court of original jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence which would include the summoning of the person or persons whose complicity in the commission of the crime can prima facie by gathered from the material available on record.
The stage for the exercise of power under section 319 of the Code had not reached, inasmuch as, the trial had not commenced and 34 evidence was not led.
The Court of Session bad, however, the power under Section 193 of the Code to summon the appellants as their involvement in the commission of the crime prima facie appeared from the record of the case.
Once It is found that the power exists the exercise of power under a wrong provision will not render the order illegal or invalid.
Joginder Singh vs State of Punjab, ; and Sohan Lal & Ors.
vs State of Rajasthan; ; referred to.
2.01.The two alternative modes In which the Criminal Law cm be set in motion are: by the filing of information with the police under Section 154 of the Code or upon receipt of a complaint or information by a Magistrate.
The former would lead to investigation by the police and may culminate In a police report under Section 173 of the Code on the basis whereof cognizance may be taken by the Magistrate under Section 190(1)(b) of the Code.
In the latter case, the Magistrate may either order investigation by the police under Section 156(3) of the Code or himself hold an inquiry under Section 202 before taking cognizance of the offence under Section 190(1) (a) or (c), as the case may be, mad with Section 204 of the Code.
Once the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence he may proceed to try the offender (except where the case is transferred under section 191 or commit him for trial under Section 209 of the Code if the offence Is triable exclusively by a Court of Session.
Once cognizance of an offence is taken It becomes the Courts duty to find out who the offenders really am and if the Court finds that apart from the persons sent up by the police some other persons am involved, It Is his duty to proceed against those persons by summoning then because 'the summoning of the additional accused Is part of the proceeding initiated by his taking cognizance of an offence,.
2.03.After cognizance is taken under Section 190(1) of the Code, in warrant cases the Court is required to frame a charge containing particulars as to the time and place of the alleged offence and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any) in respect of which, it was committed.
But before framing the charge section 227 of the Code provides that if, upon a consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith, the Sessions Judge considers that them 35 is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall, for reasons to be recorded, discharge the accused.
It Is only when the Judge is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused was committed an offence that he will proceed to frame a charge and record the plea of the accused (vide, section 228).
R becomes Immediately clear that for the limited purpose of deciding whether or not to frame a charge against the accused, the judge would be required to examine the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith, which would comprise the police report, the statements of witnesses recorded under Section 161 of the Code, the seizure memoranda, etc.
etc. 2.05.
Once the court takes cognizance of the offence (not the offender) it becomes the court 's duty to rind out the real offenders and if it comes to the conclusion that besides the persons put up for trial by the police some others are also Involved in the commission of the crime, it is the court 's duty to summon them to stand trial along with those already named, since summoning them would only be a part of the process of taking cognizance.
Even though the expression 'take cognizance ' is not defined, it is well settled that when the Magistrate takes notice of the accusations and applies his mind to the allegations made In the complaint or police report or information and on being satisfied that the allegations, if proved, would constitute an offence decides to initiate judicial proceedings against the alleged offender he Is said to have taken cognizance of the offence.
It is essential to bear in mind the fact that cognizance is in regard to the offence and not the offender.
Mere application of mind does not amount to taking cognizance unless the magistrate does so for proceeding under Section 200/204 of the Code.
Jamuna Singh & Ors.
vs Bhadai Sak ; at 4041; Raghubans Dubey vs State of Bihar ; and Hariram Satpathy vs Tikaram Agarwala, ; AIR 1978 SC 1S68, referred to.
S.K Latfur Rahman & Ors.
vs The State, (1985) PLJR 640 (1985) Criminal Law Journal 1238, approved.
