The respondent was a tenant at the rate of Rs. 183.33 per month In the suit premises.
The respondent was in arrears of rent with effect from 13.1980 to 28.2.1983.
On 7th March, 1983, predecessor in interest of appellant No.2 and appellant No.1, flied an application for eviction of the respondent on the ground of non payment of rent.
The Rent Controller on 29.7.1986 passed an order of eviction.
On 13.8.1986 the respondent deposited a sum of Rs. 9,500 In the court of the Rent Controller.
According to the appellant the account deposited was not In according with the order dated 29th July 1986.
They filed the execution petition before the Rent Controller seeking possession of the suit premises.
The Rent Controller framed two Issues: (a) whether the tender made by the respondent of the rent amount was short as alleged , (b) Relief.
108 The Rent Controller held that the tender made by the respondent was short of Rs. 161.29.
While deciding issue No. 2, the Rent Controller allowed 15 days ' time to deposit the said amount.
The appellants being aggrieved by the order of the Rent Controller riled a revision petition in the High Court.
Before the High Court the appellants submitted that the executing court had no jurisdiction to extend the time for making good the deficiency of Rs. 161.29 inasmuch as since period of 30 days was fixed by the Himachal Pradesh Urban Rent Control Act, 1987 itself, the court could not either enlarge or abridge this period.
The High Court dismissed the revision petition, holding that the respondent was not liable to be evicted and also held that the order of the executing court extending time to deposit Rs. 161.29 in pursuance of its order dated 29.7.1986 was of no consequence.
The landlord riled this appeal by special leave against the High Court 's judgment.
The respondent tenant submitted that sub section (2) of Section 14 gave discretion to the Controller to pass an order of eviction or not to pass an order of eviction, even if the ground mentioned in clauses (i) to (v) of Sub section (2) of Section 14 were made out; that the order of eviction which was passed was not the final order in the sense that it was an interim order and the final order was passed only after the expiry of 30 days if the tenant failed to avail of the second opportunity provided by the third proviso to clause (i) of sub section (2) of Section 14.
Allowing the appeal of the landlord, this Court HELD:1.01.
The Rent Control Acts are measures to protect tenants from eviction except on certain specified grounds if found established.
Once the grounds are made out and subject to any further condition which may be provided in the Act, the tenants would suffer ejectment.
Again the protection given in the Acts is not to give licence for continuous litigation and bad blood.
[117H] 1.02.The legislature which made the Act could not have envisaged that after the parties finish of one round of litigation, the party should be 109 relegated to another round of litigation for recovery of rent which accrued pendente lite.
Whatever protection Rent Acts give, they do not give blanket protection for "non payment of rent '.
This basic minimum has to be complied with by the tenants.
Rent Acts do not contemplate that if one takes a house on rent, he can continue to enjoy the same without payment of rent.
[118A B] 1.03.Rent Control Acts are necessary social measures for protection of tenants.
The Rent Control Laws have tried to balance the equity.
Landlord is duty bound to satisfy the ground of eviction mentioned in various Rent Acts and if he does not satisfy, he cannot get the order of eviction merely because the Act restricts his rights.
[122E] 1.04.There are certain Rent Acts which, even when a ground of eviction is satisfied, still confer powers on the Rent Controller to consider the question of comparative hardship and it is only in those types of cases, if the Controller is satisfied, he cap decline passing orders of eviction.
But if there is no such limitations, the Rent Controllers after the ground of eviction specified in the Act is made out, have no discretion to reject the application.
Once the order of eviction is passed the executing court is duty bound to execute its orders.
No question of equity or hardship arises at that stage.
[122F G] 2.01.There is no provision in the Act for giving powers to the Controller to direct payment or deposit of "pendente lite" rent for each month during the pendency of the petition for eviction of the tenant.
First Proviso to sub section (2) of Section 14 shows that in order to show payment or valid tender as contemplated by clause (i) of sub section (2) of Section 14 by a tenant in default, he has to pay on the first date of bearing the arrears of rent alongwith interest and costs of the application which are to be assessed by the Controller.
[116G H] 2.02.Sub clause (i) of sub section (2) of Section 14 gives two opportunities to the tenant to avoid eviction.
Ile first opportunity to avoid eviction is if the tenant avails of the benefit of first proviso.
This opportunity is before the passing of the order of eviction.
The second opportunity is after the order of eviction.
The order which is passed for eviction, is final in the sense as it is not an interim order.
If the tenant avails of the second opportunity as provided in the third proviso then the order of eviction becomes inexecutable and he saves himself from eviction.
[119G] 110 2.03.The Controller is required to dismiss the eviction application if he is not satisfied to the existence of any ground mentioned in clauses (i) to (v) of sub section (2) of Section 14 of the Act but where the Controller is satisfied with existence of any of the grounds mentioned in clauses (1) to (v) of sub section (2) of Section 14 the Controller has no discretion to decline to pass the order of eviction.
[119B] 2.04.The order which the Controller passed was a composite order of eviction in the sense that if the tenant wanted to save himself from eviction, he had to comply with the order.
The order which was passed by the Controller cannot be said to be an order without jurisdiction.
It may be a right order, it may have been a wrong order.
It was not a nullity that the executing court will ignore it.
But at the stage when the execution application was riled, the Rent Controller could not go behind its own order dated 29.7.1986.
[118C] 2.05.If the Controller could not go behind Its own order in execution proceedings, the High Court could not also go behind the order in revision against the order of Controller refusing execution.
It was not the appropriate stage for the High Court to examine what order ought to have been passed or to limit the efficacy of the order to its interpretation of the words "amount due" as mentioned in the third proviso to clause (i) of subsection (2) of Section 14.
[118D E] 2.06.The landlord, as per the scheme of the section, cannot be worse off vis a vis a tenant who was good enough to deposit in court the arrears of rent together with interest and costs on the first date of hearing.
[117D] 2.07.In the present case the tenant spared no efforts to harass the landlords.
After the order of eviction dated 29th July, 1986 the matter did not rest there.
The tenant again failed to pay the rent and the landlord was forced to file another eviction petition on the ground of non payment of rent for the period from 1.3.1983 to 30.11.1986 and it was only after the filing of the said eviction petition and in order to avoid eviction he deposited the rent.
It was only after the notice of the Special Leave Petition was issued, the tenant chose to pay the rent from 1.12.1986 after keeping it in arrears for practically six years.
[123A B] Om Parkash vs Sarla Kumari & Ors., 1991 (1) Sim.
L.C. 45, referred to.
111 Shri Krishnan Kumar vs Shri Gurbux Singh, , approved.
Shyamcharan Sharma vs Daramdas, ; ; Miss Santosh Mehta vs Om Prakash and others; , ; Ram Murti vs Bhola Nath and another, [1984] 3 SCC Ill and Ganesh Prasad Sah Kesari and another vs Lakshmi Naryan Gupta; , , distinguished.
3.01.The 'amount due" occurring in the third proviso in the context will mean the amount due on and upto the date of the order of eviction.
It will take into account not merely the arrears of rent which gave cause of action to file a petition for eviction but also include the rent which accumulated during the pendency of eviction petition as well.
If the tenant has been paying the rent during the pendency of the eviction petition to the landlord, the 'amount due" will be only arrears which have not been paid.
[117C D] 3.02.It will be advisable if the Controller while passing the order of eviction on the ground specified in clause (1) of sub section (2) of Section 14 of the Act specifies the 'amount due" till the date of the order and not merely leave it to the parties to contest it after passing of the order of eviction as to what was the amount due.
[117F] 3.03.In the context in which the expression "may ' is used it means .shall".
Otherwise the section would read that 'got only the Controller can reject an application when he is not satisfied with the ground but is also entitled to dismiss the application when he is so satisfied.
" Such an intention cannot be attributed to the legislature particularly when the consequences of non satisfaction is expressly mentioned.
Even if the consequences of non satisfaction was not mentioned, the expression .may ' occurring would still mean "shall" and all that would mean Is that if the grounds are not made out, he will be bound to dismiss the application and If the grounds are made out, he is bound to pass the order of eviction.
If any other interpretation Is given to the word "may" the section may itself become subject matter of challenge under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The Court shall avoid interpretation which make the provisions violative of the Constitution if possible.
[117C F] 112
