The appellant took the suit premises situate in Ludhiana on a monthly rent of Rs. 800 from respondent 1.
Both the respondents are medical practitioners.
The respondent riled a petition for eviction of the appellant tenant on three grounds: their personal need under Section 13(3)(a)(i)(a); change of user under Section 13(2)(ii)(b) and impairment of the value and utility of the rented building under Section 13(2) (iii) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act 1948.
The Rent Controller dismissed the petition.
The appellate authority held that the personal need of the respondents and the ground of change of user was proved.
Since the building though let out to the tenant for a residential purpose was used partly for his profession and had become a 'scheduled building ' under Section 2(h), he could not be evicted on the ground of personal need.
The order of eviction was, however, made on the ground of change of user of the building.
Ile High Court on revision affirmed the finding and order of eviction made by the appellate authority.
150 In the Supreme Court, it was argued for the appellant that there was no change of user to justify the order of eviction on that ground and that the finding on the question of personal need was erroneous.
Relying on legislative intent evidenced in amendments to the Act, it was further contended that no order of eviction can be made on the ground of personal need contained in Section 13(3)(a)(i)(a) in respect of a 'scheduled building ' since that ground is available for eviction only from a residential building.
The omission of the words 'or a scheduled ' after the word 'residential ' in Section 13 (3) (a) (i) (a) in 1956 and their addition in Section 13A in 1985 were referred to advance the argument The respondents submitted that there was no ground to interfere with the order of eviction; that 'scheduled building ' In section 2(h) continues to be a 'residential building ' in section 2(g) and that personal need in section 13(3) (a) (i) (a) is available as a ground for eviction; and that the finding of fact relating to personal need of the landlord in not open to challenge.
In the alternative, if a "scheduled building ' is not a "residential building" then the ground of change of user, unilaterally was available.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: 1.
The finding of fact of personal need is unassailable.
That respondent 2 is carrying on his profession at some distance from Ludhiana is not sufficient to negative the landlords ' need.
[155B] Non examination of respondent 2 is immaterial when respondent 1 has examined himself and proved the need of the landlord; it Is at best a matter relating to appreciation of evidence, on which ground this finding of fact cannot be assailed particularly when it was not seriously challenged in the High Court.
(pp.6/7) [155C] 2.
All buildings are divided into two categories: "non residential" and "residential".
Building, * used for the purpose of business or trade are " non residential" and the remaining buildings are all 'residential '.
This is clear from the definitions in section 2(a), (d) and (g).
(pp.23/24) [167D] 3. 'Scheduled building as defined in section 2(h) is merely a kind of 'residential building, as defined in section 2(g), its characteristic being its part user for a scheduled purpose.
(p.24) [167E] 151 4. 'The Act makes a distinction between a residential building which is being partly used for a scheduled purpose, i.e. a scheduled building, for the purpose of determination of fair rent.
A separate definition of 'scheduled building ' in clause (h) while making it clear therein that it means a residential building used partly for a specific purpose does not, therefore indicate that a scheduled building ceases to be a residential building or is a category of building separate from a residential building for the purpose of eviction of tenants in the scheme of section 13 of the Act This is the only manner in which a harmonious construction can be made of these provisions.
(pp.24/25) [167H, 168A] 5.
The object of the 1956 amendment was to equate the Punjab tenants with the Delhi tenants and exclude the ground of landlord 's personal need for eviction of tenants of non residential property.
Obviously the definition of 'scheduled building ' in section 2(h) clearly indicating that scheduled building is residential building, the words 'or a Scheduled" after "residential" were considered superfluous.
The use of the word "scheduled" after "residential ' in section 13A inserted in 1985 may have been used to avoid any controversy like the present raised on the basis of the 1956 Amendment.
(p.26) [168D E] 6.
Section 13A which provides for an expeditious remedy is not a separate distinct provision but has to be read along with section 13 of the principal Act forming a part of the general scheme contained in section 13 for eviction of tenants on the ground of personal need from buildings which are not non residential.
(p.27) [168H] 7.
This construction of section 13(3) (a) (i) as it stood after the 1956 amendment, is the only construction which can be made to harmonise with the definitions in section 2.
(p.27) [169C] 8.
The question of change of user is not necessary to be considered.
However, the general principle is that if the express terms of lease restrict the user solely for purpose of residence, then use of any part thereof for even a scheduled purpose without the written consent of the landlord may amount to use of the building for a purpose other than that for which it was leased.
That, however, is a question of fact in each case.
In that case while the ground of eviction in section 13 (3) (a) (i) (a) would remain available to the landlord for eviction of the tenant, in view of the express 152 covenant against user of any part of the residential building even for a scheduled purpose, it may make available also the ground of change of user under section 13(2) (ii) (b) of the Act.
(pp.28/29) [169G 170A] Bishamber Dass Kohli (dead) by L.rs.
vs Smt.
Satya Bhalla, referred to.
