The Respondent University invited applications for appointment to 10 posts of Assistant Professors.
Out of 112 applications received, the Screening Committee recommended 106 candidates for being Interviewed and found the remaining 6 applicants ineligible.
However, only 65 candidates appeared for the interview.
6 candidates were selected from the general category , and 2 from the Reserved Category.
5 candidates Including the petitioner were placed on the waiting list.
As per the advertisement, a candidate should have a doctorate degree or research work of equally high standard, and good academic record with atleast a Second Class Master 's Degree.
The lack of doctorate degree could be made up by either research work of equally high standard or M.Phil with two years research work.
Except in the case of Respondent No.10, who had a doctorate degree as on the last date for submission of applications, the qualifications of other selected candidates had to be relaxed by the Scrutiny Committee.
The petitioner challenged the appointment of the six selected candidates from the general category, before the High Court, but was not successful.
Being aggrieved by the High Court 's judgment, the petitioner preferred the present Special Leave Petition.
On behalf of the Respondent University it was contended that since at the time of selection Respondent Nos. 5 and 4 had obtained their doctorate degrees they could be said to have fulfilled the qualifications; 187 that since respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were registered for Ph. D. in 1982, by the time of the selection they had put in research work connected with their thesis and on the date of selection, they had about 3 years ' experience in research work; that respondent No.8 had good academic record both in MA and B.A. and the Scrutiny Committee could under the Ordinance relax the qualifications as admittedly sufficient number of candidates with doctorate degrees were not available; and that even the petitioner did not have the doctorate degree; that the candidates had already been appointed in February 1985 and they have been working since then and some of them were also due for promotion to the higher posts in the near future; and that their record of teaching so far has been excellent and unblemished and so their selection need not be interfered with at this late stage.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition and laying down the guidelines for future selection process, this Court, HELD : 1.
In the absence of a fixed date indicated in the advertisement/notification inviting applications with reference to which the requisite qualifications should be judged, the only certain date for the scrutiny of the qualifications will be the last date for making the applications.
Therefore, when the Selection Committee took into consideration the requisite qualifications as on the date of selection rather than on the last date for preferring applications, it acted with patent illegality, and on this ground itself the selections in question are liable to be quashed.
However, the selected candidates have been working in the respective posts since February 1985.
Almost eight years have elapsed. 'Mere is also no record to show as to how the Selection Committee had proceeded to weigh the respective merits of the candidates and to relax the minimum qualifications in favour of some candidates in exercise of the discretionary powers vested in it under the University Ordinance.
If the considerations which weighed with the Committee in relaxing the requisite qualifications were valid, it would result in injustice to those who have been selected.
For these reasons, this Court is not inclined to set aside the selections made by the Screening Committee.
[195H, 196A E] A.P. Public Service Commission, Hyderabad & Anr.
vs B. Sarat Chandra & Ors., and The District Collector Society) Vizianagaram & Anr.
vs M. Tripura Sundari Devi, (1990) 4 SLR 237, relied on.
188 2.
It is necessary to emphasise and bring to the notice of the Respondent University that the illegal practices in the selection of candidates which have come to light and which seem to be followed usually at its end must stop forthwith.
For this purpose the following guidelines are laid down for the future selection process: (i) The University must note that the qualifications it advertises for the posts should not be at variance with those prescribed by its Ordinance/Statutes.
[196F] (ii) The candidates selected must be qualified as on the last date for making applications for the posts in question or on the date to be specifically mentioned in the advertisement/notification for the purpose.
The qualifications acquired by the candidates after the said date should not be taken into consideration, as that would be arbitrary and result in discrimination.
It must be remembered that when the advertisement/notification represents that the candidates must have the qualifications in question, with reference to the last date for making the applications or with reference to the specific date mentioned for the purpose, those who do not have such qualifications do not apply for the posts even though they are likely to acquire such qualifications and do acquire them after the said date.
In the circumstances, many who would otherwise be entitled to be considered and may even be better than those who apply, can have a legitimate grievance since they are left our of consideration.
[196G,H, 197A B] (iii) When the University or its Selection Committee relaxes the minimum required qualifications, unless it is specifically stated in the advertisement/notification both that the qualifications will be relaxed and also the conditions on which they will be relaxed, the relaxation will be illegal.
