The three appeals arose out of disputes relating to the publication of telephone directories of MTNL a Government of India Undertaking.
The MTNL introduced a new concept of "yellow pages ' in telephone directories, and these yellow pages were to contain advertisement under different headings.
The contractor who was to be awarded the contract for printing such directories was to collect the revenue from the advertisements in the yellow pages as well as in the white pages of the telephone directory, supply the same free of cost to the for its subscribers, and pay royalty to the MTNL in connection with printing of such directories.
Tenders for publication of the directories for Delhi and Bombay were invited.
Tender of UIP respondent No. 2 in the Writ Petition and appellant in one of the appeals (CA.No. 91 of 1993) was accepted, and an agreement dated 14th March, 1987 was executed.
UDI, respondent No. 3 to the Writ Petition and appellant in one of the other appeals (CA No. 90, of 1993) was a subsidiary of UIP.
Under the original agreement UIP was to publish directories every year for a period of five years from 1987 to 1991 for Delhi and Bombay separately, pay an amount of Rs. 20.16 crores as royalty to the MTNL, supply the directories free of cost to subscribers.
UIP also furnished a 82 ` performance guarantee for a sum of Rs. one crore, and was also to supply the same number of supplementary directories which were to be published six months after the publication of the annual issue, to be published in November/December every year.
UIP was given the exclusive right for procurement of the advertisements in the yellow pages as well as strips, bold the extra entries in the white pages, the rates to be fixed by the UIP for each issue of the directory, and such rates to be printed for general information.
It was stipulated that if UIP committed default or breach of the agreement or failed in the due performance thereof, the MTNL shall be entitled to recover from the UIP by way of compensation or liquidated damages and amount calculated at the rate of Rs. One lakh for every day or part thereof for the delay beyond the stipulated date.
The MTNL without prejudice to other rights could by notice in writing determine the contract.
UIP defaulted and committed breach of the agreement inasmuch as directories for Delhi were published only for the years 1987 and 1988 and for Bombay only for the year 1987.
For the year 1987, Delhi issue was published after a delay of seven months and Bombay issue after six months, and the Delhi issue of 1988 was published only in August, 1990, a delay of two years.
There was no publication of the directories for Delhi for the years 1989, 1990 and 1991, and in respect of Bombay for the years 1988, 1989, 1990 and 1991.
A supplemental agreement was entered on 26th September, 1991 between UIP, UDI, MTNL and Sterling Computers Limited appellant in one of the appeals (CA.
No. 89 of 1993).
Sterling by this agreement was introduced to carry out the unexecuted portion of the agreement with UIP.
By this supplemental agreement Sterling was to print and publish 13 main issues of Delhi and Bombay directories within a period of seven years including the year 1991 on payment of additional royalty of only Rs. 10 crores to the MTNL over and above the royalty stipulated in the original agreement by the UIP.
Under the agreement dated 14th March, 1987 the royalty which was payable was Rs. 20.16 crores for the period 1987 to 1991, but under the supplemental agreement Sterling was given the contract to publish 13 main issues of the Delhi and Bombay directories upto 1997 and 1998, but for the extended period it had to pay royalty only for an amount of Rs. 10 83 crores.
A Writ Petition was flied questioning the validity and legality of the supplemental agreement on different grounds including the ground of mala fide.
It was contended by the petitioners that under the grab of a supplemental agreement a fresh contract was awarded to Sterling for a fresh period from 1991 to 1997 on fresh terms and conditions to publish the directories every year for Delhi and Bombay without inviting tenders or affording an opportunity to others, to submit tenders so that they may be also considered for award of the said contract.
It was asserted by the petitioners that in the process of entering into the supplemental agree ment the MTNL, which is a public undertaking and a "State ' within the meaning of Article 12 of the constitution, had suffered a loss of more than Rs. 60 crores without any corresponding benefit accruing to the MTNL or to the public in general.
MTNL contested the writ petition, contending that the supplemental agreement was a result of a bona fide commercial decision free from any bias or malice, that the original contract for the years 1987 to 1991 had been awarded to UIP after inviting tenders, but UIP having gone bankrupt, no money could have been realised from it.
The termination of the original contract was no remedy although repeated contraventions and breaches had been committed by the UIP inasmuch as there was no publication of directory for Bombay for the years 1988, 1989, 1990 and 1991 and for Delhi for the years 1989, 1990 and 1991.
In order to salvage Rs. 20.16 crores which was payable to the MTNL under the original agreement dated 14th March, 1987 by the UIP and which had not been paid, a decision was taken by the MTNL to enter into a supplemental agreement and to allow the UIP/UNI/Sterling to publish the thirteen issues of directories, six main issues for Delhi and seven main issues for Bombay upto years 1997 98 apart from the supplementary directories.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions, and came to the conclusion that the supplemental agreement dated 26th September, 1991 cannot be held to be an extension of the original agreement dated 14th March, 1987, and that the supplemental agreement was tainted with malice the object being to provide unjust enrichment to UIP/UDI/Sterling.
In the appeals to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the 84 appellants that the supplemental agreement was entered into by the MTNL taking into consideration the circumstances then existing which had been examined at the highest level and as such a Court should not examine the discretion exercised by the public authority as a court of appeal because the decision to enter into the supplemental agreement also involved a question of policy, and it was pointed out that the contract had been awarded in the year 1987 to UIP on an experimental basis on such terms and conditions on which in past directories had not ever been published, and that the real experiment was as to how the directories ' could be published without incurring any cost by MTNL.
On behalf of the Writ Petitioners it was stated that they were prepared to pay to the MTNL an amount of Rs. 60 crores for the period 1991 to 1997/1998 the period covered by the supplemental agreement for which the UIP/(JDI/Sterling have undertaken to pay only Rs. 10 crores as royalty.
Dismissing the appeals, this court HELD:1.
Ile publication of directories by the MTNL is not just a commercial venture, the primary object is to provide service to the people.
[92F] 2.The norms and procedures prescribed by Government and indicated by Courts have to be more strictly followed while awarding contracts which have along with a commercial element a public purpose.
[92F] 3.The action or the procedure adopted by the authorities which can be held to be a 'State ' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, while awarding contracts in respect of properties belonging to the state can be judged and tested in the light of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Raman Davaram Shelly vs 7he International Airport Authority of India, ' ; ; M/s. Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs The State of Jammu and Kashmir, ; ; Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union (Regd) Sindri vs Union of India, ; ; Ram and Shyam Company vs State of Haryana, ; ; Haji T.M. Hasan Rawther vs Kerala Financial Corporation, AIR 1988 SC 157; Mahabir Auto Stores vs Indian Oil Corporation, ; and Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi vs State of U.P., , referred to.
[92 H 93 A] 4.
Public authorities, at times It Is said must have the same liberty 85 as they have in framing the policies, even while entering into contracts because many contracts amount to implementation or projection of policies of the Government.
But it cannot be overlooked that unlike policies, contracts are legally binding commitments and they commit the authority which may be held to be a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution In many cases for years.
That is why the courts have impressed that even in contractual matters the public authority should not have unfettered discretion.
[91G H, 92A] 5.In contracts having commercial elements, some more discretion has to be conceded to the authorities so that they may enter into contracts with persons, keeping an eye on the augmentation of the revenue But even in such matters they have to follow the norms recognised by courts while dealing with public property.
[92B] 6.Under some special circumstances a discretion has to be conceded to the authorities who have to enter into contract giving them liberty to assess the overall situation for purposes of taking a decision its to whom the contract is to be awarded and at what terms.
If the decisions have been taken in bone fide manner although not strictly following the norms laid down by the Courts, such decisions are upheld.
[92C] 7.Public authorities are essentially different from those of private persons.
Even while taking decision in respect of commercial transactions a publicauthority must be guided by relevant considerations and not by irrelevant ones.
If such decision is influenced by extraneous considerations which it ought not to have been taken into account the ultimate decision is bound to be vitiated, even if it is established that such decision had been taken without bias.
[102H, 103A] 8.While exercising the power of judicial review, in respect of contracts entered into on behalf of the State, the Court is concerned primarily as to whether there has been any infirmity in the 'decision making process '.
By way of judicial review the Court cannot examine the details of the terms of the contract which have been entered into by the public bodies or the state.
Courts have inherent limitations on the scope of any such enquiry.
But the Courts can certainly examine whether "decision making process ' was reasonable, rational, not arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[95C E F] 86 Chief Constable of the North Wales Police vs Evans, ; , referred to.
9.In the facts and the circumstances of the instant case, it has to be held that the MTNL has applied the "irrelevant considerations ' doctrine while granting a fresh contract for a period of five years through the supplemental agreement dated 26th September, 1991, because it had failed to take into account considerations which were necessarily relevant ie.
following the rule of inviting tenders while granting the contract for a further period of five years on fresh terms and conditions and had taken into account irrelevant considerations.
[101H, 102A] 10.Philanthropy is no part of the management of an undertaking, while dealing with a contractor entrusted with the execution of a contract. '[102F] 11.The supply of the directories to public in time, was a public service which was being affected by the liberal attitude of the MTNL and due to the condonation of delay on the part of the UIP/UDI.
There was no justification on the part of the MTNL to become benevolent by entering into the supplemental agreement with no apparent benefit to the without inviting fresh tenders from intending persons to perform the some job for the next five years.
[102G] 12.The supplemental agreement is really a fresh agreement with fresh terms and, conditions which has been entered by MTNL without inviting any tender for the same.
It has been entered to benefit the parties who are admittedly defaulters by not publishing directories for Bombay for the years 1988 1991, and for Delhi for the years 1989 1991 although they had collected several crores or Rupees for the advertisements for the directories to be published in the aforesaid years.
[103D E] 13.It is a matter of common experience that whenever applications relating to awarding of contracts are entertained for judicial review of the administrative action, such applications remain pending for months and in some cases for years.
Because of the interim orders passed in such applications, the very execution of the contracts, are kept in abeyance.
The cost of different projects keep on escalating with passage of time apart from the fact that the completion of the project itself Is deferred.
This process not only affects the public exchequer but even the public In general 87 who are deprived of availing the facilities under different projects.
As such, it need not be impressed that while exercising the power of judicial review in connection with contractual obligations, Courts should be conscious of the urgency of the disposal of such matters, otherwise the power which is to be exercised in the interest of the public and for public good in some cases become counter productive by causing injury to the public in general.
[106AB]
