IDCO and JOPL entered Into an agreement whereunder IDCO agreed to supply to JOPL 5000 tens of MS rounds for export on terms and conditions mentioned therein.
The goods were not supplied.
By a letter dated September 12, 1969, IDCO cancelled the agreement and intimated to JOPL that its offer which had culminated in the agreement, should be treated as withdrawn.
Some correspondence followed.
Thereafter JOPL 's claim for damages against IDCO for breach of contract was referred to the Chief Secretary, who was named in the agreement, for arbitration.
He declined to act as arbitrator.
An arbitrator was thereafter appointed by the Subordinate Judge, Bhubaneswar under S.20 of the .
He gave his award on September 24, 1985.
In the award the arbitrator briefly stated the facts, the issues settled for adjudication and that the parties had produced a large number of documents, examined witnesses and advanced elaborate arguments.
Having carefully considered them, he set out the conclusions and awarded JOPL Rs. 11,00,344 with pendente lite interest @ 6%.
IDCO challenged the award before the Subordinate Judge, Bhubaneswar who dismissed the petition and made the award a rule of the Court In appeal before the Orissa High Court, the learned Judge rejected all contentions of IDCO except one namely that In answering three issues the arbitrator had arrived at Inconsistent conclusions apparent on the face of the award, which had a bearing on the question of awarding of damages.
He therefore directed that the records be sent back to the 229 230 arbitrator for making a fresh award.
Cross appeals were filed in the Supreme Court.
JOPL contended that there was no inconsistency on the face ' of the award which vitiated it.
For IDCO, it was contended that the award was bad in law, and in any event the High Court was in error in sending the matter back to the arbitrator for making a fresh award.
Dismissing the appeal of IODC, this Court, HELD: 1.
A speaking or reasoned award is one which discusses or sets out the reasons which led the arbitrator to make the award.
Setting out the conclusions upon the questions or issues that arise in arbitration proceedings without discussing the reasons for coming to these con clusions does not make an award a reasoned or speaking award.
The arbitrator has in the award only answered the issues that were framed.
He had not discussed or set out the reasons for the answers.
The award is, therefore, not a speaking or reasoned award.
[234E F] 2.
That the arbitrator merely referred to the pleadings does not mean that the pleadings are incorporated in the award.
[234F] Allen Berry and Co. vs Union of India, AIR 1971 SC 6% and Ciacomo Costa Fu Andrea vs British Italian Trading Co. Ltd, , followed.
In answering issue no.2, the arbitrator construed only such clause of the agreement as was relevant to decide the issue.
Such clause alone would be incorporated in the award and could be looked at by the court to determine if the arbitrator had misconstrued it.
(pp.9 10) [236B] 4.
Even assuming the incorporation of the agreement, an error apparent on the face of the award had to be shown.
(p.10) [236D] Bungo Steel Furniture Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , relied on.
In the circumstances of the case, merely because the arbitrator had not mentioned the pleadings and order of reference does not mean that the issues framed did not reflect the referred disputes.
(pp.11 and 12) [237B] 231 6.
That the original foreign sale contracts had not been sent to IDCO does not ipso facto lead to the conclusion that the arbitrator had no material before him upon which he could find in monetary terms the damages suffered by JOPL.
[237E] 7.
In the facts of the case, there are no inconsistencies upon the face of the award as can be characterised as errors that vitiate the award.
An award has to be read as a whole and harmoniously.
The grounds upon which an award can be set aside are limited.
The court should be very circumspect about setting aside an award reached by an arbitrator for parties have agreed that the disputes that may arise or have arisen between them should be resolved not by a court of law but by arbitration.
[239H, 240A] 8.
Evidence of a "malady of the racket of arbitration ' should make the court scrutinies the award carefully in each case, but would not make the court declare all high amounts of awards would be bad per se.
(p.17) [240B C] State of Orissa vs Gangaram Chhapolia, and State of Orissa vs Dandasi Sahu, ;
