The Respondent Hotel which was also running a Bar for sometime, closed down its business after several years.
Th Inspectors of the appellant Corporation verified the records of the establishment and reported that at certain point of time the employment strength of the establishment including the bar was more than 19.
Therefore, the establishment was treated as covered provisionally under the Employees State Insurance (ESI) Act, 1948.
Since the final date of coverage could be decided only after verifying all the records, the Respondent was asked to produce them.
The Respondent did not avail the opportunity afforded to it Though the Respondent sent Its explanation, It was not acceptable to the appellant Corporation and so it passed a detailed order under S.45 A calling upon the Respondent to pay the contribution with interest at 6% failing which It would be recovered as arrears of land revenue.
Since this order and the reminder thereto, did not evoke any response from the Respondent, the appellant sent a claim in Form 19 to the District Collector requesting him to recover the said amount The Respondent challenged the proceedings by filling an application under S.75 of the Act before the ESI Court, which upheld the assessment made by the appellant Corporation, but stated that recovery steps were not justified after the closure of the establishment, and only prosecution as contemplated section 85 of the Act was attracted.
The appellant Corporation preferred an appeal against the said decision of ESI Court The High Court dismissed the appeal and held that since the scheme was made after the closure of the establishment, the 219 220 appellant was not justified in proceeding against the Respondent Being aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, the appellant Corporation preferred the present appeal contending that so long as the establishment was covered by the provisions of the Act, the Respondent could not circumvent its liability by claiming that before actual recovery proceedings, it had closed down the establishment.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
Admittedly the hotel industry like that of the respondent has been notified by the Government thus extending the provisions of the to hotel industry.
Therefore, on the date of commencement of its business, namely, 11.7.85, there was a liability on the Respondent to contribute to the ESI fund.
Under section 40 the primary liability is on the employer to pay, not only his contribution but also the employees contribution.
As such the employer can not plead that since he had not deducted the employees ' contribution from their wages, he could not be made liable for the same.
After all when he makes employees ' contribution he is entitled to deduct from the wages.
Thus by force of the application of the statutory provisions, the liability to contribute during the relevant period, namely, 11.7.85 to 31.3.88, arose.
[226E G] 1.2.
The Insurance Court as well as the High Court have correctly upheld the demand for contribution.
But it is rather strange to conclude that the demand could not be enforced against a closed business.
If this finding were to be accepted it would not promote the scheme and avoid the mischief.
On the contrary, it would perpetrate the mischief.
Any employer can easily avoid his statutory liability and deny the beneficial piece of social security legislation to the employees, by closing down the business before recovery.
That certainly is not the indentment of the Act.
It is equally fallacious to conclude that because the employees had gone away there is no liability to contribute.
It has to be carefully remembered that the liability to contribute arose from the date of commencement of the establishment and is a continuing liability till the closure.
The very object of establishing a common fund under section 26 for the benefit of all the employees will again be thwarted if such a construction is put.
[227D F] R.M.
Lakshmanamurthy vs The Employees ' State Insurance Corporation, Bangalore, , relied on.
221 2.
The proceeding for the recovery is in respect of the dues of contribution which arose prior to the closure on 31.3.88.
Therefore, it matters little when notice was issued calling upon the establishment to pay the contribution.
Such a notice is only a reminder to the employer to discharge his statutory obligation.
The appellant corporation is thus entitled to proceed with the recovery proceedings in accordance with law.
[227H, 228A]
