The first respondent, a defeated candidate, riled an election petition before the High Court for a declaration that the election of the appellant was void and that he himself had been duly elected.
Since the notice could not be served on the appellant, and some other respondents in the ordinary course, it was published in a vernacular daily newspaper, as directed by the High Court, fixing the date of appearance of the respondents therein.
The appellant appeared before the High Court on the date of publication of the notice and sought time for filing the written.
statement and after doing so submitted a recrimination notice under Section 97 of the Representation of People Act, 1951.
Along with the recrimination notice he flied an application under Section 5 of the requesting the High Court to condone the delay in filing the same, since the appellant had given notice beyond the period of 14 days from the date of commencement of trial, prescribed under the proviso to Section 97(1).
The High Court held that Section 5 of the was not applicable to a recrimination notice.
Aggrieved, the appellant riled the appeal, by special leave, before this Court.
It was contended that by virtue of Section 29(2) of the , all the provisions contained in sections 4 to 24 (both inclusive) of the Act applied to the proceedings under the Representation of the People Act, 1951, including the recrimination notice under Section 97.
314 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.1.
There is no provision in the Representation of People act 1951 making all or any of the provisions of the placable to the proceedings under the Act.
[318A] 1.2.
The Act equates a recrimination notice to an election petition.
The language of Section 97 makes the said fact abundantly clear.
It provides that returned candidates or any other party may give evidence to prove that the election of such candidate would have been void If he had been the returned candidate and a petition had been presented calling in question his election.
The proviso to sub section (1) applies the provisions of Sections 117 and 118 to such a recrimination notice.
For non compliance with the requirement of Section 117 an election petition is liable to be dismissed by virtue of sub section (1) of Section 86.
Sub section (2) of Section 97 further provides that the notice referred to in sub section (1) should be accompanied by the statement and particulars as required by Section 83 in the case of an election petition and should be signed and verified in like manner.
[319C E] 1.3.
The proviso to sub section (1) of Section 97 which requires such a notice to be given to the High Court within 14 days of the date fixed for the respondents to appear before the High Court to answer the claim or claims (reading the definition of 'commencement of trial ' into it) has also a particular meaning and object behind it.
The idea is that the recrimination notice, if any, should be filed at the earliest possible time so that both the election petition and the recrimination notice are tried at the same time.
[319F] The recrimination notice is thus comparable to an election petition.
If Section 5 of the does not apply to the filing of an election petition, it does not equally apply to the filing of the recrimination notice.
[319G] H.N Yadav vs L.N. Misra, ; , relied on.
Shukla vs Khubchand Baghel and Ors., [1964] 6 S.C.R. 129, distinguished.
Bhogilal Pandya vs Maharawal Laxman Singh, AIR , Bhakti Bh.
Mondal vs Hhagendra K Bandhopandhya, 1968 Calcutta 315 69, overruled.
