The respondent while working as Income Tax Officer completed certain assessments during the year 1982 83.
A charge memorandum, was served on him, proposing to hold an inquiry against him under Rule 14 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Central Appeal) Rules, 1965.
A statement of article of charge was framed against the respondent.
The substance of the charge was the completion of nine assessments in an irregular manner, hastily with a view to confer undue favour upon the assessees, and by such act, he failed to maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty and exhibited a conduct unbecoming of government servant.
The details relating to misconduct or misbehaviour of the respondent were furnished and he was charged for violating the provisions of Rules 3 (1) (i), 3 (1) (ii) and 3 (1) (iii) of the Central Civil Services (,Conduct) Rules, 1964.
In support of the allegations, he was also supplied with the necessary documents.
Against the memorandum, the respondent preferred an application before the Central Administrative Tribunal, praying for a stay of the disciplinary proceedings and to consider his case for promotion on merits without resort to the sealed cover procedure.
On 8.2.1991, the Tribunal directed the appellant Union of India to open the sealed cover and to implement the recommendations of the 297 Departmental Promotion Committee to promote the respondent to the post of Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, if he was found fit for promotion within two weeks from the date of order.
Later on 223.1991, the Tribunal allowed the respondent 's application, holding that the action taken by the respondent officer was quasi judicial and should not have formed the basis of disciplinary action.
The Tribunal also made its earlier order dated 8.2.1991 absolute.
The Union of India preferred the present appeals by special leave against the orders of the Tribunal, contending that in a case where disciplinary proceedings were pending against the respondent, the procedure of opening the sealed cover should not have been resorted to.
Otherwise, it would amount to putting a premium on misconduct ; that the Tribunal failed to appreciate the ratio of the order in C.A. Nos.
4986 87/90; that as the respondent was charged for violation of Rules 3(1)(i), 3(1)(ii) and 3(1)(iii) of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964; immunity from the disciplinary action could not be claimed.
The respondent contended that the opening of the sealed cover was correctly ordered because on the date when the Departmental Promotion Committee met in March 1989, no charge sheet was served on the respondent; that as the respondent was exercising quasi judicial functions, orders made by him if were wrong, the remedy by way of an appeal or revision could be resorted to; that if in every case of wrong order, disciplinary action was resorted to, it would jeopardize the exercise of judicial functions; and the immunity attached to the officer while exercising quasi judicial powers would be lost.
On the question, whether an authority enjoys immunity from disciplinary proceedings with respect to matters decided by him in exercise of quasi judicial functions; allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD : 1.01.
The disciplinary action can be taken in the following cases : (i) Where the Officer had acted in a manner as would reflect on his reputation for integrity or good faith or devotion to duty ; (ii) if there is prima facie material to show recklessness or misconduct in the discharge of his duty; (iii) if he has acted in a manner which is unbecoming of a govern 298 ment servant; [311E F] (iv) if he had acted negligently or that he omitted the prescribed conditions which are essential for the exercise of the statutory powers; (v) if he had acted in order to unduly favour a party, (vi) if he had been actuated by corrupt motive however, small the bribe may be.
[311G H] The instances above catalogued are not exhaustive.
For a mere technical violation or merely because the order is wrong and the action not falling under the above enumerated instances, disciplinary action is not warranted.
Each case will depend upon the facts and no absolute rule can be postulated.
[312A B] 1.02.
There is a great reason and justice for holding in such cases that the ' disciplinary action could be taken.
It is one of the cardinal principles of administration of justice that it must be free from bias of any kind.
[311B] 1.03.
The officer who exercises judicial or quasi judicial powers acts negligently or recklessly or in order to confer undue favour on a person is not acting as a judge.
[311C] 1.04.
In the present case, this Court Is not concerned with the correctness or legality of the decision of the respondent but the conduct of the respondent in discharge of his duties as an officer.
The legality of the orders with reference to the nine assessments may be questioned in appeal or revision under the Act.
[311D] 1.05.
In the case on hand, article of charge clearly mentions that the nine assessments covered by the article of charge were completed (i) in an irregular manner, (ii) in undue haste, and (iii) apparently with a view to confer unduefavour upon the assessees concerned.
[310A B] Therefore, the allegation of conferring undue favour is very much 299 there and certainly disciplinary action is warranted.
[310C] Govinda Menon vs Union of India, ; ; Thayre vs The London, Brighton and South Coast Railway Company, and Thompson vs British Berna Motor Lorries Limited, at page 188, referred to.
Union of India & Ors.
vs A.N. Saxena, ; , explained.
SLP (C) Nos.
2635 36/89 in CA No. 4986 87/90, distinguished
