The appellants and two others were charged with and tried for offences under sections 148,302,149 and 323/149 IPC for causing the murder of one S and causing simple hurts to one R, both related to the accused.
The Trial Judge acquitted one of the five accused since no part of the actual occurrence except exhortations were attributed to him and convicted the other four accused under section 302/34 and 323/34 IPC, and sentenced them to life imprisonment and 6 months rigorous imprisonment respectively.
On appeal, the High Court acquitted one more accused on the ground that the medical evidence did not corroborate the claim that he used his kirpan with force as alleged by the prosecution.
The appeal preferred by the complainant against this acquittal,was dismissed by this Court.
The other three accused whose conviction and sentence were confirmed by the High Court, have preferred the present appeals.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the prosecution case has been discredited by the Courts render ing the same unacceptable resulting in the acquittal of two accused and for the same reasons, they also deserved acquit tal.
It was also contended that the evidence regarding recovery of weapons did not inspire confidence.
587 Disposing of the appeal, this court, HELD: 1.
There may be a tendency here and there to implicate a person in addition to actual assailants in a crime but substitution is rare and that cannot be the case here.
As is evident the parties are closely related.
The crime was committed in broad day light.
The witness is a stamped witness.
There was no reason for the prosecution to falsely evolve a case against the appellants.
The medical evidence is consistent and corroborative in connecting all the three appellants.
On the eye witness account and the corroboration it receives from medical evidence, their guilt is estab lished even if the evidence of recovery of weapon is kept aside.[592 C G] 2.
Out of 13 injuries on the dead body six were incised wounds and the remaining were blunt weapon injuries.
Amongst the incised wounds the first one was by itself sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death of the de ceased.
That injury was positively attributed to the appel lant in the second case who opened the attack but the re maining five incised wounds were not positively attributed to him alone.
It can safely be assumed that some may have fallen to his share to be inflicted and others to the co accused who has since been acquitted.
Even though the Doctor has stated that all the incised wounds could have been caused by Kulhar P.1, that by itself cannot go to conclude that all the incised wounds were caused by the appellant in the second case.
Since he inflicted the first incised wound on the head of the deceased, which was sufficient by itself in the ordinary course to cause death, he has rendered himself liable to be adjudged guilty under section 302 IPC.
[592 H; 593 A_C] 3.
Since extensive damage had been done to the limbs of the deceased after the infliction of vital injury No.1, it can safely be inferred that despite the assailants ' choosing non vital parts of the body for inflicting those injuries, they must be attributed the knowledge that by their concert ed act they were likely to cause death of the deceased, for which act they could be punished under section 304 part II of the Indian penal Code.
The act was done while the de ceased was alive .
The outcome of injury No.1 may or may not have been perceived by the assailants except the appellant in the second case, but they were satisfied in choosing and inflicting injuries on non vital parts which injuries were caused by breaking the bones of his arms and legs.[593 F H] 4.
Due to his young age, being in teens, the appellant in the first case 588 may have acted under the influence of his paternal uncle, viz; the appellant in the second case.
Though he shared the common intention of causing extensive injuries to the de ceased and injuries to P.W.4 he may not have shared the common intention of causing death but can definitely be attributed the knowledge that by his concerted act the victim could die.
Similarly the share cropper had acted under the influence of his employers.but cannot be said to be a co participant in intentionally causing the death of the death of the deceased.
He too must be attributed the knowledge that by his act in concert with others he was others he was likely to cause the death of the deceased.
Also, no injury on any vital part of the body of the de ceased was attributed to either of these accused.
According ly, these appellants are held guilty of offence under sec tion 304 IPC, read with section 34 IPC, and not under section 302 IPC.[594 A D] 5.
The conviction of the appellant in second case is altered to a plain one under section 302 IPC and his life sentence is maintained.
His conviction and sentence under section 323/34 is also sustained.
The conviction of the other appellants are altered to one under section 304 IPC read with section 34 IPC for which a sentence of seven years rigorous imprisonment is imposed on each of them.[594 D,E]
