Under an Irrigation Scheme, the respondent State proposed to construct a dam on a river in the State and prepared a sketch, indicating the passage of the canal from the Dam and for that purpose, proceeded to acquire land through which the canal was proposed to run.
Apprehending that serious damage will be caused to their lands by the passing of the canal through their lands, the appellants farmers filed a suit against the respondent State, seeking to restrain it from implementing the Irrigation Scheme, as proposed.
During the pendency of the suit an agreement was arrived at between the parties to the effect that the canal from the Dam would be run as per the line demarcated in red in the map appended to the deed of agreement.
As a result, the suit was unconditionally withdrawn by the appellants, but subsequently, on discovering that the State Government was going back from the agreement and the alignment of the canal was being undertaken contrary to the alignment reflected in red in the map appended to the agreement, they filed a fresh suit for declaration to the effect that the agreement entered into between them and the respondents through its Executive Engineer, Irrigation Department, was binding on the 367 parties and that the parties were bound to act according to the terms of the said agreement and for an injunction, restraining the respondent State from going back on the agreement.
The trial court decreed the suit and permanently restrained the State from going back from the agreement and acting otherwise than as per the terms of the same.
The appeal preferred by the State was also dismissed by the District Judge.
The State riled a second appeal before the High Court contending that the alleged compromise/agreement was not binding upon the State, inasmuch as the Executive Engineer had no authority to agree on behalf of the State Government as he was not the representative of the Government.
The High Court held that the agreement was a null and void document for non compliance with the mandatory provisions of Article 299(1) of the Constitution.
It also rejected the appellants ' plea that under the statutory powers conferred by section 18 of the Bombay Irrigation Act, 1879 the Executive Engineer was competent to enter into a compromise and that the said compromise arrived at during the pendency of the earlier suit was binding on the Government.
In the appeal filed before this Court on behalf of the appellants farmers, it was submitted that reliance placed on Article 299 of the Constitution of India was wholly erroneous, that by a Notification, dated 27th of September 1963, published in Part IV B of the Government Gazette, the State Government had appointed all Executive Engineers and Superintending Engineers in charge of canals in the State to be Canal Officers in respect of such canals and assigned to them all the powers and duties of the Canal Officers under the Act and, therefore, the agreement/compromise entered into by the Executive Engineer during the pendency of the suit of which he was doing 'pervi ' was a validly executed compromise which was binding on the parties and respondent could not go back on it, and that after having made the appellants to withdraw their earlier suit on the basis of the agreement, it was not permissible for the respondent to dispute the act done by its officers or agents within their powers under the statute.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.1.
The agreement/compromise arrived at in the previous 368 suit, could not have been equated with a contract between the State and the citizen.
Article 299(1) of the Constitution concerns itself with contracts and assurances of property and lays down how Government contracts, including assurances of property are to be made and executed.
The provisions of Article 2" are mandatory in character and their non compliance would render a contract void, but where the agreement is not referable to Article 299 and is not a contract, as contemplated by that Article, the agreement cannot be invalidated for not satisfying the essential requirements of Articles 299 of the Constitution.
[375B, D E] 1.3.
There is a marked distinction between contracts which are executed in exercise of the executive powers and agreements or orders made, which are statutory in nature.
Articles 299(1) applies to a contract made in exercise of the executive power of the Union or the State and it has no application to a case where a particular statutory authority as distinguished from the Union or the State, enters into an agreement within his authorised capacity.
[375F] State of Haryana and Ors.
vs Lal Chand and Ors., ; , relied on.
A compromise of the nature contained in the agreement arrived at during the pendency of a suit, in the instant case is not a contract executed between the parties as envisaged by Article 299.
[375E] 2.1 It is clear from the record that it was the Executive Engineer who was doing 'pervi ' of the case in the suit filed earlier.
The agreement in question was entered into during the pendency of the said case.
The State Government had appointed all Executive Engineers and Superintending Engineers in charge of canals in the State to be Canal Officers in respect of such canals and assigned to them all the powers and duties of the Canal Officers under the Act by virtue of the Notification dated 27th September, 1963.
Thus, it is manifest that the Executive Engineer, by virtue of the said Notification, had been lawfully appointed as Canal Officer within the meaning of Section 3(6) of the Bombay Irrigation Act, 1879.
[377F H, 378A] 2.2.
Section 18 of the Act vests the Canal Officers with the power to 369 hold Inquiry and direct the construction of suitable alignments for a water course and by Section 77 of the Act a Canal Officer Is vested with the authority to survey, demarcate and make a map of the land which, in his opinion, Is suitable for constructing an alignment for the water course.
[378A] 23.
Thus, under the statute, read with the notification dated 27th September, 1963, the Canal Officer (Executive Engineer) was fully competent to decide about the particular alignment of the water course and it fell within the jurisdiction of the Canal Officer to decide and settle about the suitable demarcation of the alignment of the water course of the canal from the Dam, in question and he exercised that jurisdiction under the statute when he demarcated the water course in red, in the map attached to the agreement.
It is the content of the agreement and not its form which is relevant to trace the source of power behind it and in the light of the statutory provisions, it Is manifest that the document has been executed by the Executive Engineer by virtue of the statutory powers vested In him.
The circumstance that the agreement came into existence during the pendency of the suit and was executed by way of an agreement does not militate against the order of alignment as reflected therein being any less statutory in character.
[378B D] 2.4.
The Act itself envisages that the Canal Officer may after and settle the alignment in consultation with the landholders through which the water course is to run.
In the agreement in question, the Executive Engineer had agreed to alter the alignment of the water course in consultation with the appellants who thereupon 'unconditionally ' withdrew the suit since no grievance remained to be settled.
The altered alignment was, therefore, validly made by following the procedure envisaged by the Act.
The High Court fell in error in ignoring the statutory powers of the Executive Engineer, vested in him under Sections 18 and 77 of the Act read with the notification or 27th September, 1963 on the true import of agreement.
[378E F] 2.5.
Under these circumstances, the agreement was lawfully executed by the Executive Engineer in exercise of his statutory powers under the Act and the State was obliged to act according to the terms of the said agreements and could not give it a go bye without following the procedure under the Act to again alter the alignment [378G] 370
