The Railway Board entered into contracts with 12 manufactur ers for the supply of cast steel bogies to be used for building the wagons, every year.
Among them H.D.C., Mukand and Bhartiya had capacity to manufacture larger quantities.
In 1991 two new firms Simplex and Beekay also entered the field.
For the year 1992 93, a tender notice for procurement of 1900 cast steel bogies was issued to the Regular suppliers as well as to Simplex and Beekay the new entrants.
The tender notice stated therein that the last date for submission of offers was 27.11.91 by 2.30 P.M. and the tenders to be opened at 3 P.M. on the same day; that the price was subject to the price variation clause and the base date for escalation purpose was 1.9.91; that the Railways reserved the right to order additional quantity upto 30 % of the quantity ordered during the currency of the contract on the same price and terms and conditions with suitable extensions in delivery period.
The price quoted by H.D.C., Mukand and Bhartiya firms was identical, i.e. Rs. 77.
666 per bogie.
Other tenderers price varied between Rs. 83.000 and Rs. 84, 500 per bogie.
The Government 's announcement of reduction of custom duty 109 on the import of steel scrap and dispensation of freight equalisation fund for steel came after the opening of the tenders and before the finalisation of the tenders.
The Tender Committee recommended that the three manufac turers who quoted an identical lowest rates without any cushion for escalation between 1.7.91 and 1.9.1991 formed a cartel; that the reasonable rate per bogie was to be Rs. 76,000 by taking into consideration of the two concessions announced by the Government; and that the existing procedure to be followed on the question of distribution of quantities to the tenderers.
On 4.2.92, the Committee signed the recommendations.
On the same date, the Member (Mechanical) of the Committee received letter from H.D.C. and Mukand, wherein the tenderers offered to substantially reduce the prices because of the concessions.
The Advisor (Finance) examined the matter and observed that if it was intended to continue the existing policy of fixing a rate and distributing the order among all the tenderers, then negotiations might not be useful; that review of the existing policy would take time; and that the present tender be decided on the basis of the existing policy.
The Member (Mechanical), the next higher authority recom mended the acceptance (if the Tender Committee 's recommendation.
The Finance Commissioner approving the recommendations of the committee, noted that the tenderers who quoted the identical rates had formed a cartel; that a counter offer of Rs. 76,000 be accepted but in the case of H.D.C., a price lower by Rs.1 1,000 to he offered as per their post tender letter dated 4.2.92; that the present formula regarding the distribution of quantities be applied to all tenderers except the three who formed a cartel; that some recoveries from the three tenderers he made on the basis of their letters wherein they quoted prices which were much less than the updated price on 1.9.91 of Rs.79.305; that the post tender letters be ignored and that for short term gains the Department could not sacrifice long term healthy compensation.
110 The Minister for Railways, the approving authority agreeing with the recommendations of the Finance Advisor, noted that the three tenderers had formed a cartel and they he offered a price lower by Rs. 1 1.000 with reference to the counter offer recommended by the Tender Committee and the quantities also be suitable adjusted to break the cartel and ordered for redistrib ution of the quantities exercising 30% option.
The Chairman, Railway Board, when received the file for implementation of the orders from the Minister, noted that action be taken as decided by the Minister, which had resulted in dual pricing, namely, one to the three tenderers and the higher one to the other tenderers and therefore, the Minister to consider whether they could counter offer the lower price to all the tenderers as that would result in saving much more.
When the matter was sent to the Finance Commissioner, he observed that as some of the units were sick units and owe a lot of money to the nationalised banks; it would be in the national interest to accept dual pricing.
Therefore, the rile was again put up to the approving authority.
He agreed with the recommendations of the Commissioner and the Tender Committee and directed for their implementation.
As per the final decision taken by the approving authority the three tenderers were issued a counter offer of Rs.65,000 per bogie by telegram and other tenderers were given a counter offer of Rs.76,000/ per bogie.
After the receipt of the telegram dated 18.3.92 H.D.C. and Mukand riled writ petitions in the Delhi High Court challenging the discriminatory counter offer.
Bhartiya had riled a writ petition in the Calcutta High Court.
It was withdrawn and another writ petition was riled later in the Delhi High Court.
In the writ petitions filed by H.D.C.and Mukand, the High Court issuing notice to the respondents,stayed the operation of the telegram dated 18.3.92.
111 In reply to the telegram, H.D.C. and Mukand also wrote to the Minister of Railways offering to supply the bogies at the rate of Rs.67.000 per bogie, which was accepted by the Railway.
Pending the writ petitions, the High Court passed an interlocutory order, directing the Railway to accept the allocation of bogies recommended by the Tender Committee at the rate of Rs.67.000 per bogie subjected to the final decision in the writ petitions.
The Railway 's petition for special leave to appeal filed against the interlocutor%, order of the High Court was dismissed.
Thereafter, the High Court allowed the writ petitions riled by H.D.C and Mukand and directed that all the tenderers should make the supplies at the rate of Rs. 67.000 per bogie and allocation of quantity to be considered afresh on a reasonable basis.
The Union of India filed appeal by special leave (S.L.P. (c) Nos. 11897 98/92) against the judgment of the High Court.
The other SLPs.
were riled by the affected tenderers who figured as respondents Nos. 4 to 12 in the writ petitions before the High Court.
The High Court disposed of Bharatiya 's writ petition in terms of the judgment in the other two writ petitions (W.P.Nos. 1152 and 1157/ 92) wherein they were shown as respondent No. 13).
As Bharatiya alias Besco did not question the judgment of the High Court, they were arrayed as respondent in the S.L.P. riled by the Union of India.
The Union of India submitted that the three big manufactures i.e. M/s H.D.C., Mukand and Bhartiya formed a cartel and the same was evident from the fact that each one of them quoted an identical price which was a cartel price '; that the Government in the matters of economic policy for good and sufficient reasons and in the public interest could reject the lowest offer with a view not to allow any monopoly and to encourage competition among the recognised manufacturers; that the dual pricing adopted by the Railways under the circumstances was not discriminatory; that the Railways had rightly taken into account the two concessions and found that the price at the rate of Rs.67,000 per bogie was not reasonable and, workable and it was only a cartel price and that Rs. 76,000 was the reasonable price 112 and on that basis made a counter offer to other manufacturers except to these three big manufacturers; that the Railways took into consideration all the relevant factors and on rational basis the quantities were allotted; and, therefore, they were not given larger share.
The nine smaller manufacturers in general supported the sub missions of the Union of India.
The respondent M/s H.D.C. supporting the finding of the High Court submitted that the award of the contract for supply of bogies was vitiated by mala fides and that disproportionate allotment of quota of bogies and.
dual pricing were based on malafides and estraneous considerations violating Article 14 of the Constitution; that the reasons put forward on behalf of the Railways were disingenuous and bereft of rationale.
M/s Mukand respondent submitted that the dual set of counter offers and allocation of disproportionate quantities were highly arbitrary and that the practice and police of the past 10 years of placing orders on all manufacturers in respect of the quantities worked out on the basis of standard quantity formula at a uniform price, gave rise to legitimate expectations among all bogie manufacturers and irrational departure from the existing policy was arbitrary and unreasonable; that the making of law tender offers could not by Itself be visited with punty consequences like dual pricing and reducing the allotment of legitimate quantities.
M/s. Bhartiya submitted that the Tender Committee erred In treating m/s Bhartiya also as a member of the cartel and that the allotment of quantities was arbitrarily reduced; that M/s Bhartiya never made an offer of Rs. 67,000 and there was nothing in writing to that effect and that merely because of the statement of the counsel during the proceedings before the High Court, it should not be understood that they were willing to supply at the rate of Rs. 67,000 and that they should not be treated differently from the other nine manufacturers.
Disposing of the Special Leave Petitions, this Court, 113 HELD: 1.1.
Since the offers of the three tenderers were identical and the price was somewhat lower, the Tender Committee entertained a suspicion that a cartel had been formed and the same got further strengthened by the post tender attitude of the said manufacturers which further resulted in entertaining the same suspicion by the other authorities in the hierarchy of decision making body including the Minister of Railways.
(124 D) 1.2.
All the Railway authorities including the Minister acted in a bonafide mannerin taking the stand that the three manufacturers formed a cartel.
(124F) 1.3.
There is no enough of material to conclude that M/S H.D.C., Mukand and Bhartiya formed a cartel.
Because of mere quoting identical tender offers by the Said three manufacturers for which there is some basis, the conclusion, that the "id manufacturers had formed a cartel does not appear to be correct.
(124 C) 1.4.
The current contract priced based on the updated price is Rs.79,505.
The three manufacturers offered at Rs. 77,600.
Taking into consideration the later concessions, the Tender Committee decided that the price of Rs. 76,000 is reasonable.
(124 F) 1.5.
The fixation of price at Rs. 67,000 per bogie straightaway without necessary and proper consideration and appraisal regarding the viability and other aspects by some experts, is not just and fair from many points of view.
A fresh consideration is called for, particularly from the point of view of safeguarding the interests of the public exchequer and giving necessary protection to the smaller manufacturers.
(125 B) 1.6.
The Tender committee is directed to reconsider the question of fixation of reasonable price.
The Tender Committee shall consider, the offer of Rs. 67,000 made by M/s H.D.C. and Mukand along with the data that would he given by them in support of that and the percentage of profits available to all the manufacturers and other relevant aspects and then fix a resonable price, at which the manufacturer would be able to supply.
(125 C) 114 1.7.
At a belated post tender stage the Railway authorities did not deem it fit to reconsider the question of fixation of price in the light of the post tender offers made by M/s H.D.C. and Mukand, as by then they were of the opinion that the three big manufacturers have formed a cartel and quoted a cartel price.
The stand by the Railways to adopt dual pricing under the circumstances is bona fide and not malafide.
However, dual pricing on principle may not appear to be rational since the Railways have been following certain formula in fixing the price which is made applicable to all the manufacturers.
But under certain circumstances dual pricing may be reasonable. (125 E F) 1.8.
M/s H.D.C. and Mukand came forward with firm offer of a price at Rs. 67,000 per bogie.
M/s Bhartiya also got committed to supply at the same price.
All the three of them did not even challenge the order of the High Court.
These three big manufacturers must be deemed to be in a position to supply at the rate of Rs.67,000 and thus they form a distinct category.
The smaller manufacturers belong to a different category and if a different price is fixed for them it is not discriminatory.
(125 F G) 1.9.
If the price that is to be fixed by the Tender Committee as directed by the Court happens to be more than Rs. 67,000 then that would he applicable to the smaller manufacturers only and not to M/s H.D.C., Mukand and Bhartiya who on their own commitment have to supply at the rate of Rs. 67,000.
(126 A) 1.10.
The price thus fixed by the Tender committee which applies only to the smaller manufacturers shall be deemed to be final and the respective contracts shall be deemed to he concluded so for the price is concerned.
(126 B) 1.11.
The formation of an opinion that a cartel was formed had no firm factual foundation; reduction of quota by way of reprisal can not be justified.
The Minister of Railways as the final authority, after considering various relevant factors, may be justified in taking a particular decision in the matter of allotment of quota but such decision must be taken on objective basis.
But, in this case, all the smaller manufacturers deserving a favourable treatment in the mat 115 ter of allotment of quota, have not been equally treated in the sense that one or two of them got larger quantities.
Though this does not appear to be a serious departure, yet in these matters the Govt.
is expected to be just and fair to one and all.
In future the authorities would make a proper consideration of the relevant factors in respect of each tenderer in an objective manner in allotting the quantities.
(126 E H) 1.12.
The three manufacturers M/s H.D.C., Mukand and Bhartiya should be allocated the quantities as per the recommendations of the Tender Committee.
However, this Court does not want to disturb at this stage the quantities finally allotted by the competent authority to the small manufacturers as that would cause great hardship to them.
(127 C) The Railway authorities was left to make necessary adjustments next year in the matter of allocation of quantities to them taking into consideration these allotments given to them this year.
It will be open to the Railways to exercise 30% option if not already exercised.
The time to complete the supply is extended upto 31.3.1993.
(127 D F)
