The petitioner was a Co Ruler of an Ex Indian State of Kurundwad.
His Co Ruler, on behalf of both, executed an instrument of accession under Section 5 of the Government of India Act, 1935 and their State became a part of the Dominion of India.
A Merger Agreement was executed on the 19th February, 1948 and the administration of the State of the petitioner was also handed over to the Dominion Government on the 8th March, 1948.
The case of the petitioner was that under the Merger Agreement he 480 481 was entitled to receive annually from the revenues of the State his privy purse as specified in the Merger Agreement.
Certain groups of States entered Into covenants for the establishment of United States comprising the territories of the covenanting States and Talukas with a common executive, legislature and judiciary.
On 13th October, 1949 the Constituent Assembly of India adopted inter alia two Articles namely, Article 291 relating to payment of privy purse and Article 362 relating to personal rights and privileges of the Rulers.
The Rulers and Rajpramukhs of the States agreed to adopt the Constitution drafted by the Constituent Assembly of India.
In pursuance of Article 366(22) of the Constitution of India, the petitioner was recognized as the Ruler of the Kurundwad State with effect from 26th January, 1950 and had been in the enjoyment of the privy purse, privileges, titles and dignities issued by Merger Agreement, and by the Constitution of India.
The Parliament enacted the Constitution (Twenty Sixth Amend ment) Act of 1971, repealing Articles 291 and 362 of the Constitution, a new Article 363 A was inserted and new clause (22) to Article 366 was substituted.
It resulted in depriving the Rulers of their recognition already accorded to them and declaring the abolition of the privy purse and extinguishing their rights and obligation in respect of privy purse.
The petitioner filed the writ petition challenging the impugned Amendment Act as unconstitutional and violative and the fundamental rights of the petitioner guaranteed under Articles 14, 19(1)(f), 21 and 31(1),(2) of the Constitution.
In the Writ Petition No. 351/72, I.A. Nos. 1 to 3 of 1992 were filed by the daughters of Late Maharaja of Mysore.
WRIT PETITION NO.
798 OF 1992 The petitioner was the successor to the Ruler of Mysore also challenged the Constitution (26th Amendment) Act of 1971 on the same grounds as in Writ Petition No. 351/72.
482 The petitioner in W.P. No. 351/72 submitted that Articles 291, 362 and 366(22) of the Constitution were integral part of the constitutional scheme and formed the important basic structure since the underlying purpose of these Articles was to facilitate stabilization of the new order and ensure organic unity of India; that the deletion of the Articles damaged and demolished the very basic structure of the Constitution; that the covenants entered into were in the nature of contracts which was guaranteed constitutionally and affirmed by making the privy purse an expenditure charged under the Consolidated Fund of India; that the deletion of the Articles amounted to a gross breach of the principle of political justice enshrined in the preamble by depriving or taking away from the princes the privy purses which were given to them as consideration for surrendering all their sovereign rights and contributing to the unity and integrity of the country; that the Rulers acceded to the Dominion of India and executed Instruments of Accession and Covenants in consideration of the pledges and promises enshrined in Articles 291 and 362; that the impugned Amendment Act was beyond and outside the scope and ambit of the constitutional power of the Parliament to amend the Constitution as provided under Article 368 of the Constitution; that the Constitution (Twenty Sixth Amendment) Act was unconstitutional, null, void and violative of Articles 14, 19(1) (g), 21, 31 (1) and (2) of the Constitution; and that Articles 291 and 362 when incorporated were intended to grant recognition to the solemn promises on the strength of which the former Rulers agreed to merge with the Indian Dominion and the guarantee of privy purses and certain privileges was as a just quid pro quo for surrendering their sovereignty and dissolving their States.
The petitioner in I.A. No. 3 submitted that the fact that the expression "guarantees" occurring both in Article 32 and Article 291 besides in Article 362 ( 'guarantee ') clearly demonstrated the mind of the Constitution makers that they intended the said provisions of Articles 291 and 362 to be the basic and essential structure of the Constitution.
The petitioner in 1 A No. 1 contended that the erstwhile rulers of the princely States formed a class apart and there was real and substantial distinction between them and the citizenry of India; that the impugned amendment which violated the basic structure of the Constitution was unconstitutional that the Amendment Act was violative of the essential features contained in Articles 14 and 19(1)(f).
483 The petitioner in W.P. No. 798/92 added that the two Articles were not at all amendable on the principle of prohibition against impairment of the contractual obligations; that the impugned Amendment Act was an ugly epitome of immorality perpetrated by the India Parliament, that, too, In the exercise of its constituent powers and the said Amendment Act constituted an unholy assault on the spirit which was impermeable and that the principle of justice, fairness and reasonableness were beyond the amending powers of the Parliament; that the equality clause as interpreted by this Court in various decisions was the most important and indispensable feature of the Constitution and destruction thereof would amount to changing the basic structure of the Constitution and that the authority of the Parliament to amend the Constitution under Article 368 could be exercised only if the Amendment in the Constitution was justifiable and necessitated because of the socioeconomic reasons broadly referred to in the directive principles of the State Policy and that any Amendment unrelated to any genuine compulsion amounts to an abuse of the power and was therefore a fraud on the exercise of power itself Respondent Union of India contended that the Instruments of Accession were only the basic documents but not the individual agreements with the Rulers and therefore to attribute the agreements entered into by Rulers as a sacrifice by the Rulers was unfounded; that the nature of the covenants was not that of a contract because a contract was enforceable at law while these covenants were made non justiciable by the Constitution vide Article 363; that the covenants were political in nature and that no legal ingredients as the basis could be read into these agreements and that the guarantees and assurances embodied in Articles 291 and 362 were guarantees for the payment of privy purses; that such a guarantee could always be revoked in public interest pursuant to fulfilling a policy objective or the directive principles of the Constitution; that being so, the theory of sanctity of contract or unamendability of Articles 291 or 362 did not have any foundation; and that the theory of political justice was also not tenable because political justice meant the principle of political equality such an adult suffrage democratic form of Government etc.
Dismissing the Writ Petitions and the I.As., this court, HELD : (By Full Court) ; The Constitution (Twenty Sixth Amendment) Act of 1971 is valid in its entirety.
[529G] 484 Per section Ratnavel Pandian, J. on his behalf and on behalf of the Chief justice of India, B.P. Jeevan Reddy and S.P. Baucha, JJ.: 1.01.
The only question is whether there is any change in the basic structure of the Constitution by deletion of Articles 291, 362 and by insertion of Article 363A and amendment of clause (22) of Article 366.
The question is answered in the negative observing that the basic structure or the essential feature of the Constitution is /are in no way changed or altered by the Constitution (Twenty Sixth Amendment) Act of 1971.
[529D] 1.02.
In our democratic system, the Constitution is the supreme law of the land and all organs of the government executive, legislative and judiciary derive their powers and authority from the Constitution.
A distinctive feature of our Constitution is its amendability.
[518G] 1.03.
The power of amendment is plenary and it includes within itself the power to add, after or repeal the various Articles of the Constitution including those relating to fundamental rights, but the power to amend does not include the power to alter the basic structure or framework of the Constitution so as to change its identity.
In fact, there are inherent or implied limitations on the power of amendment under Article 368.
[515G] 1.04.
There are specific provisions for amending the Constitution.
The amendments had to be made only under and by the authority of the Constitution strictly following the modes prescribed, of course, subject to the limitations either inherent or implied.
The said power cannot be limited by any vague doctrine of repugnancy.
There are many outstanding interpretative decisions delineating the limitations so that the Constitutional fabric may not be impaired or damaged.
The amendment which is a change or alteration is only for the purpose of making the Constitution more perfect, effective and meaningful.
But at the same time, one should keep guard over the process of amending any provision of the Constitution so that it does not result in abrogation or destruction of its basic structure or loss of its original identity and character and render the Constitution unworkable.
[519B D] 1.05.
The Courts are entrusted with important Constitutional responsibilities of upholding the supremacy of the Constitution.
An amendment of a Constitution becomes ultra vires if the same contravenes or transgresses the limitations put on the amending power because there 485 is no touchstone outside the Constitution by which the validity of the exercise of the said powers conferred by it can be tested.
[518H, 519A] 1.06.
The Court is not concerned with the wisdom behind or propriety of the Constitutional amendment because these are the matters for those to consider who are vested with the authority to make the Constitutional amendment.
All that the Court is concerned with are (1) whether the procedure prescribed by Article 368 is strictly complied with? and (2) whether the amendment has destroyed or damaged the basic structure or the essential features of the Constitution.
[519D E] 1.07.
If an amendment transgresses its limits and impairs or alters the basic structure or essential features of the Constitution then the Court has power to undo that amendment.
[519F] 1.08.
No principle of justice, either economic, political or social is violated by the Twenty sixth Amendment.
Political justice relates to the principle of rights of the people, i.e., right to universal suffrage, right to democratic form of Government and right to participation in political affairs.
Economic justice is enshrined in Article 39 of the Constitution.
None of these rights are abridged or modified by this Amendment.
[523C] 1.09.
There is no question of change of identity on account of the Twenty sixth Amendment.
The removal of Articles 291 and 362 has not made any change in the personality of the Constitution either in its scheme not in its basic features nor in its basic form nor in its character.
The question of identity will arise only when there is a change in the form, character and content of the Constitution.
1527G] 1.10.
A moral obligation cannot be converted into a legal obligation.
Courts are seldom concerned with the morality which is the concern of the law makers.
[527D E] 1.11.
In a country like ours with so many disruptive forces of regionalism, communalism and linguism, it is necessary to emphasise and re emphasise that the unity and integrity of India can be preserved only by a spirit of brotherhood.
India has one common citizenship and every citizen should feel that he is Indian first irrespective of other basis.
In this view, any measure at bringing about equality should be welcome.
There is no legitimacy in the argument in favour of continuance of princely 486 privileges.
Abolition of privy purses is not violative of Article 14.
[528F] 1.12.
The Court cannot make surmises on 'ifs ' and 'buts ' and arrive to any conclusion that Articles 291 and 362 should have kept in tact as special provisions made for minorities in the Constitution.
It is but a step in the historical evolution to achieve faternity and unity of the nation transcending all the regional, linguistic, religious and other diversities which are the bed rock on which the constitutional fabric has been raised.
The distinction between the erstwhile Rulers and the citizenary of India has to be put an end to so as to have a common brotherhood.
[529E F] Nawab Usmanali Khan vs Sagamial ; ; H.H. Maharajadhiraja Madhav Rao Jiwaji Rao Scindia Bahadur & Ors.
vs Union of India; , ; Minerva Mills vs Union of India, ; ; His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru vs State of Kerala and Another, [1973] 4 SCC 225; Shankari Prasad vs Union of India, ; ; Sajjan Singh vs State of Rajasthan, ; at 966; Golak Nath vs State of Punjab, ; ; Rustom Cawasjee Cooper vs Union of India, ; ; Waman Rao and Others vs Union of India and Others, ; at 588 89; Maharao Sahib Shri Bhim Singhji vs Union of India and Others, at 212; Madhav Rao vs Union, ; at 74 and 83; Indira Nehru Gandhi vs Raj Narain, ; Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing Company vs Bharat Cooking Coal Ltd., ; , Varinder Singh & Ors.
vs State of U.P., ; at 435; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; R.D. Shetty vs International Airport Authority of India, ; ; Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; E.P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; ; Krishna Kumar vs Union of India, ; ; Mfd.
Usman & Ors.
vs State of Andhara Pradesh and Ors.
, [1971] Suppl.
SCR 549, Ramesh Prasad Singh vs State of Bihar & Ors., ; , rererred to.
Report of the Joint Select Committee on Indian Constitutional Reforms (1933 34); Report of (he Expert Committee headed by Nalini Ranjan Sarkar (published in December, 1947), Report of the Indian States ' Finances Enquiry Committee, chaired by Sir V.T. Krishanamachary (appointed on 22nd October, 1948).
Report of the Rau Committee chaired by Sir B.N. Rau (appointed in November, 1948); Dias: Jurisprudence, Fifth Edition, at pages 355 and 356; Bentham : Theory of Legislation, Chapter XII at page 60, referred to.
487 Per section Mohan, J. (Concurring) 1.01.
One of the tests of identifying the basic feature is, whether the identity of the Constitution has been changed.
[537A] 1.02.
The personality of the Constitution must remain unchanged.
It is not necessary that the constitutional amendment which is violative of a basic or essential feature should have an instant or immediate effect on the basic structure.
It is enough if it damages the essential feature.
[537B] 1.03.
The test to be applied, therefore, is whether the amendment contravenes or runs counter to an imperative role or postulate which is an integral part of the Constitution.
[537B] 1.04.
Turning to basic structure, the proper test for determining basic feature is to find out what are not basic features.
Rights arising out of covenants which were non justiciable cannot be regarded as basic feature.
Where, therefore, Article 363 makes these features non justiciable, the question of basic feature does not arise.
[539H, 540A] 1.05.
The guarantees in Articles 291 and 362 are guarantees for the payment of privy purses.
Such a guarantee can always be revoked in public interest; more so, for fulfilling a policy objective or the directive principles of the Constitution.
This is precisely what the preamble to the impugned amendment says.
That being so, the theory of sanctity of contract or the unamendability of Article 291 or 362 does not have any foundation.
The theory of political justice is also not tenable since political justice means the principle of political equality such as adult suffrage, democratic form of Government, etc.
[539D E] 1.06.
If the 26th amendment aims to establish an egalitarian society which is in consonance with the glorious preamble, how could this provision be called a basic structure? No doubt, in Madhav Rao 's case, it was held that these provisions (Articles 291, 362, 366 (22) are an integral part of the Constitution.
Apart from the fact that all these reasons were addressed against the President under Article 366(22), this Statement cannot tantamount to basic structure.
Nor would it mean the same as the basic structure.
1559G H] 1.07.
To determine whether these provisions constitute basic struc 488 ture or not, they cannot be viewed in the historic background.
By repeal of these provisions the personality of the Constitution has not changed.
India could still retain its identity and it can hardly be said that the personality has changed.
[560A] 1.08.The repudiation of the guarantees might result in the nullification of a just quid pro quo.
But, if it is the will of the people to establish an egalitarian society that will be in harmony with the changing of times.
It cannot be denied that law cannot remain static for all times to come.
[560C] 1.09 Unity and integrity of India would constitute the basic structure as laid down in Kesavananda 's case but it is too far fetched claim to state that the guarantees and assurances in these Articles have gone into the process of unification and integration of the country.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that it was the will of the people and the urge to breathe free air of independent India as equal citizens that brought about the merger of these princely States.
Therefore, the contention that the Articles 291 and 362 facilitated the organic unity of India is unacceptable.
[562E F] 1.10 In this case, the amendment does not either treat unequals as equals or in any manner violates Article 14.
All the privy purses holders are treated alike by the withdrawal of all those privileges.
[565E] 1.11.
This Court cannot concerns itself with the moral aspect of the impugned amendment.
The impugned amendment is the will of the people expressed through Parliament.
[568A] Virendra Singh and Others vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; at 454; H.H. Maharajadhiraja Madhav Rao Jiwaji Rao Scindia Bahadur & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; ; His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru vs State of Kerala, [1973] Supp.
SCR 1; Waman.
Rao and Others vs Union of India and others; , at 588 89; Maltarao Sahib Shri Bhim Singh Ji vs Union of India & Ors., at 212; Indira Nehru Gandhi vs Raj Narain, [1975] Supp, SCC 1 at 252; Ajay Hasia vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, ; ; Minerva Mills Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., ; & 119861 3 SCR 718; O.N. Mohindroo vs District Judge, Delhi, ; Mohanlal Jain vs His Holiness Maharaja Shri Swai Mari Singh Ji, [1962] 1 SCR 702; Ramesh Prasad Singh vs State of Bihar Another vs Vithal Rao & Ors., ; ; Usman Ali Khan vs Sagar 489 Mal ; ; Golak Nath vs State of Punjab, ; ; Weems vs United States, 54 Law Edition 801; Francis Coralie Mullin vs Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi & Ors., ; at 617, referred to.
"The Framing of India 's Constitution ' : By B. Shiva Rao at page 520; Robert section Peck "The Bill of Rights & the Politics of Interpretation", at page 316 317; "Law and Morality" : By Louis Blom Cooper Gavin Drewry at page 2; Kent Greenawalt : "Conflicts of Law and Morality", 1987 Edition at page 338, referred to.
