The respondent in the appeal joined Government Service in the Ministry of Finance in a Class IV post as Peon on 22nd February, 1956.
At the time of entry his service book was prepared and the date of birth was recorded as 20th May, 1934 and since he failed in the matriculation examination against the column of educational qualification 'matric failed ' was recorded.
The respondent later on again appeared in the matriculation examination, passed the said examination in May, 1956, was appointed as LD.C. in the Ministry of Home Affairs on 9th May, 1957 and in his service book an entry was made showing his educational qualification as 'Matric ' underneath the earlier entry 'matric failed ' and this changed entry was signed by the Section Officer of the Ministry of Home Affairs on 7th September, 1957.
Though the date of birth of the respondent as recorded in the matriculation certificate was 7.4.1938, while amending the entry about his educational qualification, the entry relating to his date of birth was not altered to correspond to the date given in the matriculation certificate and continued to be recorded as 20th May, 1934.
The respondent was later transferred to the Ministry of Human Resources Development and on being notified about his date of superannuation as 31.5.1992, he realised that he was being retired on the basis of his date of birth as originally recorded in the service record as 20.5.1934 ignoring the date of birth as reflected in the matriculation certificate.
In view tot the aforesaid position the respondent made a representation in September, 1991 for alteration of his date of birth but the 863 same was rejected on 4.12.1991.
He submitted another representation on 3.1.1992 for correction on the basis of the date of birth as recorded in the matriculation certificate but this request was also turned down by the appellant in view of the Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. dated 29.1.1992.
Yet another representation dated 26th March, 1992 was submitted by the respondent wherein he had drawn the attention of the Department to the order of the Principal Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal in the case of Darshan Singh vs Union of India, wherein the Tribunal had directed that the date of birth should be corrected on the basis of the matriculation certificate.
This representation was also rejected by the appellant on 22A.1992.
Being aggrieved the respondent challenged the aforesaid order by an application before the Central Administrative Tribunal and this was contested by the appellant on various grounds including the plea of limitation.
It was also urged that the application was barred by F.R. 56 (Note 5) and the General Financial Rules, 1979 and therefore did not merit and consideration.
It was submitted that the respondent knew about the entry of his date of birth as 20.5.1934 since he had signed his service book on various occasions, ever since he joined service, but his representation for correction of the date of birth was made only in September, 1991 much belatedly and even beyond the period of five years from the date of entry into Government Service as envisaged by S.O. 3997 dated 30th November, 1979.
The Tribunal did not agree with any of the aforesaid contentions of the appellant, allowed the application flied by the respondent and directed the appellant to correct the date of birth in the service record as per the date of birth recorded in the matriculation certificate.
In the appeal by the Union of India to this Court it was contented that in view of the law laid down in Amulya Chandrakalita vs Union of India & Ors., the judgment rendered by only a single member of the Tribunal is invalid and, therefore, the order deserves to be set aside and the case remanded to the Tribunal for fresh disposal.
The arguments raised before the Tribunal were also reiterated before this Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.
A Government servant, after entry into service, acquires 864 the right to continue in service till the age of retirement, as fixed by the, State in exercise of its powers regulating conditions of service, unless the services are dispensed with on other grounds contained in the relevant service rules after following the procedure prescribed therein.
[869G] 2.
The date of birth entered in the service records of a civil servant is of utmost importance for the reason that the right to continue in service stands decided by its entry in the service record.
[869H] 3.
A Government servant who has declared his age at the initial stage of the employment is, of course, not precluded from making a request later on for correcting his age.
It is open to a civil servant to claim correction of his date of birth, if he is in possession of irrefutable proof relating to his date of birth as different from the one earlier recorded and even if there is no period of limitation prescribed for seeking correction of date of birth, the Government servant must do so without any un reasonable delay.
[869H 870B] 4.
A Government servant who makes an application for correction of date of birth beyond the time fixed by the Government, cannot claim, as a matter of right, the correction of his date of birth even if he has good evidence to establish that the recorded date of birth is clearly erroneous.
[870C] 5.
Unless altered date of birth as recorded would determine date of superannuation even if it amounts to abridging the right to continue in service on the basis of actual age.
[870D] State of Assam & Anr.
vs Daksha Prasad Deka & Ors., ; , referred to.
Note (5) to Fundamental Rule 56(m) governing correction of date of birth in the service record, as amended by Government of India, with effect from 30.11.1979 limits the exercise of the right by the Government servant to seek alteration of his date of birth only within the specified period viz. five years of entry into government service.
[871A B] In the instant case, the CAT was of the opinion that the bar of five years could only apply to such Government servants who joined service after 1979, when the amendment came into force and that the said period of limitation would not apply to Government servants who were in service 865 for more than five years prior to 1979.
The approach of the Tribunal tends to create an invidious discrimination, unsustainable in law, by creating two artificial classes of government servants between those who joined service before and after 1979.
It is too simplistic a way of looking at the issue ignoring the ground realities and the intention of the rule making authority to discourage stale claims and non suit such government servants who seek alteration of their recorded date of birth belatedly and mostly on the eve of their superannuation.
[872C, 873E] 7.
It would be appropriate and in tune with the harmonious construction of the provision if in the case of those government servants who were already in service before 1979, for a period of more than five years, and who intended to have their date of birth corrected after 1979, may seek the correction of date of birth within a reasonable time after 1979 but in any event not later than five years after the coming into force of the amendment in 1979.
This view would be in consonance with the intention of the rule making authority.
[874C D] New India Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Smt.
Shanti Misra, ; and Vinod Gurudas Raikar vs National Insurance Co., ; , referred to.
In the instant case, the date of birth recorded at the time of entry into service as 20th May, 1934 had continued to exist, unchallenged between 1956 and September, 1991, for almost three and a half decades.
The respondent had the occasion to see his service book at different places at different points of time.
Never did he object to the recorded entry.
The same date of birth was also reflected in the seniority lists of L.D.C. and U.D.C., which the respondent had admittedly seen.
He remained silent and did not seek alteration till September, 1991 just a few months prior to the date of his superannuation.
Inordinate and unexplained delay or laches on the part of the respondent to seek the necessary correction would in any case have justified the refusal of relief to him.
Even if the respondent had sought correction of the date of birth within five years after 1979 when Note 5 to FR 56 was incorporated the earlier delay would not have non suited him.
His inaction for all this period of about thirty five years from the date of joining service, therefore precludes him from showing that the entry of his date of birth in the service record was not correct.
The Tribunal, therefore fell in error in issuing the direction to correct his date 866 of birth.
[876C F, 876H, 877A] Darshan Singh vs Union of India, decided by Principal Bench of CAT on 9.8.1990, over ruled.
