The respondent accused was prosecuted for committing rape on a child of 8/9 years of age.
The prosecution case was that: while the prosecutrix (P.W.4), her father (P.W.5) and elder sister (P.W.7) were in their fields, it suddenly started raining and all the three ran towards their house; P.W.4 got separated from the two kins and was following them when the accused, then aged about 16 years, took her under a mango tree and committed rape on her; P.W.5, who in the meantime returned to the fields in search of P.W.4, saw the accused lying on her, he raised an alarm whereupon P.W.7, rushed to the spot and the accused ran away leaving P.W.4 crying and bleeding per vagina.
The victim was got medically examined the same day and the doctor (P.W.1), besides mentioning the injuries on the private part of the prosecutrix, reported that she had been subjected to sexual intercourse.
At the trial P.W.5, P.W.7 and the doctor (P.W.1) who had medically examined the prosecutrix, supported the prosecution case in its totality.
The trial court held that the accused had committed an offence of rape under s.376, I.P.C. on the prosecutrix, and sentenced him to suffer R.I. for a period of five years.
18 The accused riled an appeal before the High Court which acquitted him.
The State filed the appeal by special leave to this Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.I. Courts must be wary, circumspect and slow to interfere with reasonable and proper findings based on appreciation of evidence as recorded by the lower courts, before upsetting the same and acquiring an accused involved in the commission of heinous offence of rape of hapless girl child.
[p.24B C] 1.2.
The High Court without appreciating or properly discussing the evidence committed an error in setting aside the findings recorded by the trial court which were based on proper appreciation of evidence and were not unreasonable much less perverse.
The judgment of the High Court is based on conjectural findings and cannot be sustained.[pp.22B C; 25A] 3.
The statement of prosecutrix (PW4) is clear, cogent and specific.
The Sessions Judge recorded her statement on being satisfied that she was capable of giving evidence.
She narrated the occurrence in a simple and straight forward manner.
The prosecution case was fully supported by her during her statement and nothing has been brought out in the cross examination from which any doubt could be caused about her veracity.
Her statement receives ample corroboration from the testimony of her father (PW5) who is found to be a truthful and reliable witness.
The medical evidence of PWl has supported the prosecutrix in all material particulars.
The evidence of PW7 who had also seen the accused running away from the scene of crime further lands credence to the prosecution version.
[pp.21E H; 22A] 2.1.
There is no legal compulsion to look for corroboration of the evidence of the prosecutrix before recording an order of conviction.
Evidence has to be weighed and not counted.
Conviction can be recorded on the sole testimony of the prosecutrix, if her evidence inspires confidence and there is absence of circumstances which militate against her veracity.
[p.22D] 2.2.
In the instant case the evidence of the prosecutrix is found to be reliable and trustworthy.
No corroboration was required to be looked for, though enough was available on the record.
The medical evidence provided sufficient corroboration.
[p.22E] 19 3.1.
There is no inflexible axiom of law which lays down that the absence of injuries on the male organ of the accused would always be fatal to the prosecution case and would discredit the evidence of the prosecutrix, otherwise found to be reliable.
Every case has to be approached with realistic diversity based on peculiar facts and circumstances of that case and inferences have to be drawn from the given set of facts and circumstances.
[p.24D F] Rahim Beg & Anr.
vs State of UP.
, , distinguished.
The doctor (PW3), who had examined the respondent, found him to be capable of sexual intercourse and according to him the absence of injury on the male organ of the accused was not suggestive of the fact that he had not indulged in sexual intercourse with the prosecutrix, then of tender years of age.
His evidence was not at all challenged on this aspect by the defence.
[p.24F G] 4.1.
The judgment of the High Court acquitting the accused is set aside.
The accused is convicted under S.376 IPC for having committed rape on the prosecutrix and sentenced to suffer regorous imprisonment for a period of five years.
[pp. 25H; 26A] 4.2.
Though for such an offence a more severe sentence would have been desirable but neither the State sought enhancement of the sentence by filing an appropriate petition nor any notice in this regard had been issued to the accused, and without putting him on such a notice, the Court 'cannot enhance the sentence. 'Me provision prescribing more stringent minimum sentence under Section 376 was also incorporated in the Code by an amendment only with effect from December, 1982, after the offence in the instant case had been committed.
[p.25D G]
