By an order dated 16th August 1969, the appellant was appointed by respondent 2 the Bihar School Examination Board as a Special Officer (Stores) for a period not exceeding six months in the pay scale of Rs. 300 20400 EB 20 500, with usual allowances.
The services were, however, continued till 10th March, 1971, when it was intimated that the said post of Special Officer would be abolished with effect from 1st April 1971, and consequently his services were terminated.
The appellant riled a suit and obtained an injunction against the abolition of the post and the termination of his services.
In the suit, a compromise was arrived at between the Board and the appellant, whereby he was appointed as Section Officer in the General Cadre and his pay as Special Officer was to be protected.
Pursuant to this compromise, the Board by order dated 20th March, 1972 appointed him on the vacant post of Section Officer, with a personal pay of Rs. 70 per month.
Later, by an order dated 11.11.86, respondent No. 2 regularised the appointment from the date of his appointment as Special Officer viz. 16.8.69.
However, respondent No. 5 promoted to one of the posts of Section officers on 27 8 70, contended that the seniority given to the appellant in the post of Section Officer w.e.f. 16 8 69, ie.
from the date of his appointment as Special Officer was illegal.
In the Seniority list of Section Officers prepared by respondent No. 2, the appellant was shown above respondent No. 5 and he was granted promotion to the post of Asstt.
Secretary on 20th March, 1982, and to that of Deputy Secretary on 29.11.87.
12 Against the said list of seniority, respondent No. 5 filed a writ petition in the High Court, formally challenging the order of dt 11th Nov., 1986 in terms of which the inter se seniority list was prepared.
The High Court held that the post of Special Officer occupied by the appellant was a temporary post, which was abolished, and therefore, he would have to rank below respondent No. section The appellant came to this Court.
Allowing the Appeal, HELD: The approach of the High Court was not correct.
The appellant was appointed in a higher post with a higher salary scale.
He was in fact compulsorily transferred from that post to the post of Section Officer and after that transfer by the same order of 20th March, 1972, the post of Special Officer was abolished.
The order is also capable of being interpreted as an order of amalgamation of the ex cadre post of a Special Officer with the cadre post of Section Officer.
[15H G] The consequence of both the interpretations of the said order is the same, viz. that the appellant would get seniority from the date of his appointment as Special Officer.
[15G] It is true that there is nothing on record except the order of 20th March, 1972, to show that in the temporary post of Special Officer which was created for the first time on 16th August, 1969, that the appointment of appellant was ever regularised and the appellant was appointed regularly to the same.
However, on this aspect, we must go by the intention revealed in the resolutions and orders of the Board itself.
The Board 's intention is clear.
It treated the post as regular.
The appellant was appointed to it in a substantive vacancy and in accordance with the condition governing it.
There is accordingly nothing, which militates against the seniority given to the appellant.
[16A D] The Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers ' Association and Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, ; and State of Bihar& Ors. etc.
vs Akhouri Sachindra Nath & Ors., [1991] Suppl. 1 SCC 334, referred to.
