The petitioner applicants were recruited by the Railways on ad hoc basis as Assistant Divisional Medical Officers between 1968 and 1984.
Though UPSC recruited candidates on regular basis from time to time, either due to non availability of number of candidates or non joining of selected candidates, vacancies remained and persons like the petitioners continued in such vacancies on ad hoc basis.
The petitioners riled Writ Petitions before this Court for regularisation of their services.
By orders of this Court, the services of the petitioners have already been regularised.
The present application is for fixing the seniority of the Writ Petitioners whose services were regularised.
Disposing of the application, this Court, HELD: 1.
Since the petitioner applicants are admittedly not regularly appointed through the UPSC according to the rules but have been directed to be regularised by following the procedure laid down by this Court, it is obvious that they are not appointed to their posts according to the rules.
Under no circumstances, therefore, they fall within the scope of guidelines in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers 'Association 's case.
The expression "in accordance with the rules ' or 'according to rules" used in the said guidelines means the rules of recruitment and not the special procedure laid down by this Court The petitioner applicants thus fall in an altogether different category.
Therefore, a procedure for fixing their seniority has to be evolved.
That procedure cannot be in violation of the guidelines laid down in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers ' 2 Association 's case.
Further, the seniority given to the petitioner applicants will have to be below the seniority of the outsiders directly recruited through the UPSC as well as below that of the directly recruited erstwhile ad hoc Medical Officers.
[8C F] Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
Of late this Court has been witnessing a constant violation of the recruitment rules and a scant respect for the Constitutional provisions requiring recruitment to the services through the Public Service Commission.
Since this Court has in some cases permitted regularisation of the irregularly recruited employees, some Governments and authorities been increasingly resorting to irregular recruitments.
The result has been that the recruitment rules and the Public Service Commissions have been kept In cold storage and candidates dictated by various considerations an being recruited as a matter of course.
[9E G] 2.2.
What is further, in the present case, some of those like the petitioner applicants who were initially recruited on ad hoc basis, have themselves and taken pains to appear for the tests before the UPSC and have enrolled themselves through regular channel.
There are three classes of employees viz., the outside direct recruits, the in service direct recruits and the ad hoc employees like the petitioner applicants who were regularised through the Court 's order.
The direction given In Dr. Rawani 's case for creation of supernumerary posts has to be confined to the special facts of that case and cannot be extended to other cases.
In any case, this Court should not give any such direction to the Railways.
If, however, the Railways decide to follow that course, they can do so and nothing prevents them from doing it.
This Court would rather refrain from creating a precedent by giving such directions.
[9G H; 10A D] Dr A.K Jain & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
[1987] Sapp.
SCC 497 and Dr. P.P. C. Rawani & Ors etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, JT 1991 (6) 534, referred to.
The seniority of the direct recruits both outsiders and insiders ,should be determined according to the dates of their regular appointment through the UPSC and the petitioner applicants should be placed in the seniority list after those direct recruits who are recruited till date.
Among 3 themselves, their seniority will be governed by the dates of their initial appointment [10E]
