Rajasthan Educational Service Rules, 1970 provides for appointment to Group 'DI, Section 11 of the Rajasthan Education Service, consistIng of the posts of Principal of Higher Secondary School/BSTC/RTC (Boys), 100 per cent by promotion from qualified members of Group 'El comprising the posts of Headmaster of Higher Secondary School for boys and from those of Group IF ' representing the posts of Headmasters of Secondary School of boys.
Appointment to Group 'El posts is made 100 per cent by promotion of the members of Group IF '.
The persons belonging to Group 'El, who were not selected for promotion to Group 'DI, Section II, filed writ petitions before the High Court challenging the constitutional validity of the provisions In the Rules clubbing together Groups El and IF ' for the purpose of promotion to Group 'DI, Section 11.
The High Court held the provisions as violative of Articles 14 and 1088 16 of the Constitution, allowed the writ petitions and quashed the orders promoting members of Groups IF ' to the posts in Group ID ', Section II.
The State and the affected members of Group 'F ' of the Rajasthan Education Service filed the appeals by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of members of Group IF ' and the State that the provision clubbing groups IF ' and 'E ' as feeder cadre for promotion to Group 'D ' Section 11, is in consonance with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as the Rules require preparation of a combined seniority list of all eligible members of Groups 'E ' and IF ' placing the former en bloc above the latter, and among those selected for promotion to Group 'DI Section 11, all those from Group 'E ' are to rank above those from Group IF '; and as no person belonging to Group 'E ' found suitable for promotion to Group ID ' was left out, filling the remaining vacancies from amongst suitable and qualified persons belonging to Group 'F ' cannot be violative of rights, if any, of the writ petitioners inasmuch as qualitatively those promoted from Group 'F ' were not inferior to the petitioners and the principle of equation adopted was fair to all.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: I.1.
The manner in which the Rule is worked, that is, consideration first of all persons in Groups 'E ' for promotion to Group 'D ', Section 11, and moving to Group IF ', if necessary, for filling only the remaining vacancies by selecting outstanding amongst them who satisfy the requirement of Explanation to Rule 25(11) (i.e. who have 5 outstanding/ 'very good ' annual Confidential Reports in the immediate preceding 7 years), ensures fairness to all while also maintaining efficiency in the administration.
[pp.1109E F; 1111B C] 1.2.
The total number of posts in Group 'DI, Section II is nearly the same as the total number of posts in Group 'E ', while the total number of posts in Group IF ' is about rive times thereof.
Since appointment to Group 'D ', Section If is 100 per cent by promotion, it is a distinct possibility as.
in the instant case, that the requisite number of suitable candidates from Group 'E ' may not be available to rill all the existing vacancies in Group 'D ' Section 11.
In such a situation, the only available option is to rill the remaining vacancies by selection of outstanding persons from Group 'F '.
This is more so because the nature of duties and functions of the posts in 1089 Group 'E ' and 'F ' is similar and so is that of the posts in Group 'D ' Section 11.
The High Court overlooked this fact.
[pp.1110G H; 1111A B] 13.
If the need arises to look to Group IF ' for filling the remaining vacancies on account of want of suitable.
person in Group 'El, those found unsuitable in Group 'E ' cannot complain of discrimination if persons duly qualified and more suitable performing similar functions are selected, purely on the basis of merit, since the unsuitable left out in Group 'El are excluded from the competition on the ground of unsuitability and cease to remain contenders for the remaining posts.
[pp.1111C E, G H] 1.4.
The provisions made in the Rules for promotion to Group ID ' Section II, from Group 'E ' as well as Group IF ' are therefore, not in any manner violative of Articles 14 or 16 of the Constitution.
[pp.1111B E] Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri vs The Union of India and Ors.
, ; ; Mohd Hanif Quareshi & Ors.
vs The State of Bihar, ; and Md. Usman & Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
, [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 549, relied on.
Constitutional Law by Prof. Willis; cited.
From the affidavit of a senior officer giving all the relevant particulars alongwith a chart indicating the comparative position of persons in Group 'E ' not found suitable for promotion to Group ID ' Section [ with those in Group IF ' who were found fit for promotion on the basis of merit, it was established that the principle adopted and followed was fair and reasonable and does not result in any injustice to the persons not found fit in Group 'E ' for promotion; the duties of the office of Principal as well as Headmaster are of a similar nature and there is no qualitative difference in the duties performed by persons belonging to Groups 'E ' and IF '; and that the standard of annual performance appraisal of the members of the two groups is also on par.
[pp.1107G H; 1108A D] 3.
It would be advisable for the State Government to lay down more clearly its policy for the future to avoid even the semblance of treating unequals as equals for the purpose of promotion, in consonance with the well known maxim that 'justice should not only be done but should also be seen to be done '.
[p.1093A B] 4.
The judgment of the High Court* is set aside with the result that 1090 the writ petitions filed in the High Court stand dismissed.
[p.1112A] * Miss Kusum Tandon vs State of Rajasthan, etc., etc., D.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 2221 of 1990 on the file of Rajasthan High Court, decided on 3.9.1991.
