In January, 1989, in accordance with First Proviso to Section 9 of the United Provinces Act, 1916 one Smt.
Sarla Devi was nominated by the State Government as the sole Woman member for the Municipal Board.
On 15.2.1990 U.P. Ordinance No. 2 of 1990 later on replaced by U.P. Act No. 19 of 1990 amended the proviso of Section 9 of the Act substituting a new proviso, providing for the nomination of two Women members by the State Government.
The Amendment Act also added a fourth proviso to the Section which provided that the nomination of the two women members was at the pleasure of the State Government.
On 19.2.1990 the Government issuing a general notification and cancelled nominations of Women members in several Municipal Boards.
Cancelling the nomination of Smt.
Sarla Devi, Smt.
Abida and Smt.
Hazra Khatoon were nominated by the Government on 19.4.1990.
On 22.7.1991 under Section 87 A of the Act a no confidence motion against one Mohd. Iqbal, the President of the Board was initiated by some members before the District Magistrate.
The District Magistrate fixed 12.8.1991 for consideration of the confidence motion.
On 2.8.1991, the Government nominated Smt Shyama Devi and Smt.
Baijanti Devi as the two women members of the Board, cancelling the nominations of Smt.
Abida and Smt Hazra Khatoon.
35 On 9.8.1991 Mohd. Iqbal, President of the Municipal Board, against whom the non confidence motion was pending, filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the constitutional validity of the fourth proviso to Section 9 of the Act and also challenged the notification dated 2.8.1991.
Further he challenged the proceedings of no confidence motion initiated against him.
The High Court did not grant any stay of no confidence proceedings, but ordered that the outcome of the no confidence proceedings shall be subject to the result of the writ petition.
In the meeting fixed on 12.8.1991 by the District Magistrate to consider the no confidence motion 20 members of the Board voted in favour of the no confidence motion, out of the total strength of 37 members of the Board.
The newly nominated Women members by notification dated 2.8.1991 participated in the meeting, whereas Smt Abida and Hazra Khatoon neither attended the meeting nor claimed any right to attend the same.
The no confidence motion dated 12.8.1991 was passed against Mohd. Iqbal.
One Om Narain, The appellant No. 1 in C.A. Nos.
714 16 of 1993) who was the Vice President of the Board was elected as the President in the vacancy.
The appellant Om Narain took charge of the office of the President of the Board and continued to function as the president.
Mohd. Iqbal, the former President filed another writ petition challenging the no confidence motion dated 12.8.1991 passed against him.
Abida and Smt Hazra Khatoon also filed a writ petition, challenging the notification dated 2.8.1991, which cancelled their nominations and nominated Smt.
Shyama Devi and Smt.
Baijanti Devi in their places.
A Division Bench of the High Court considered all the three writ petitions two by the former President and one by the former women members.
Agreeing with the decision in Dr. Smt.
Rama Mishra vs State of U.P. (Writ Petition No. 11114 of 1990 disposed on 9.12.1991) allowed the writ petitions, quashing the notification dated 2.8.1991 and declaring Mohd. Iqbal to be the president of the Board.
The review application flied by the appellants was dismissed by the High Court.
36 Being aggrieved against the High Court 's decision, the former Vice President and the Women members nominated by notification dated 2.8.1991 approached this Court in these appeals (C.A.Nos.
714 716 of 1993) by special leave.
The C.& No. 717 of 1993 was by another Woman member of another Municipal Board, having aggrieved against the judgment of the High Court dated 9.12.1991 passed in Dr. Rama Mishra 's case.
The appellants contended that the view taken in Dr. Rama Mishra 's case was not correct and the view taken in Prem Kumar Balmiki vs State of U.P. (W.P. No. 1067 of 1991, disposed of on 13.11.1991) was correct; that the State Legislature was competent to insert fourth proviso and to lay down that the nominated members shall hold office during the pleasure of the State Government; that if the initial appointment by nomination was made on political considerations, political considerations should be allowed to operate in terminating such appointments made by nomination; that there was no violation of any principle of natural justice nor such provision was arbitrary so as to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution; and that the only requirement under the second proviso to Section 9 of the Act was that if none or only one of the members elected under clause (b) was a woman, the State Government was to nominate by notification two Women members or one more Woman member, as the case may be, so that the number of Women members in the Board was not less than two, and that the State Government did not violate the provision.
The private respondents submitted that once the power of nominating the Women members was exercised by the State Government, such nominated members could not be removed prior to the completion of the term of the Board, unless they were removed on the grounds contained under section 40 of the Act; that the State Government could not be allowed to remove a nominated member at its pleasure without assigning any reason and without affording any opportunity to show cause; that once a Woman member was nominated, she got a vested right to hold the office of a member of the Board and the State Government could not be given an uncanalised, uncontrolled and arbitrary power to remove such member; that such arbitrary power without any guidelines would be contrary to the well established principles of democracy and public policy and that it would hamper the local bodies to act independently without any hindrance from the side of the Government.
37 Allowing the appeals, this Courts, HELD: 1.01.
The right to seek an election or to be elected or nominated to a statutory body, depends and arises under a statute.
The initial nomination of the two Women members itself depended on the pleasure and subjective satisfaction of the State Government.
If such appointments made initially by nomination are based on political con siderations, there can be no violation of any provision of the Constitution in case the Legislature authorised the State Government to terminate such appointment at its pleasure and to nominate new members in their place.
[50G H] 1.02.
The nominated members do not have the will or authority of any residents of the Municipal Board behind them as may be present in the case of an elected member.
In case of an elected member, the Legislature has provided the grounds in Section 40 of the Act under which the members could be removed, But so far as the nominated members are concerned, the Legislature in its wisdom has proved that they shall hold office during the pleasure of the Government.
[51B] 1.03.
Such provision neither offends any Article of the Constitution nor the same is against any public policy or democratic norms enshrined in the Constitution.
There is also no question of any violation of principles of natural justice in not affording any opportunity to the nominated members before their removal nor the removal under the pleasure doctrine contained in the fourth proviso to Section 9 of the Act puts any stigma on the performance or character of the nominated members.
It is done purely on political considerations.
[51D] 1.04.
In Dr. Rama Mishra 's case, the High Court wrongly held that the pleasure doctrine incorporated under the fourth proviso to Section 9 of the Act was violative of the fundamental right of equality as enshrined in Article 14 and Article 15(3) of the Constitution.
[51E] Dr. Smt.
Rama Mishra vs State of U.P. Writ Petition No. 11 114 of 1990 decided on 9.12.1991 by the Allahabad High Court, over ruled.
Prem Kumar Balmiki vs State of U.P. Writ Petition No. 1067 of 1991 decided on 13.11.1991 by the Allahabad High Court, approved.
The special provision contained for nominating one or two 38 women members as the case may be provided in Section 9 of the Act would be protected from challenge under clause (3) of Article 15 of the Constitution.
[52B] 1.06.
The provision of pleasure doctrine incorporated by adding proviso four does not, in any manner, take away the right to representation of women members in the Board, but it only permits the State Government to keep the nominated women members of its own choice.
[52C] 1.07.
The right of equality enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution applies to equals and not to unequals.
The nominated members of the Board fall in a different class and cannot claim equality with the elected members.
[52E] 1.08.
Even in the case of highest functionaries in the Government like the Governors, the Ministers, the Attorney General and the Advocate General discharge their duties efficiently, though removable at the pleasure of the competent authority under the law, and it cannot be said that they are bound to demoralise or remain under a constant fear of removal and as such do not discharge their functions in a proper manner during the period they remain in the office.
[52G] 1.09.
The motion of no confidence being supported by 20 members which admittedly constituted a majority of the total strength of the members of the Board being 37, the no confidence motion has been rightly carried out and as a result of which Mohd. Iqbal was not entitled to continue as President of the Board.
Similarly, Smt.
Abida and Smt.
Hazra Khatoon having been rightly removed as nominated members, they are no longer entitled to continue as nominated members of the Municipal Board, Shahjahanpur and in their place Smt.
Shyama Devi and Smt.
Baijanti Devi shall be entitled to continue as nominated members of the Board.
[53C D]
