The prosecution 's case was that on the date of occurrence, the pw.2 and the deceased were returning after answering the call of nature at about 6 P.M.
At that time the appellant along with co accused came there.
Seeing the p.w.2 and the deceased the accused came rushed towards them with knives.
Appellant chased the deceased and gave a knife blow on his chest.
The P.W.2 received a knife blow from the co accused.
Thereafter the accused fled away.
The victim died on the way while he was being taken to Debai.
The P.W. 2. lodged the first information report on the same night at about 11.30 P.M.
The motive for the occurrence was that about 10 or 12 days before the date of occurrence, the appellant abused the P.W.2 and the deceased.
They gave two/three slaps to the appellant The appellant accused 's case was that for last two days prior to the date of occurrence the crop of his grand father was being damaged.
Therefore, he was keeping a watch on the field.
During night the P.W.2 and the deceased came to the field.
Seeing them, the appellant raised an alarm Chor Chor.
They started running.
The appellant chased them to catch 71 them.
But they turned back and started assaulting the appellant with lathies.
The appellant attacked them with a 'ballam ' to save his life.
The injuries on the person of the appellant were examined, in the next morning.
He filed an application before the Superintendent of Police and a case was registered at about 10.25 A.M. on the next day of the date of occurrence on the basis of appellant 's petition.
The trial Court acquitted the appellant of the charges under sections 302 and 307 read with section 34 of the penal Code.
The State 's appeal was allowed by the High Court and the present appellant was convicted under section 302 of the Penal Code and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
Present appeal was filed by the accused against the High Court 's judgment.
The State contended that if the version of appellant was accepted, it would amount to a case of free fight between the prosecution party and the accused, both being armed and that in a case of free right no party could claim right of private defence.
Partly allowing the appeal, this court, HELD: 1.01.
A free right is that when both sides mean to right a pitched battle.
The question of who attacks and who defends in such a fight is wholly immaterial and depends on the tactics adopted by the rival party.
In such cases of mutual rights, both sides can be convicted for their individual acts, [76E] 1.02.
So far the facts of the present case are concerned, if the version disclosed by the accused can be held to be a probable version of the occurrence then it cannot be held to be a case of free fight.
[76G] 1.03.
In any particular case the injuries found on the person of the accused being serious in nature may assume importance in respect of the genesis and manner of occurrence alleged by the prosecution.
In other case the injuries being superficial, by themselves may not affect the prosecution case; the version disclosed by the prosecution having been proved by witnesses who are independent, reliable and trustworthy, supported by the circumstances of that particular case, including the promptness with 72 which the first information report was lodged on behalf of the prosecution.
But if the first information report has not been lodged promptly and there is no reasonable explanation for the delay , the witnesses who support the version of the prosecution are not only inimical but even their evidence is not consistent with the circumstances found during the course of investigation, then in that situation, injuries on the person of the accused which are not very serious in nature assume importance for the purpose of consideration as to whether the defence of the right of private defence pleaded by the accused should be accepted.
[80B D] 1.04.
So far the present case is concerned the injuries found on the person of the appellant are not serious in nature and merely on the ground that prosecution has suppressed those injuries, the appellant is not entitled to the acquittal.
But those injuries can certainly be taken into consideration while judging whether the defence version of the accused is probable.
[80H] 1.05.
The motive disclosed on behalf of the prosecution for the occurrence is not acceptable.
Even if it is assumed that because of some altercation 10/12 days before the date of occurrence, the appellant had decided to cause the murder of the deceased, then more injuries would have been caused on the person of the victim by the appellant.
[81B] 1.06.
The delay in lodging the first information report by PW 2 has not at all been explained.
The occurrence according to prosecution took place at 6.00 P.M. in the evening.
The victim while being taken to Debai which is at a distance of five kilometers expired on the way.
Then why first information report was lodged at 11.30 P.M., there is no explanation.
On the other hand the appellant 's case is that the occurrence did not take place at 6.00 P.M. in the evening but at later part in the night.
That appears to be more probable.
[81C] 1.07.
The injury found on the chest of the deceased is inconsistent with the prosecution case that appellant chased the deceased and then gave a blow by knife.
But it is consistent with the defence version that soon the deceased and PW.2 returned and started assaulting the appellant when the appellant gave a ballam blow in the chest of the deceased.
If the appellant had given the ballam blow while chasing the deceased, in that event it would have caused injury on the back of the deceased.
[81F] 73 1.08.
Taking all facts and circumstances into consideration the version of the accused of the occurrence appears to be probable and acceptable.
[82G] Gajanandv.
State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR1954SC 695;Kanbi Nanji Virji vs State of Gujarat AIR 1970 SC 219; Puran vs State of Rajasthan, AIR 1976 SC 912; Vishvas Aba Kurane vs State of Maharashtra, AIR 1978 SC 414; The State of Gujarat vs Bai Fatima, ; ; Lakshman Singh vs State of Bihar, AIR 1976 SC 2263; Bhaba Nanda Sarma vs The State of Assam, ; ; Hare Krishna Singh vs State of Bihar, ; and State of Rajasthan vs Madho, AIR 1991 SC 1065, referred to.
[76F] 2.01.
Once it is established by the prosecution that the occurrence in question is result of a free fight then normally no right of private defence is available to either party and they will be guilty of their respective acts.
[76G] 2.02.
Accused pleading the right of private defence need not prove it beyond reasonable doubt.
It is enough if on the basis of the circumstances of a particular case, applying the test of preponderance or probabilities the version becomes acceptable.
[80E] 2.03.
There are no two parallel versions before the Court, one on behalf of the prosecution and other on behalf of the accused and the Court is required to choose as to which of the two versions is the correct version of the occurrence.
The burden placed on the accused is discharged no sooner he creates a doubt in the mind of the Court and satisfies the Court that the version disclosed by him in the facts and circumstances of that particular case is more probable.
[80E F] 2.04.
If the right of private defence is available.
While judging the question whether the accused has exceeded such right, should not be weighed in a golden scale.
But the right of private defence does not extend to the infliction of more harm than is necessary for the purpose of defence.
When the appellant caused the injury with a ballani (spear) in the chest of the victim which resulted in his death, certainly he exceeded his right of private defence.
[82H, 83A] Partap vs )le State of U.P., ; Mohan Singh vs State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 2161; Seniyal Udayar vs State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1987 SC 1289; Vijayee Singh vs State of U.P.; , and Buta 74 Singh vs State of Punjab, , referred to.
[80G] 3.
An admission has to be taken as a whole.
It was not open to the High Court to reject one part so far the aggression and assault by the prosecution party which according to the appellant preceded giving of the ballam blow, and to accept only the later part of the statement that appellant gave a ballam blow, for the purpose of convicting the appellant [82D].
Hanumant Govind Nargundkar vs State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1952 SC 343, referred to.
