The appellant, A 1, his wife, A 2, and his brother 's wife, A 3, were prosecuted under Sections 302/34 and 201/34 of the Indian Penal Code.
Ile entire case was based on the circumstantial evidence : (a) the deceased had illicit relations with A 2 and A 3; (b) the deceased was last seen on the night when he went to sleep in his house and thereafter his dead body was found buried in the house of A 1; (3) during interrogation A 1 made a disclosure statement and consequently lead the police party to his sitting room where he pointed out a spot covered by a cot and thereafter he dug the floor and, the dead body of the deceased was recovered from a five feet deep pit; and (4) recovery of doe (woodcutter) from his possession bearing the same human blood group as that of the deceased.
Relying upon these circumstances the trial court convicted A 1 and A 2 on both the counts and sentenced them to imprisonment for life on the first count and for five years on the second count but acquitted A 3. 'Me High Court dismissed the appeal of A 1.
However, it acquitted A 2 on the ground that there was no evidence to connect her with the commission of the murder but maintained her conviction and sentence under sections 201/34 on the ground that she being the inmate of the house was in the know of the fact that the dead body was burried in the house with a view to causing the disappearance of evidence and she must have been necessarily involved in the process of digging a grave of five feet deep, the filling of the grave and erasing the traces etc.
Both the accused filed appeals in this Courts.
Dismissing the appeal of A 1 and allowing the appeal of A 2, this Court, 66 HELD: 1.
The chain of circumstances relied upon by the prosecution and accepted by the Courts below leaves no manner of doubt that A 1 committed the murder.
Accordingly his conviction and sentence is upheld.
[68B] 2.
There is not an iota of evidence on the record not even a whisper to the effect that it was A 2 who helped in concealing or causing the evidence of the commission of the offence to disappear.
Simply because she is the wife of A 1 and as such is supposed to be living in the same house, It cannot be assumed that she was guilty of the offence under section 201/34.
A 1 may or may not have taken help of his wife in concealing the dead body.
Her being wife of A 1 by itself is not sufficient to prove the charge under section 201/34.
She is accordingly acquitted of that charge.
[68H, 69A B]
