The appellant assessee was issued a notice under Section 23A of the Income tax Act, 1922.
The assessee contested the same.
At the same time, it set apart a sum of Rs. 6,52,000 in its books for the year ending 31st March 1956, to meet the contingency that may arise if his plea failed.
During the year 1958 59 an amount of Rs. 2,02,000 out of the said amount was transferred to the profit & loss account. 'Me balance amount of Rs. 4,50,000 continued to remain and was shown as a provision set apart to meet the aforesaid contingent liability.
The assessee has been contesting the said proceedings.
Ultimately it succeeded before the High Court which held that no action could be taken against the assessee under Section 23A.
For the assessment year 1963 64 in proceedings under the , the assessee claimed that the said sum of Rs. 4,50,000 was a reserve and should be included in its capital.
The Income tax Officer did not agree.
Ultimately the matter reached the Tribunal which agreed with the assessee.
At the instance of Revenue the question as to whether the sum of Rs. 4,50,000 set apart for contingent liability (taxation) was to be included in the computation of capital of the assessee company under Rule 1 of the Second Schedule of the was referred to the High Court.
The High Court having answered the question against the assessee, the, assessee has preferred the present appeal contending that inasmuch as no order levying additional tax under Sec.
23A was made the amount could not be treated as a provision.
109 110 Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD : 1.1.
Provisions made against anticipated losses and contingencies are charges against profits and, therefore, to be taken into account against gross receipts in the P.&L. accounts and the balance sheet.
On the other hand, reserves are appropriations of profits, the assets by which they are represented being retained to form part of the capital employed in the business.
[112G] 1.2.
In the instant case, the provision made by the assessee in its Books for meeting the anticipated liability of tax (under Section 23A of the Income Tax Act, 1922) was indeed a provision and not a reserve.
The assessee Itself called it a provision.
It did not call it a reserve nor was the amount set apart or appropriated as a reserve.
It is not to suggest that the description given or the Book entries made by the assessee are conclusive, but to emphazise how the assessee understood the said item itself In the circumstances of the case the High Court was right in holding it to be a provision and not a reserve, and so the amount of Rs. 4,50,000 was not to be included in the computation of Capital of the assessee Company.
[113E] Metal Box Company of India Limited vs Their Workmen, and Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co.Ltd.
vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Andhra Pradesh etc.
, , relied on.
