The respondent Company obtained loan from the appellant Financial Corporation.
Soon after obtaining the loan it ceased to, operate and was declared a sick unit.
Consequently, it did not make any repayment of loan as stipulated in the agreement and the hypothecation deeds.
Thereafter, the appellant Corporation issued notice under section 29 of the for taking over the respondent 's unit for recovery of the amount due Rs.38.57 lakhs.
Ile respondent Company filed a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court questioning the appellant 's action.
Ile High Court allowed the petition and directed (1) expeditious rehabilitation of the concern and (2) to restore back the 150 possession of the unit to the respondent Company.
Against the judgment of the High Court the Financial Corporation riled an appeal in this Court.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court, HELD : 1.
It is true that the appellant Corporation which Is an instrumentality of the State created under the is not like an ordinary money lender or a Bank which lends money.
It is a lender with a purpose the purpose being promoting the small and medium industries.
At the same time, It is necessary to keep certain basic facts In view.
The relationship between the Corporation and the borrower is that of creditor and debtor.
the Corporation is not supposed to give loans once and go out of business.
It has also to recover them so that it can give fresh loans to others.
Corporations too borrow monies from Government or other financial corporations and they too have to pay interest thereon.
No doubt it has to act within the four corners of the Act and in furtherance of the object underlying the Act.
But this factor cannot be carried to the extent of obligating the Corporation to revive and resurrect every sick industry irrespective of the cost involved.
[156H, 157A C,F,] Promoting industrilisation at the cost of public funds does not serve the public interest; it merely amounts to transferring public money to private account.
The fairness required of the Corporation cannot be carried to the extent of disabling it from recovering what Is due to it.
While not insisting upon the borrower to honour the commitments undertaken by him, the Corporation alone cannot be shackled band and foot in the name of fairness.
Fairness is not a one way street more particularly in matters like the present one.
The fairness required of it must be tempered nay, determined in the light of all these circumstances.
In the instant case the respondents have no intention of repaying any part of the debt.
They were merely putting forward one or other ploy to keep the Corporation at bay.
[157D F] Mahesh Chandra vs Regional Manager, U.P. Financial Corporation Ors., (1992) 2 J.T. 326, held Inapplicable.
In a matter between the corporation and Its debtor, a writ court has no say except in two situations : (1) there is a statutory violation on the part of the Corporation or (2) where the Corporation acts unfairly i.e. 151 unreasonably.
The High Court exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution cannot sit as an Appellate Authority over the acts and deeds of the Corporation and seek to correct them.
Doctrine of fairness.
evolved in administrative law was not supposed to convert the writ courts into appellate authorities over administrative authorities.
The constraints self imposed undoubtedly of writ jurisdiction still remain.
Ignoring them would lead to confusion and uncertainty.
The jurisdiction way become rudderless.
[157G H, 158A] 2.1.
The obligation to act fairly on the part of the administrative authorities was evolved to ensure the Rule of law and to prevent failure of justice.
This doctrine is complementary to the principle of natural justice which the Quasi judicial Authorities are bound to observe.
It is true that the distinction between a quasi judicial and the administrative action has become thin.
But even so the extent of judicial scrutiny/judicial review in the case of administrative action cannot be larger than in the case of quasi judicial action.
If the High Court cannot sit as an appellate authority over the decisions and orders of quasi judicial authorities it follows equally that it cannot do so in the case of administrative authorities.
The Court cannot substitute its judgment for the judgment of administrative authorities in such cases.
Only when the action of the administrative authority is so unfair or unreasonable that no reasonable person would have taken that action, can the Court intervenes.
[158C F] A.K Kraipak & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 150; Secretary of State for Education vs Talimeside Metropolitan Borough Council, ; and Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd., vs Wednesbury Corporation, ; , relied on.
While passing the impugned order the High Court has not kept in mind the well recognised limitations of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
While reviewing the administrative action it was not justified in acting as an appellate court.
[153D,159C]
