The respondent bank charge sheeted the appellant employee for granting bank loans to a large number of persons without proper documentation and without verifying their credit worthiness and obtaining illegal gratification in that connection.
An enquiry was held.
The Enquiry Officer found the appellant guilty and on the basis of the enquiry report, he was dismissed from service.
The appellant challenged the order of dismissal in a writ petition before the High Court.
On 8.7.1988 the High Court allowed the petition holding that the enquiry held was not proper and in accordance with law and ordered the appellant to face another enquiry in respect of which it gave certain directions.
The same enquiry Officer then permitted the appellant to cross examine the witnesses of the bank and to examine his own witnesses.
The Enquiry Officer held in his report dated 27.3.1989 that nine charges against the appellant were found to be proved, one not proved and one partly proved.
The disciplinary authority, considering the enquiry report, dismissed the appellant from service on 23.10.1989.
161 The appellant challenged the dismissal order in the High Court contending that the enquiry was not conducted as required by the order of the High Court dated 8.7.1998 and that he was not furnished with a copy of the Enquiry Report.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition, against which the present appeal by special leave was filed.
The appellant contended that the Enquiry Officer in the second enquiry report had relied upon the findings of the earlier enquiry, since quashed, and that he did not permit the appellant to examine three necessary witnesses in support of his case; that there was no real enquiry as contemplated by the High Court 's order dated 8.7.1988; and that, therefore, the dismissal order passed on the basis of the second enquiry report be quashed.
The respondent bank submitted that the Enquiry Officer conducted the enquiry as directed by the High Court in its order dated 8.7.1988.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.01.
The order dated 8th July, 1988 contemplated a fresh enquiry.
At best, the examination in chief of the witnesses of the respondent could be said to have been allowed to be incorporated in the second enquiry proceedings.
The order certainly contemplated that the Enquiry Officer would apply his mind afresh to the evidence on record, comprising the examination in chief and cross examination of the respondent 's witnesses and that of the appellant 's witnesses.
[165C] 1.02.
It was patent from the "Additional enquiry report" made by the Enquiry.
Officer that there had been no fresh application of mind.
It was impermissible for the Enquiry Officer, in these circumstances, to have borne his previous Enquiry Report in mind and to have confined the "Additional enquiry report" only to the cross examination of prosecution witnesses and the examination and cross examination of defence witnesses .as the charges have been dealt with one by one in detail in my previous enquiry report".
It was also impermissible for him to have stated that "the findings of the previous enquiry report remain as they are".
Having regard to the High Court 's order dated 8th July, 1988, the Enquiry Officer was bound to consider the material on record afresh and not to take his earlier 162 report into account and to say that he found "no reason to change that report '. [165C E] 1.03.
In the fitness of things it was directed that another Enquiry Officer should be appointed by the respondent who should allow the appellant the opportunity of examining as his witnesses the three persons referred to by the earlier Enquiry Officer in the paragraph of the 'Addi tional enquiry report" sub titled 'Conclusion".
He should give to the respondent and the appellant the opportunity of a hearing.
He should then apply his mind to the material on record without in any way being influenced by the earlier enquiry reports, and make his own enquiry report accordingly.
[165G H, '166A] Union of India and Others vs Mohd Ramzan Khan, ; , referred to.
