The High Court reiterating the principles enunciation in Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. and Ors.
vs State of U.P. and Ors.
, ; held that the Central Government had the exclusive power to grant a licence for the manufacture of industrial alcohol and it was not necessary for the Company respondent to obtain a PD 2 licence from the Excise Commissioner before starting its distillery for the manufacture of industrial alcohol.
The High Court directed the State of U.P. and another not to interfere with the respondent Company 's manufacturing Industrial alcohol in the distillery for which licence was granted but subject to the State Government 's right to ensure that industrial alcohol was not converted into potable alcohol.
The State of U.P. filed a special leave petition against the judgment of the High Court, in this Court contending that before manufacturing industrial alcohol, the respondent company was to manufacture into rectified spirit and that rectified spirit Could be converted potable liquor by merely adding water, that the High Court did not give any reason in support of the High Court 's direction.
"We further direct that the respondents shall allot molasses to the, petitioner in accordance with the assurance given to the petitioner vide order of the Government dated 23.3.1989." The respondent Company submitted that the High Court order was extended from time to time for the subsequent years as well.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, this Court, HELD: 01.
The law laid down by this court and the observations of 292 the High Court in the impugned judgment recognise and safeguard the right of the State Govt.
to guard against any abuse and to ensure that rectified spirit is not diverted for human consumption.
That power is affirmed.
[293F] 02.
The direction of the High Court cannot be construed and shall not be understood as calling upon or directing the Government to do anything, or to make any supplies, contrary to the provisions of the provisions of the Molasses Contral Order or any other law governing the supplies of molasses.
The supply of molasses to the respondent shall be made in accordance with law.
[294A B] Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. and Ors.
vs State of U.P. and Ors.
, ; , referred to.
[292F]
