For election to the Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly from 60 Chachiot Assembly Constituency held during February, 1990, fifteen persons, including the appellant and one Karam Singh, filed nomination papers.
At the time of scrutiny, an objection was raised against the nomination of Karam Singh on the ground that he was holding the office of Chairman, Himachal Pradesh Khadi and village Industries Board, which is an office of porfit within the meaning of Article 191 (1) (a) of the Constitution and was, therefore, disqualified for being chosen as a member of the legislative Assembly.
The Returning Officer upheld the objection and rejected the nomination of Karam Singh.
The appellant was declared elected to the Legislative Assembly from the said Constituency.
His election was challenged by the Respondents by filing election petitions in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.
The High Court found that the said rejection of nomination of Karam Singh was improper because on the date of scrutiny Karam Singh was not holding an office of profit and for that reason, the election of the appellant was set aside.
The appellant herein filed the present appeals under section 116 A of the Representation of the People Act, challenging the judgment of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. 251 During the pendency of the appeals the Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly was dissolved.
After considering the appeals on merits the Court, which dismissing the appeals, HELD : 1.
Inspite of the dissolution of the Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly the question arising for consideration cannot be said to have become academic because the invalidation of the election of the appellant may give rise to the liability to refund the allowances received by the Appellant.
[253G, 255 B] Loknath Padhan vs Birendra Kumar Sahu, ; , distinguished.
[253G] 2.01. 'Resignation ' means the spontaneous relinquishment of one 's own right and in relation to an office, it cannotes the act of giving up or relinquishing the office.
The act of relinquishment may be unilateral or bilateral depending on the return of the office and the conditions governing it.
[260F] 2.02.If the act of relinquishment is of unilateral character, it comes into effect when such act indicating the intention to relinquish the office is communicated to competent authority.
The authority to whom the act of relinquishment is communicated is not required to take any action and the relinquishment takes effect from the date of such communication where the resignation is intended to operate in praesenti.
[260G] 2.03.In cases where the act of relinquishment is of a bilateral character, the communication of the intention to relinquish, by itself, would not be sufficient to result in relinquishment of the office and some action is required to be taken on such communication of the intention to relinquish, e.g., acceptance of the said request to relinquish the office, and in such a case the relinquishment does not become effective or operative till such action is taken.
[260H,,261A B] 301.
From the provision of Section 7 of the H.P. Khadi and Village Industries Board Act, 1966, (the 'Act ') it would appear that the act of relinquishment of the office of Chairman of the H.P. Khadi and Village Industries Board (the Board) is unilateral in character and the resignation from the said office takes effect when it is communicated without any 252 further action being required to be taken on the same.
Since the Chairman of the Board is nominated by the Government of Himachal Pradesh under Section 4(2) of the Act, resignation has also to be communicated to the Government of Himachal Pradesh i.e. the Head of the Department dealing with the Board, and once it is so communicated it takes effect from the date of such communication if the resignation is in praesenti or from the date indicated therein if it is prospective in nature to be operative from a future date.
[263G H, 264A B] 3.02.The resignation of Karam Singh as Chairman of the Board was not required to be accepted by the Government of Himachal Pradesh.
It became effective on January 31, 1990 when the letter of resignation was received by the Financial Commissioner cum Secretary (Industries) to the Government of Himachal Pradesh who was the Head of the Department dealing with the Board and to whom it was addressed.
[265D] 3.03.Since there is no requirement in the Act that the resignation of the Chairman of the Board should be notified in the Official Gazette as in the case of a member of the Board, it cannot be said that the resignation of Karam Singh did not take effect till it was notified in the Official Gazette vide notification dated February 12, 1990.
[265E] Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and Another vs Brojo Nath Ganguly and Anr., ; J.K Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Company Ltd. vs State of U.P. & Others, ; ; Lala Ram vs Gauri Shanker, 1981 All.
Law 1982; Raj Kumar vs Union of India, [1968] SCR 857; Union of India vs Shri Gopal Chandra Misra & Ors., ; at p. 21 and Glossop vs Glossop, , Halsburys Law of England 4th Ed., Vol. 7, p. 316, para 536, relied on.
[260D G, 261G, 262G]
