The appellant, a foreign national, was convicted by the trial court under Section 20(b)(ii) of the and sentenced to undergo ten years ' rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of one lakh rupees, and in default, to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months.
According to the prosecution, two cylindrical pieces of charas, weighing 7 gms.
and 5 gms.
respectively, were seized from the appellant by a Police Patrol Party and on chemical analysis of one of the pieces, it was found that the substance contained charas.
The trial court, relying on the evidence of PW 1, Junior Scientific Officer of the Director of Health Services, who examined the substance, PW 2, a panch witness and PW 3, the Police Inspector, who was heading the Patrol Party, convicted the appellant.
The High Court dismissed the appellants appeal.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appellant it was contended that both the courts below had erred in holding that the accused was found in possession of 12 gins.
of Charas; since only a small quantity i.e. less than 5 gms. had been sent for analysis the remaining part of the substance, which had not been sent for analysis, could not be held to be also Charas and, therefore, the quantity proved to have been in the 338 possession of the accused would be small quantity, as provided under Section 27 of the Act and the accused should have been given the benefit of that Section.
On behalf of the State, it was submitted that there was no need to send the entire quantity for chemical analysis, and the fact that one of the pieces which was sent for analysis had been found to contain Charas, the necessary inference would be that the other piece also contained Charas and that, at any rate, since the accused had totally denied, he could not get the benefit of Section 27, as he had not discharged the necessary burden as required under the section.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court, HELD:1.1.
In the absence of positive proof that both the pieces recovered from the accused contained Charas only, it is not safe to hold that 12 gms.
of Charas was recovered from the accused.
In view of the evidence of P.W. 1, the prosecution has proved positively that Charas weighing about 4.570 gms.
was recovered from the accused.
[342C] 1.2.In general, possession of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance has been prohibited by Section 8 of the and any person found in possession of the same contrary to the provisions of the Act or any rule or order made or permit issued thereunder is liable to be punished as provided thereunder to imprisonment for a term not less than 10 years and a fine not less than Rs. 1 lakh.
However, Section 27 is an exception, whereby lesser punishment is provided for illegally possessing any 'smaller quantity ' for personal consumption of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance.
By virtue of the notification issued on 14.11.85 under Explanation (1) of the Section, 5 gms or less quantity of Charas has been specified by the Central Government to be the small quantity.
[343E F, 344B] 1.3.
In the instance case, the prosecution has proved that the quantity seized from the accused was less than 5 gms.
Therefore, it is within the meaning of"small quantity ' for the purpose of Section 27.
[344C] 1.4.
No doubt, as Section 27 lays down, the burden is on the appellant to prove that the substance was intended for his personal consumption As to the nature of burden of proof that has to be discharged 339 depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Whether the substance was intended for personal consumption or not has to be examined in the context in which this exception is made.
[344D] 1.5.
The accused though in general has taken a plea of denial,but his examination under Section 313 Cr.
P.C. by the Magistrate reveals that there was a plea that it was meant for his personal consumption.
The trial court has also noted in its judgment that the accused had made an application stating that the piece said to have been recovered from him was less than 5 gms., and not 12 gms.
as alleged.
The prosecution case itself shows that he was having this substance in a pouch alongwith a chillum (smoking pipe) and smoking material.
The averments made by the appellant in the application and as extracted by the trial court would themselves show that it was meant for his personal consumption.
The surrounding circumstances under which it was seized also confirm the same.
[344E G] 1.6.The appellant is a foreigner and as a tourist appears to have carried this substance for his personal consumption.
No doubt, the menace of trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substance has to be dealt with severely, but in view of the provisions of Section 27, it cannot be held that the small quantity found with the appellant was not meant for his personal consumption.
Therefore, the appellant is liable to be punished as provided under Section 27 of the Act.
[344G H, 345A] 1.7.Accordingly, the conviction of the appellant under Section 20(b)(ii) of the Act and sentence of 10 years ' R.I. are set aside, and he is convicted under Section 27 of the Act and sentenced to undergo 6, months ' R.I. and to pay a fine of Rs. 1 lakh, in default of payment of which to further undergo 6 months ' R.I. [345C]
