The New Delhi Municipal Committee by its resolution dated 19.10.
1973 extended the benefit of higher pay scales recommended in the Shiv Shankar Committee Report, to its staff working in the electricity wing.
Following this, the employees working in the general wing of the NDMC also raised demand for granting them the benefit of those pay scales.
In the meantime, by its resolution dated 27.6.1978 the NDMC constituted, with effect from 1.5.1978, the electricity wing composed of 28 technical and 496 ministerial posts and decided to give all of them scales of pay as per S.S. Committee 's Report.
In the writ petitions filed in the High Court the ministerial staff failed to receive full relief.
This Court in R.D. Gupta & Ors. etc.
vs Lt. Governor, Delhi Administration & Ors.
; , found that the entire ministerial staff in the NDMC constitutes a unified cadre.
The ministerial posts in the general wing, the electricity wing and the water works wing are interchan geable posts and postings are made from the common pool according to administrative convenience and exigencies of service and not on the basis of any distinct policy or special qualifications.
It was thus held that all sections of the ministerial staff should be treated alike and all of them were entitled to the same scales of pay for the work of equal nature done by them.
In order to extend the benefit of R.D. Gupta 's case, the NDMC by its order dated 9.6.1988, revised the pay scales of ' 18 categories of employees who constituted 496 posts forming the electricity cell.
By another order 414 dated 27.7.1988 the NDMC extended the benefit of S.S. Committee 's scales to eight allied categories of sweepers, subsequently, all the drivers of the NDMC were extended benefit of R.D. Gupta 's case.
On the question: whether the petitioners fall within the cadre of ministerial staff or fall in similar cadres which have already been granted the benefit of S.S. Committee 's pay scales.
Disposing of the writ petitions, the Court, HELD: 1.
There is no valid justification for discriminating the employees of the Auto Workshop which forms a part and parcel of the electricity wing of the NDMC, since the benefit of the pay scales recommended by the S.S. Committee has been allowed by the NDMC to the 18 categories of employees which include daftry, peon, chowkidar, sweeper etc.
[422D E] 2.
The NDMC having allowed the benefit of S.S. Committee 's scales to rat catchers and dog catchers vide order dated 27.7.1988, there is no valid justification for denying such benefit to duplicating machine operators and gunmen/dog shooters.
There is no essential difference in the job work done by gunmen/dog shooters.
The post of duplicating machine operators in transferable and interchangeable from other class IV employees of the NDMC who have already been granted benefit of S.S. Committee 's pay scales vide order dated 9.6.1988.
[422E] 3.
Both the posts of Junior Technical Assistant (Hindi) and Assistant Store Keeper are such posts which clearly fall within the ministerial cadre.
They are thus entitled to the benefit of S.S. Committee 's scales.
[423B] 4.
The benefit of S.S. Committee 's pay scales having already been extended to the pump drivers in the electricity wing, there is no valid ground or justification to deny such benefit to the pump drivers working in the water supply, horticulture and civil wings of NDMC.
[423C] 5.
The employees of Junior Navyug School run by NDMC fall in a different cadre altogether and as such cannot claim the benefit of S.S. Committee 's pay scales on the basis of R.D. Gupta 's judgment.
Their posts are not interchangeable or transferable from any other post under the NDMC.
The nature and the duties performed by them are totally different and they cannot be granted the benefit of the S.S. Committee 's pay scales 415 on the basis of any equality with the other employees of NDMC who have been granted such benefit.
[423D E] 6.
The telephone operators working in the NDMC fall in a separate cadre and their posts are neither interchangeable nor transferable with the other members of the service in the NDMC.
That apart, the petitioners are trained Telephone Operators and Senior Telephone Operators and as such do not fall within the category of ministerial staff and are not entitled to the benefit of S.S. Committee 's pay scales on the basis of R.D. Gupta 's case.
[423F] 7.
The respondent Delhi Administration and NDMC are directed to take appropriate steps within three months and make payment of the entire arrears and grant future benefit in the pay scales as recommended by S.S. Committee.
[424B]
