Different varieties of cotton yarn were manufactured by the appellant Mills.
Packing of the yarn was done in two forms, viz. cone form which was used in powerloom and hosiery industry and hank form which was exclusively consumed by the handloom industry.
For the cone form of packing the ring frame cops were fed to the winding machines and for the hank form of packing the cops were fed to the reeling machines.
The appellants were packing the yarn in cone form only.
Since they had not installed the reeling machines, they could not pack the yarn in hank form.
In exercise of powers under S.3 of the , Textile (Control) Order, 1986 was issued by the Government.
Clause 16 of the said order gave power to the Textile Commissioner to issue directions providing the manner of packing of yarn in hanks, cones or in any other form and in such proportion as he deemed necessary or ex pedient.
It also laid down the complete guidelines for exercise of the powers by the Textile Commissioner.
Exercising his powers under clause 16 of the 1986 Order, the Textile Commissioner issued a notification on 293.90, which was amended on 11.5.90 and 17.5.90.
According to the Notification every producer of yarn should pack in hank form at least 50% 404 of the total yarn packed by him during each half yearly period for civil consumption.
The appellants challenged the constitutional validity of clause 16 of the Textile (Control) Order, 1986 and the Notification issued thereunder, by filing Writ Petitions before the High Court.
The Writ Petitions were dismissed and the appellant Mills preferred the present appeals.
The appellants contended that an identical notification dated 29.6.1979 issued under the Textile (Control) Order, 1948 was struck down by the High Court and the said judgment having been upheld by this Court, the respondents were bound by the same and the Textile Commissioner had no authority to issue a fresh notification in similar terms; and that the appellants could not be compelled to manufacture something for which the appellants have not installed necessary machinery and other super structure.
It was further contended that the Notification was violative of Articles 14 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The present notification under challenge has been issued under Clause 16(1) of the Textile (Control) Order, 1986.
Unlike Clause 21(5) of the 1948 Order, proviso to Clause 16(1) of the 1986 Order provides complete guidelines to the Textile Commissioner to issue the directions envisaged thereunder.
[409G H] Sri Rani Lakshmi G.S. & W. Mills Pvt. Ltd. & Others vs Textile Commissioner, Bombay & Ors., AIR 1986 Madras 66, distinguished.
In order to make available sufficient quantity of hank yarn at reasonable price and also for the sustenance of Handloom workers engaged in the largest cottage industry in India, it became necessary to reserve hank yarn for Handloom sector by making it obligatory on the part of the manufacturers of yarn to pack a certain percentage of their production packet for civil consumption in the form of hanks.
Thus the notification has been issued in the interest of the general public and also for the larger interest of the textile industry, and is not violative of article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India.
[411B C] 3.
Having accepted the condition regarding packing of yarn in hank form, while taking the licence, under clause 4 of the Industrial Licence, the 405 appellants cannot now turn round and say that they are not bound by the same.
[411F] 4.
There is no violation of article 14 of the Constitution since the notification has been made applicable uniformly to all the producers of yarn.
The appellants are required to pack yarn in hank form in the proportion as provided in the notification keeping in view the total yarn packed by the mill concerned.
In any case the grievance of the appellants has been substantially mitigated by the press note dated May 11, 1990 issued by the Textile Commissioner, reinstituting the erstwhile relaxation getting yarn obligation fulfilled by transfer of surplus yarn packing of another producer, and allowing a producer to get hank yarn reeled through another producer having extra relying capacity.
[411G H; 412A]
