The appellant Company issued a letter to its Contractor containing the terms and conditions of a contract of loading packed cement bags from its Packing Plants Into wagons or trucks.
Under Clause 12 there was a stipulation that the Contractor shall be paid a sum for his work at a flat rate of 41 paise for each tonne of cement handled In Packing Plant No.1 and 30 paise for each tonne of cement handled in Packing Plant No.2 Clause 13 thereof, which contained a recital that the rate of loading in Clause 12 had been worked out on the basis of daily basic wages of Rs.2.35 paise, DA of Rs.1.21 paise and H.R.A of Rs.0.50 paise per day per worker, stipulated a terms of reimbursement by the appellant to the Contractor of the difference in DA over the amount of Rs.1.21 paise and annual increment etc.
payable from mouth to month to every worker by him.
The Contractor carried out his work and the appellant made payments of the sums payable to him under the contract.
But no deductions of tax were made under Section 194C(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The Income Tax Officer served two notices One in respect of assessment years 1973 74 and 1974 75 and the other for 1974 75 to 1977 78 on the principal officer of the appellant Company to show cause as to why action should not be taken against the appellant for non compliance with Section 194C(1).The appellant filed a Writ Petition before the High Court of Patna seeking the quashing of the notices but the same was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant 538 539 that (1) the 'work ' for the carrying of which the sum is required to be credited to the account of or paid to a Contractor under Section 194C(1) of, the Act ' is only a 'works contract ' and hence deduction "under that sub section could arise only to the extent where the sum credited to the account of or paid to a Contractor for, executing such works contract ' is comprised of the element of Income of the Contractor, (2) that the words 'on income.
comprised therein ',appearing immediately after the words ' deduct an amount equal to two per cent of such sum as income tax in the concluding part of the sub section must be taken to mean the percentage amount deductible on the Income received by the Contractor under the contract and not on the sum credited 'to the account of 'or paid to the Contractor.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD. 1.
Them is nothing fit sub section (1) of Section 194C to show that the contract to carry out a work or the contract to supply labour to carry out a work should be confined to 'works contract '.There is no mason to curtail or to cut down the meaning of plain words used in the Section.
.Any work ' means any work and not &."works contract ', which has a special connotation in the tax law. 'Work ' envisaged In the sub section, therefore has.
a wide import and covers 'any work ' which one or the other of the organisations specified in the sub section can get carried out through a Contractor under a contract and further It includes obtaining by any of such organisations supply of labour under a contract with a Contractor for carrying out its work which, would have fallen outside the 'work ', but forks specific inclusion in the sub section.
[544 B E] Brij Bhushan Lal Parduman Kumar etc.
vs C.I. T., Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and New Delhi [1979] 2 S.C.R. 16, distinguished.
The words in the sub section 'on income comprised therein ' appearing Immediately after the words 'deduct an amount equal to two per cent of such sum as income tax ' from their purport, cannot be understood as the percentage amount deductible from the income of the Contractor out of the sum credited to his account or paid to him in pursuance of the co Moreover the concluding part of the sub section requiring deduction of an amount equal to two per cent of such sum as income tax by, use of the words 'on income comprised therein ' makes It obvious that the amount equal to two per cent of the sum required to be deducted Is a 540 deducts at source.
Hence on the express language employed in the sub section, it, is impossible to hold that the amount of the two per cent required to be deducted by the prayer out of the sum credited to the account of or paid to the Contractor has to be confined to his income component out of that sum, [545 D G] 2.1.
There is also nothing in the language of the sub section which permits exclusion of, an amount paid on behalf of the organisaiton to the Contractor according to, the termsand conditions ofthe contract in reimbursement, of.
the amount paidby to workers,from, the sum envisaged therein.
[545 G H, 546 A]
