The appellant along with others was tried for offences under Section 302 read with Sections 148, 149 and 323 of the Indian Penal Code.
The case of the prosecution was that on 16.9.80 Mammed Kutty at 6.00 a.m. in the morning pelted stones at the house of the deceased.
At about 12.00 noon while Mammed Kutty and his brother Abdulla Kutty were passing in front of the house of the deceased, a protest was made by the deceased in respect of the morning incident which was denied.
At about 2.00 p.m. when the deceased was sitting with his wife (PW 4) and others on the varandah of his house, 5 persons including the appellant came to his courtyard and challenged him to come out, if he wanted to beat Mammed Kutty and Abdulla.
The deceased stepped out into his courtyard and asked the accused persons not to create a scene, when the appellant and the other accused gave some blows to the deceased on his hand.
Thereafter the deceased raised his hand to give a blow to the appellant, when the appellant took out a dagger from his waist and gave an injury on the upper part of the chest of the deceased near the left shoulder and above the armpit.
The deceased ran towards the house of PW1 and fell on the varandah.
Therefore, the accused persons escaped.
The victim was removed to the Medical Hospital where he was examined by PW 9, but soon thereafter expired.
The F.I.R. was lodged at 7.15 p.m. and after investigation the chargesheet was submitted against the five accused persons.
At the trial the prosecution examined 4 eye witnesses, PW1 to PW4, and PW8 the doctor who held the post mortem examination.
693 The trial court on consideration of the materials on record came to the conclusion that the charges leveled against the accused persons had not been established beyond all reasonable doubt, and on that finding acquitted all the accused including the appellant.
Great importance was attached to the injury found on the person of Abdulla and adverse inference was drawn against the prosecution case.
On appeal by the State, the High Court convicted the appellant under Section 302 and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
Another accused (Alavi) was convicted under Section 323 of the Penal Code and sentenced to payment of fine of Rs. 250.
The acquittal of the remaining 3 accused persons by the Trial Court was affirmed.
The High Court held that mere non disclosure of the superficial injuries on the person of Abdulla even if those injuries had been caused in the same occurrence, do not in any manner affect the persecution case.
In the appeal to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the statements made in the First Information Report, the evidence of the eye witnesses in connection with the morning incident of pelting of stones, show that it was a concoction and that none had pelted any stone on the house of the deceased, and that if this part of the prosecution case is disbelieved then it has a bearing on the main occurrence itself.
It was further submitted, that the prosecution had suppressed the real manner of occurrence in as much as Abdulla was first assaulted by the prosecution party on the same day at about 130 p.m. and that he was hospitalised after receiving the injuries, reliance being placed on the evidence of DW1 who had stated that he had examined the injuries on the person of Abdulla on 16.9.80 at 430 p.m.
Allowing the appeal in part, this Court, HELD:1.
It is well settled that if the evidence of the eye witnesses is held to be reliable and inspires confidence then the accused cannot be acquitted solely on the ground that some superficial injuries found on the person of the accused concerned, had not been explained by the prosecution.
[696 H] In the instant case, so far as the four eye witness are concerned they have been named in the FIR.
The FIR was lodged at 7.15 p.m., the same evening, within two hours of the death of the victim.
The FIR mentions the 694 details of the occurrence, and the version disclosed therein had been supported by the eye witness before the Court.
No reason has been shown as to why the evidence of these P.Ws should not be accepted.
[697 C] 2.The prosecution has admitted that the accused persons were not carrying any weapon in their hands and during the protest made, a sudden quarrel and fight took place between the prosecution party and the accused persons.
This part of the version had been admitted at the trial by the eye witnesses in their evidence, who also stated that first the appellant and the other co accused gave blows on the hand of the deceased and that the knife blow was given by the appellant when the deceased was trying to give a counter blow to the appellant.
[697 F] In view of the admitted position that a sudden right and quarrel preceded the giving of the knife blow by the appellant to the victim which in all probability was given not while the victim and the appellant were standing face to face but during struggle between them, causing tailing of the injury, it shall not be just and proper to hold that the appellant had an intention to cause the death of the victim, but only knowledge that injury which he was causing was likely to cause death.
In such a circumstance it is not possible to uphold the conviction of appellant under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code.
It is therefore set aside, and the appellant convicted under Section 304 Part 11 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 7 years.
[697 H,698 A C]
