The prosecution case was that on 23.8.1981 between 12 30 1.00 p.m., on hearing screams and cry of the deceased, aged about 18 years, P.W.2 alongwith her father PW3, and PW4 rushed to the house of the appellant They saw the father of appellant No. 1 (father in law of the deceased) alongwith the husband and mother in law of the deceased hurriedly com ing out of the kitchen while the deceased was lying on the floor engulfed in flames.
As the appellant No. 1, did not respond to the request of PW2 to give her something to extinguish the fire, PW2 requested the father of the appellant No. 1 to give a bed sheet or blanket while the father of the appellant No. 1 was passing on a bed sheet to PW2, the appellant No. 2 (mother in law of the deceased) objected.
In the meanwhile PW2 took the bed sheet from the father of the appellant No. 1 and tried to extinguish the fire.
The deceased asked PW2 for some water.
PW3 removed the burning petticoat from the body of the deceased to save her from further burning.
While doing so he also received some burn injuries.
PW2 poured water into the deceased 's mouth and enquired from her as to what had happened.
667 The deceased told PW2 that her mother in law had poured kerosene over her and her husband had set fire to her.
The deceased asked for more water, which was again given to her by PW2.
The deceased 's statement made to PW2 was overheard by PW3 PW5 and some others who also reached the spot on hearing her cries.
PW5 went away to inform the matenal uncle of the deceased with one Ramakrishna on his motor cycle.
There PW5 found PW1, the brother of the deceased and informed about the burning of the deceased and also what he had heard the deceased telling PW2.
PW1 reached the house of the appellant with Ramakrishna on his motor cycle.
He saw a number of persons including PWs 2 and 3 gathered there.
The deceased was lying on the floor and she had no clothes on her.
PWl noticed that she had received burn injuries from her breasts downwards to her legs.
On seeing her plight, PWl started crying and hitting his head against a piller.
When the deceased noticed PW1 had come, she asked PW2 to bring her brother inside.
PW2 went out and brought PWI to the kitchen.
The deceased took the palm of her brother, PWl into her own palms and told him to tell mother and father that her mother in law poured kerosene on her and her husband set her or fire.
She requested him that he should not fight, "anyhow she was dying." She also told PWl to take back the cash given to her and to divide it amongst her sisters in equal share and to get them married to nice persons.
The appellant No. 1, the husband of the deceased came inside the kitchen with folded hands and begged her for forgiveness saying that he would not repeat what he had done.
PWI got wild and caught hold of the neck of the appellant No. 1.
FIW2 and PW3 rushed towards them and released the appellant No. 1 from the hold of PW1.
They sent PWI to another uncle 's house and told the uncle to take care of PW1.
When PWI returned to the house of the deceased after one hour he saw that PW6, a local Doctor, was giving first aid to the deceased and she was lying on a cot in the verandah.
PW6 advised at about 3.30 p.m. to remove the deceased to the Government Hospital.
The deceased was brought to the hospital at about 5 p.m.
At about 5.30 p.m., PW9, a doctor examined the deceased and declared her dead.
PWl along with his uncle went to the Police Station, adjacent to the hospital and lodged the FIR.
A case under section 302 IPC was registered 668 and police investigation was started.
Both the appellants were not found in the village when search for them was made by the investigating officer.
The appellant No. 1 surrendered in the Court on 10.11.1981 while the appellant No. 2 surrendered in the Court on 7.12.1981.
The Trial Court held that there was no motive for the appellant to commit the crime; that the evidence of PWs 2 to 4 could not be relied upon; that PW1 had made improvements in his statements recorded at the trial and, therefore the oral dying declaration made to him could not be relied upon.
The Trial Court also held that there was unexplained delay in lodging report with the policy.
It acquitted the appellants, holding that the case was one of suicide and not of murder.
The State filed appeal in the High Court.
The High Court held that the chain of the established circumstances was complete and the circumstances were sufficient to establish that the appellants alone had committed the crime of murder of the deceased.
The High Court convicted both the appellants for the offence under section 302/34 IPC and sentenced each one of them to imprisonment for life.
Hence this appeal before this Court under section 2(a) of the .
The appellants contended that since the Trial Court had acquitted the appellants, the High Court was not justified in recording an order or conviction, as the findings recorded by the Trial Court could not be said to be perverse; that the dying declarations were not worthy of reliance and the motive was feeble and not established; that the surrendering of the appellants themselves in the court on 10.11.1981 and 7.12.1981 itself was enough to show that they had no guilty conscious and the prosecution was not justified in relying upon this conduct as an adverse conduct against the appellants; and that since all neighbors had become hostile, out of fear the appellants did not act either to put off the fire or remove the deceased to the hospital.
The respondent State submitted that the findings of the Trial Court were not only conjectural but also perverse and the evidence of the wit 669 nesses was disbelieved on mere surmises; that the Trial Court did,not properly discuss the two dying declarations made by the deceased and since the dying declarations have been proved by reliable evidence, these by themselves could form the basis of conviction of the appellants; that the High Court after a careful appraisal of the evidence had rightly set aside the judgment of the Trial Court which suffered from illegality as well as manifest error and perversity,, and that the prosecution had established the case against the appellants beyond every reasonable doubt and their appeal deserved to be dismissed.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD:1.01.
In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the settled law is that the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is drawn should be fully proved and these circumstances must be conclusive in nature.
Moreover, all the established circumstances should be complete and there should be no gap in the chain of evidence.
The proved circumstances must be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused alone and totally inconsistent with his innocence.
The courts have, therefore, the duty to carefully scrutinize the evidence and deal with each circumstance carefully and thereafter find whether the chain of the established circumstances is complete or not before passing an order of conviction.
[679 E F] 1.02.In a case based on circumstantial evidence, motive assumes great significance as its existence is an enlightening factor in a process of presumptive reasoning.
The motive in this case is alleged to be the greed of dowry.
[679 H] 1.03.The evidence led by the prosecution to establish, the existence of motive is wholly reliable and is also consistent.
The prosecution has successfully established that the appellants had strong and compelling motive to commit the crime because of her parents not agreeing to get the land registered in the name of the first appellant and their insistence to have the land registered in the name of their own daughter instead.
The motive, has, been conclusively established by the prosecution.
[682 D] 1.04.Both the dying declarations are oral.
They have been made to friends and to the brother of the deceased respectively.
In view of the close relationship of the witnesses to whom the oral dying declarations were 670 made, it becomes necessary for the court to carefully scruitinize and appreciate the evidence of the witnesses to the dying declarations [683.
B] 1.05.PW1 is the brother of the deceased and therefore a very close relation, but mere relationship cannot be a ground to discard his testimony, if it is otherwise found to be reliable and trustworthy.
In the natural course of events, the deceased who was on the verge of her death would have conveyed to her near and dear ones the circumstances leading to her receiving the burn injuries.
PW1 has given a very consistent statement and has reproduced the words of the deceased clearly and truthfully.
Nothing has been brought out in the cross examination to discredit his testimony at all.
[683 C D] 1.6.Despite searching cross examination of both PW2 and PW3, nothing has been brought out in their cross examination to discredit them or doubt their veracity at all.
After carefully analysing their evidence, it is found that PWs 2 and 3 as witnesses worthy of credence and trustworthy.[684 F] 1.07.From the evidence of PWs 1,2 and 3, both the dying declarations are provedto have been made by the deceased.
They are the statements made by thedeceased and relate to the circumstances leading to her death.
Both the dying declarations are consistent with each other and appear to have been made by the deceased voluntarily and in the natural course of events.
They have a ring of truth about them.
[684 G] 1.08The medical evidence, fully corroborates the prosecution case and lendssupport to the dying declaration and more particularly the manner inwhich the deceased had been set on fire.[686 D] 1.09.The normal human conduct of any person finding someone engulfed in flames would be to make all efforts to put off the flames and.
save the life of the person.
Though, the appellants were the closest relations of the deceased, they did not do anything of the kind.
They rendered no first aid to the deceased.
Their conduct at the time of the occurrence, therefore, clearly points towards their guilt and is inconsistent with their innocence.
The appellants did not even accompany the deceased to the hospital in the matador van.
Had the husband not been a party to the crime, one would have expected that he would be the first person to take steps to remove the deceased to the hospital and leave no stone unturned 671 to save her life.
An innocent mother in law would have also done the same, even if she had no love or emotional feelings for her daughter in law.
Neither the husband nor the mother in law of the deceased took any steps to remove the deceased to the hospital let alone accompany her to the hospital.
This conduct also is inconsistent with their innocence and consistent only with the hypothesis, as stated by the deceased in her dying declarations, that the mother in law had poured kerosene on her while her husband had lit fire and put her on flames.
[686 H, 687 A D] 1.10.The prosecution has, thus, successfully established that the conduct ofboth the appellants both at the time of the occurrence and immediatelythereafter is consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the appellants and inconsistent with their innocence.
[688 B] 1.11.Absconding by itself may not be a positive circumstance consistent only with the hypothesis of guilt of the accused because it is not unknown that even innocent persons may run away for fear of being falsely involved in a criminal case and arrested by the police, but coupled with the other circumstances, the absconding of the appellants assumes Importance and significance.
The prosecution has successfully established this circumstance also to connect the appellants with the crime.
[688 E F] 1.12.The prosecution has successfully established all the circumstances appearing in the evidence against the appellants by clear, cogent and reliable evidence and the chain of the established circumstances is complete and has no gaps whatsoever and the same conclusively establishes that the appellants and appellants alone committed the crime of murdering the deceased on the fateful day in the manner suggested by the prosecution.
All the established circumstances are consistent only with the hypothesis that it was the appellants alone who committed the crime and the circumstances are inconsistent with any hypothesis other than their guilt.
[688 G H, 687 A] 2.01.Under Section 32, when a statement Is made by a person, as to the cause of death or as to any of the circumstances which result In his death, in cases in which the cause of that person 's death comes into question, such a statement, oral or in writing, made by the deceased to the witness is a relevant fact and is admissible in evidence.
The statement made by the deceased, called the dying declaration, falls in that category provided it has been made by the deceased while in a lit mental condition.
[684 H, 685 A B] 672 2.02.A dying declaration made by person on the verge of his death has a special sanctity as at that solemn moment, a person is most unlikely to make any untrue statement The shadow of impending death is by itself the guarantee of the truth of the statement made by the deceased regarding the causes or circumstances leading to his death.
A dying declaration, therefore, enjoys almost a sacrosanct status, as a piece of evidence, coming as it does from the mouth of the deceased victim.
Once the statement of the dying person and the evidence of the witnesses testifying to the same passes the test of careful scrutiny of the courts, it becomes a very important and a reliable piece of evidence and if the court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true and free from any embelishment such a dying declaration, by itself, can be sufficient for recording conviction even without looking for any coroboration.
If there are more than one dying declarations, then the court has also to scrutinise all the dying declarations to find out if each one of these passes the test of being trustworthy.
The Court must further find out whether the different dying declarations are consistent with each other in material particulars before accepting and relying upon the same.
[685 C E] 2.03.Both the dying declarations are consistent with each other in all material facts and particulars.
That the deceased was in a proper mental condition to make the dying declaration or that they were voluntary has neither been doubted by the defence in the course of cross examination of the witnesses nor even in the course of arguments both in the High Court and before this Court.
Both the dying declarations have passed the test of credit worthiness and they suffer from no infirmity whatsoever.
[685 F G] 2.04.The prosecution has successfully established a very crucial piece of circumstantial evidence in the case that the deceased had voluntarily made the dying declarations implicating both, the appellants and disclosing the manner in which she had been put on fire shortly before her death.
This circumstance, therefore, has been established by the prosecution beyond every reasonable doubt by clear and cogent evidence.
[685 G H] 3.01.There has been an alarming increase in cases relating to harassment, torture, abetted suicides and dowry deaths of young innocent brides.
This growing cult of violence and exploitation of the young brides, though keeps on sending shock waves to the civilised society whenever it happens, continues unabated.
There is a constant erosion of the basic 673 human values of tolerance and the spirit of "live and let live '.
Lack of education and economic dependence of women have encouraged the greedy perpetrators of the crime.
It is the woman who plays a pivotal role in this crime against the younger woman, as in this case, with the husband either acting as a mute spectator or even an active participant in the crime, in utter disregard of his matrimonial obligations.
[689 C D] 3.02.Awakening of the collective consciousness is the need of the day.
Change of heart and attitude is what is needed.
If man were to regain his harmony with others and replace hatred, greed, selfishness and anger by mutual love, trust and understanding and if woman were to receive education and become economically independent, the possibility of this pernicious social evil dying a natural death may not remain a dream only.
[690 D] 3.03.The legislature, realising the gravity of the situation has amended the laws and provided for stringent punishments in such case and even permitted the raising of presumptions against the accused in cases of unnatural deaths of the brides within the first seven years of their marriage.
[690 H] 3.04.The was enacted in 1961 and has been amended from time to time, but this piece of social legislation, keeping in view the growing menance of the social evil, also does not appear to have served much purpose as dowry seekers are hardly brought to book and convictions recorded are rather few.
[691 A] 3.05.Laws are not enough to combat the evil.
A wider social movement of educating women of their rights, to conquer the menace, is what is needed more particularly in rural areas where women are still largely uneducated and less aware of their rights and fall an easy prey to their exploitation.
[691 B] 3.06.The role of courts, under the circumstances assumes greater importance and it is expected that the courts would deal with such cases in a more realistic manner and not allow the criminals to escape on account of procedural technicalities or insignificant lacune in the evidence as otherwise the criminals would receive encouragement and the victims of crime would be totally discouraged by the crime going unpunished.
The courts are expected to be sensitive in cases involving crime against women.
[691 C] 674 State (Delhi Administration) vs Lavnan & Ors., Crl.
Appeals 93 and 94 of 1984 decided on 23.9.1985, referred to.
