The proviso to clause (1) of Article 316 of the Constitution requires that 'as nearly as may be ', one half of the members of the Public Service Commission shall be from service category.
Clause (2) of the Article entities a member of a Public Service Commission to hold office for a term of six years from the date on which he enters upon his office or he attains the age of superannuation provided therein whichever is earlier.
Subclause (c) of clause (3) of Article 317 provides for removal of a member of the Public Service Commission by reason of infirmity of mind or body.
Respondent No. 6, a blind, acknowledged scholar of English and Associate Professor in the Patna University, was appointed the seventh non service member of the Bihar State Public Service Commission on 4th March 1991.
The total strength of the Public Service Commission was eleven.
The other four members belonged to the services category.
On 11th September 1991, respondent No.5, the Chairman of the said Commission, gave a certificate stating that the respondent has been performing his duties with exceptional excellence without letting his blindness hinder his work and strongly recommended conferment of a national award in recognition of his excellence despite his blindness.
On 22nd October 1991 the State Government addressed a letter to the Union Ministry of Home Affairs recommending him for the prestigious national award of 518 'Padamshree ' for his services as a member of the Public Service Commission.
On 15th March 1992 the President of India conferred on him the National Award.
On 14th January 1992 the appellant, in a public interest ligigation, challenged the appointment of respondent No. 6 as a member of the Bihar Public Service Commission.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
In the appeal by special leave it was contended that the appointment of the seventh member from the non service category was violative of the proviso to Article 316(1) of the Constitution.
It was submitted that the expression 'as nearly as may be one half ' occurring in the said proviso has been used to convey that a fraction may be ignored if the total number of members cannot be exactly halved between service and non service categories.
The argument was that if the representation of the service members of the Commission fell short of 50% then all persons to be appointed on the Commission till the said proportion was made up, had to be from the service category, that being their necessary qualification.
It was further contended that respondent No. 6 was totally blind even from a date prior to his appointment and was unfit to be appointed by reason of the said physical infirmity.
The argument was that the blindness was an infirmity of body and if it was a ground for removal from office under Article 317(3) (c), it was much more a disqualification for appointment and hence respondent No. 6 should be prevented from continuing in his office.
In the affidavit riled on behalf of the State Government on 23rd January 1993 it was stated that although the proviso to Article 316(1) was not mandatory, that by itself was not a good ground for departing from the suggestion of the Constitution and hence the appointment of respondent No. 6 as the 7th non Government member was not justified.
It was further stated that at the time of the appointment, the aspect about his blindness was not specifically considered as the same was stated in the bio data of respondent No. 6 in very causal way and in such a manner that it had escaped the attention of the constitutional authorities at the time of recommending respondent No. 6 for appointment.
The affidavit further stated that while conducting the interviews, members of the Commission had to visually interview each of the candidates to determine his suitability and after the appointment of respondent No. 6 it had come to 519 the notice of the respondent State that the blindness of respondent No. 6 was clearly hampering the effective discharge of official duties by him.
It was contended for respondent No. 6 that it was on account of his academic distinctions, and with the full knowledge that he was totally blind from childhood that he was appointed as a member of the Public Service Commission; that his blindness did not come in his way of discharging his duties effectively , that the only thing he could not do was to assess the individuals external personality on the basis of the candidate 's external appearance, which was not a material requirement for the candidates for many posts; that his dependence upon the opinion of the other members of the interview board for this aspect was not of a kind which vitiated the assessment of the interview board as a whole; that he had made a representation to the President of India, the Governor of Bihar and others, against the serious misconduct, gross malpractices and wilful violation of the constitutional mandate by the Chairman of the Commission, and that it was this dispute with the Chairman, who was backed by the Chief Minister of the State, which had led to the writ petition.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1.
Merely because at the time of appointment of respondent No. 6, there were four service members and six non service members, it cannot be said that he was disqualified for being appointed as the 7th member from the non service category.
[531D] 1.2.
The reasonable interpretation of the proviso to Article 316(1) of the Constitution requiring that as nearly as may be one half of the members of the Public Service Commission shall be from service category, is to treat it not as a strict rule to be enforced but as a binding guideline to be followed in practice in spirit as far as possible and without deliberately flouting it.
[531D] 1.3.
The expression "as nearly as may be" used in the proviso itself suggests that the proportion of 50% of the service members is not exact but approximate and is meant not to, be mandatory but directory.
The said proviso does not, in terms, say that In no case and at no point of time, the said proportion should either go above or fall below 50%.
The fraction is and can be taken care of without the aid of the expression "as nearly as may bell, and a document like Constitution does not have to Incorporate 520 normal rules of interpretation.
The need to have 50% members from the service category also cannot be said to be of such paramount importance to the composition of the Commission that the breach of it at any particular point of time would defeat the very object of constituting the Commission.
[528F G, 529F] 1.4.
Furthermore, when the members are appointed, they are bound to differ in age, whether they belong to the service category, or the non service category.
In the normal course, they would retire at different points of time.
At that time, a suitable person from the same category may not be available to be appointed in their place.
It is not always possible to make an advance list of persons of either category who are suitable for such appointment.
Hence the total strength of the Commission as well as the number from each of the categories, are bound to vary from time to time.
At any given point of time, therefore, it may not be possible to maintain the proportion between the two categories strictly in accordance with the direction given in the Constitution.
[529B C] 1.5.
By providing the proportion between the service and non service members of the Commission, the framers of the Constitution sought to strike a balance amongst the two categories.
However, on that account, the framers of the Constitution cannot be presumed to ensure that on all occasions there shall be an exact balance of views between these two categories of members.
It is unrealistic to believe that individuals with different backgrounds always insist on the acceptance of the outlook dictated by their background alone and refuse to share the viewpoint of others.
It is certainly not expected of the members of such high ranking constitutional body as the Public Service Commission.
Furthermore, the Service Commissions mostly sit in Committees and are aided and assisted by experts from the concerned faculties, disciplines and departments.
The Committees take their decision collectively after due deliberations and discussion.
It is, therefore, the composition of these Committees and not so much the composition of the Commission at any particular point of time that matters.
[530C E] 1.6.
The appointing authority, therefore, cannot be said to have no option, under any circumstance whatever, to allow reduction of representation from the service category and a breach of the requirement contained in the proviso to Article 316(1) by reasons of appointment of a 521 member from non service category would vitiate such appointment or the duties performed by such appointee as a member of the Public Service Commission.
[530G] 2.
Respondent No. 6 cannot be said to be unfit to carry on his duties as a member of the Commission because of his blindness.
Nothing concrete has been brought on record to show that he had failed to perform his duties as a member of the Commission efficiently.
Except the external appearance of the candidates appearing before him, he is able to ascertain the required merits or demerits of the candidates, as to the other members of the Commission.
The Commission operates through Committees.
For selecting the candidates for almost all disciplines and departments, the experts from the concerned departments sit in these Committees and the opinion of the experts ordinarily prevails in such appointments since the members of the Committees, who are the members of the Commission do not have the expertise in the relevant fields.
This shows that all members of the Commission sitting on the interview Committees have also to be guided in their opinion by the experts.
If respondent No. 6 has to take guidance only in the matter of external appearance of the candidates, all members of the Commission have to be guided by the experts with regard to the most vital equipment of the candidates, viz., the intellectual caliber and the proficiency of the candidates in the relevant subjects.
There is,, therefore, nothing wrong if only for external appearance, for which only a small percentage of the total marks is reserved, respondent No. 6 has to depend on the advice, opinion or guidance of other members of the Committees and the Commission.
[532B E] 3.1.
By 'infirmity of body ' what is spoken of in sub clause (c) of clause (3) of Article 317 of the Constitution is an infirmity which disables the member from discharging his functions as such member effectively.
It is not every infirmity of body or every loss of use of every limb of the body.
The defect or deficiency must be such as would disable the member from carrying out his duties satisfactorily and consistent with the trust reposed in him.
The said infirmity further must necessarily be such as has arisen after the appointment and not the one which existed at the time of the appointment, unless of course, the Government was unaware of the same at the time of appointment.
[533A B, D] 3.2.
In the instant case, not only the blindness of respondent No. 6 522 does not prevent him from discharging his duties expected of him, but in fact the services rendered by him as such member have been eulogised and commended for a national award by no other than the State Government itself and the Chairman of the Commission, who had first hand knowledge of his functioning.
This is apart from the fact that the Governor who appointed him on the advice of the Council of Ministers is presumed to have done so after satisfying himself that the loss of eyesight was not an infirmity which would impede him in the discharge of his duties.
[533C] 4.1.
No responsible public authority could have made the claim that none of the constitutional functionaries concerned was aware that respondent No. 6 was totally blind from his childhood, when that fact must have been widely known in the State and in all probability the extra ordinary Abilities exhibited by him despite his blindness must have been the main reason for his appointment as a member of the Public Service Commission.
The State Government should not have considered it compulsive to allow such blatantly rabid statements to be made on oath with impunity.
The affiant by making such statement has made the constitutional authorities look ridiculous and their functioning a mockery.
[534H G] 4.2.
Neither the certificate given by respondent No. 5, the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, on 11th September, 1991 nor the letter of the State Government to the Union Home Ministry dated 22nd October 1991, has been controverted by the Chairman and the State Government.
The averment in the affidavit that the blindness of respondent No. 6 is hampering his work, therefore, has no basis.
The belated claim of the State Government against respondent No. 6 has its obvious roots in the strained relations between him on the one hand and the Chairman and the State Government on the other.
[535E F] 5.
The appellant and the respondent State is directed to pay the costs of the appeal to respondent No. 6.
[537C]
