The second respondent, a partnership firm was carrying on the business of manufacturing and selling polished granites.
It was running its factory in a small portion of the land owned by it and the rest of the land was vacant when the Urban Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Act, 1976 was made applicable to that area.
The firm made an application to.
the State Government for exemption of the vacant land from the provisions of 715 716 the said Act, and the exemption was granted subject to certain conditions.
The Competent Authority under the Act came to the conclusion that there was some excess vacant land and directed the publication of a notification u/s 10(1) of the Act for acquisition of the same.
Later, the firm made an application to the State Government for permission to sell the vacant land to the third respondent (builders) mainly on the ground that the firm had been incurring huge losses in its business.
On 6.3.1987 the State Government permitted the firm to sell the land to the builders, only to the extent of 16194 sq. mtrs.
Again the firm riled another application to transfer the remaining 3444 sq. mtrs.
of land to the builders, and on 18.4.1987 the State Government permitted the same subject to certain conditions.
Consequently, by a sale deed dated 30.9.1987 the firm entered into a deed of absolute sale with the builders for sale of the entire vacant land.
Writ Petitions by way of Public Interest Litigation were riled in the High Court challenging the exemptions granted by the State Government, for declaring the sale deed void and inoperative and for acquiring the land for the weaker sections.
A Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions and gave certain directions including sale of plots to be carved out from the land and only such number of plots as would be necessary to discharge the debts of the firm were to be sold and the remaining portion of the vacant land was to be acquired under the Act.
He also held that there were no mala fides in the State Government granting exemptions by its orders date 63.1987and 18.4.1987.
Against the decision of the Single Judge, appeals were preferred before the Division Bench of the High Court and the Division Bench set aside the findings as well as the direction given by the Single Judge.
Aggrieved by the Judgment of the Division Bench, the appellants preferred the present appeals.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: BY THE COURT.
I.I.The provisions of Section 20(1)(b) of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 do not permit the State Government to give exemption to the vacant land in excess of the ceiling limit for the purposes 717 of transferring the same.
[757 C] 1.2.The orders dated 63.1987 and 18.4.1987 granting exemption and permission to the firm for sale of the land are void ab initio having been passed without jurisdiction.
Accordingly, the sale deed dated 30.9.1987 executed by the 2nd respondent firm in favour of the 3rd respondent.
builders is invalid and inoperative, as the respondent firm had no legal right to transfer the land in favour of the builders.
[757 F, G] 13.In view of the above conclusions, it is not necessary to go into the questionsas to whether the State Government has the power to grant exemption; thecircumstances in which it can be exercised; and whether financial hardship such as the indebtedness of the land holder is sufficient to warrant such exemption or not; and the date on which such indebtedness is to be assessed and in what manner; and whether in the present case, the said aspects of the indebtedness were properly investigated or not for this very reason, there is no need to go into the other question regarding the mala fide on the part of the authorities while granting permission to the firm to sell the land to the builders in question.
[757 D, E] Per Sawant, J. 1.The provisions of Section 20(1)(b) of the Urban Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Act, 1976 do not permit the State Government to exempt vacant land in excess of the ceiling limit for the purposes of transfer.
[753 B] 2.The central object of the Act, as is evident both from the preamble as well as the statement of objects and reasons, is to acquire vacant land in excess of the ceiling area and to prevent speculation and profiteering in the same and also to distribute the land equitably to subserve the common good.
It is, therefore, per se against the said object to permit the sale of the excess vacant land for whatever reasons, including the undue hardship of the land holder.
To construe the provisions of Section 20 (1) (b) so as to read in them the conferment of such power on the State Government for whatever reasons, is to distort and defeat the whole purpose of the legislation.
Further, neither the plain language of the clause nor its context and intendment merit such construction.
Section 20 itself is titled "Power to exempt".
The power given to the State Government under the Section is only to exempt certain excess vacant lands from the operation of the provisions of Sections 3 to 19 of Chapter 111, none of which refers to the subject of transfer or 718 restrictions on transfer.
Those provisions relate to the calculation.
declaration, acquisition and vesting of the excess vacant land.
It is Chapter IV which relates to the transfers of vacant lands and the restrictions thereon.
Further, from the scheme of the Act.
it is evident that the transfers of the vacant land were to be regulated by the specific provisions made in it.
They were not to be left to be governed by the unguided discretion of any authority including the State Government.
The specific provisions for regulating the transfer have been incorporated in Sections 26 to 28 of the Act.
Those provisions permit transfer of only vacant lands within the ceiling limit but without buildings, and of vacant lands in excess of the ceiling limit but with buildings thereon and subject to the condition s laid down there.
It cannot be suggested that in defiance of the said provisions, Section 20(1)(b) vests power in the State Government to sanction sales of excess vacant lands with or without building thereon.
Under Section 20(1) (b), the State Government can only exempt such excess vacant land from being acquired by it.
The Government cannot permit its transfer when the Act, does not even by implication, authorise it to do so but permits the transfer subject only to the conditions prescribed by Section 27.
The legislature cannot be presumed to have prescribed different conditions for transfer of the same or similar lands.
[746 C H; 747 A] 3.
The restriction on transfer even of vacant land within the ceiling limit but without building is deemed to be valid.
Thus the transfer of the vacant land without building even if it is within the ceiling limit and of the vacant land in excess of the ceiling limit with a building or a portion of the building are subject to the restrictions placed by the Act.
Section 20 is subject to the provisions of sections which follow it including Sections 26 to 28.
Hence no construction can be placed on clause (b) of sub section (1) thereof which will be in conflict with the provisions of sections 26 to 28.
[747 E, F] Maharao Sahib Shri Bhim? Singhji vs Union of India, , referred to.
Since as per the definition of "person" in Section 2(i), the said provision viz. S.20(1) (a) is applicable not only to individuals, but also to a family, a firm, a company or an association or body of individuals whether incorporated or not, the hardship spoken of there, is obviously one related to the user of the land.
In fact, it is difficult to understand the precise purpose for which clause (b) has been enacted and the meaning of the expression "undue hardship" there.
One is left only to speculate on the subject.
The 719 speculation itself may not be valid.
The lands are held by companies, trusts and associations for industrial and commercial use, for the use of medical and educational institutes, sports, clubs, cultural activities, gardens, exhibitions etc.
There is no special provision made in the Act to protect or take care of such users.
The only provision under which a relief can be given to preserve and safeguard such user is Section 20(1) (a).
But that provision can be pressed into service only on the basis of the location of the land and its present or prospective user and only if it passes the test of public interest However, all lands in excess of the ceiling limit may not strictly be necessary for such user, even if the user is in the public interest.
Nevertheless, the withdrawal of a part of the land found to be in excess may cause an avoidable hardship to the land holder which may be disproportionate.to the benefit that is to accrue to the public on account of such withdrawal.
The excess of land may be meager or the severance of such excess land itself may result in unnecessary hardship.
The hardship further has to be undue and not merely an ordinary hardship which is bound to be caused on account of the application of the Act to every holder of the excess vacant land.
The undue hardship must be one which cannot be avoided except by granting a relief of exemption as contemplated by the said provision.
The relief from financial hardship or from indebtedness to the land holder of such land is alien both to the object and the scheme of the Act.
The classification of the owners of land for this purpose between debtors and non debtors is itself irrational and has no plausible nexus with the object of the Act.
Such a classification is, therefore, discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
(748 B H; 749 Al Thakorbhai Dajibhai Desai vs State of Gujarat, AIR 1980 Guj.
1891, overruled.
5.The exemption which is granted under Section 20(1)(b) has to be supported by reasons to be recorded in writing.
This requirement also contemplates an exemption which is related to and promoted by the use or better use of the land.
If it is the financial hardship which was under the contemplation of the legislature, them was nothing easier than to make a reference to the same in clause (b) itself and to lay down guidelines for the inquiry into such hardship.
The provisions of sub section (2) of Section 20, directly negative either exemption on account of financial hardship or for the purpose of the transfer of the land, since that sub section empowers the State Government to withdraw the exemption already granted If the 720 State Government is satisfied that any of the conditions subject to which the exemption is granted either under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub section (1) is not complied with.
It is inconceivable that the legislature had in mind the cancellation of the transfer including sale, which cannot be done when it has already taken place.
[749 E G] 6.It cannot be said that the legislature which places restrictions on the transfer of the land within the ceiling limit would at the same time give a carte blanche for the sale of the land in excess of the ceiling limit.
For it would mean, that the State Government cannot have an option to purchase such land and that the sale can be made by the holder of the excess land at any price that he chooses.
Such a reading of Section 20(i)(b) would militate against one of the objects of the Act, viz., to prevent speculation and profiteering in the sale and purchase of land.
Moreover, it would be patently discriminatory.
Whereas the holder of vacant land within the ceiling limit would have to suffer the restrictions placed by Section 26, the holder of the vacant land in excess of the ceiling limit has not to do so.
He would in fact be in a better position.
The provisions with regard to granting such exemption subject to certain conditions contained in Section 20(1)(b) do not in any way mitigate the discrimination.
When the statute itself places specific restrictions under Section 26 on the sale of land within the ceiling limit, it is not possible to reach a conclusion that the conditions on which the State Government is empowered to permit the sale can be left to the discretion of the State Government.
In fact, such discretion given to the State Government would itself be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, the same being unguided and untrammeled This also shows that the legislature has not given power to the State Government under Section 20(1)(b) to permit exemption for sale of the land.
Otherwise it would have provided in the section itself for the conditions on which the permission to sell can be given and such conditions could not be less onerous than those provided under Section 26 of the Act.
If the power, to permit sale of the land was intended to be given only for relieving the land holder of his financial hardship, the section could very well have provided for sale of such land under Section 26 of the Act or made provision in Section 20(1)(b) itself for the first option of the State Government to purchase it.
It cannot be said that by not making such provision either in Section 20(1)(b) or Section 26, the legislature intended to permit the sale of such land at a price above the fair market price payable under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or the corresponding law and thereby encourage 721 speculation and profiteering, the very evils which the Act intended to curb A [750 E H; 751 A C] 7.The provisions of Section 27 also militate against the conferment of the power on the State Government to permit exemption of land for the purpose of its transfer.
The provisions of Section 27 refer to any urban or urbanisable land with a building.
The vacant land in excess of the ceiling limit may be with or without a building.
In fact, the provisions of Section 27 directly negative the conferment of such power, for the said provisions show that the legislature did not want the sale of any urban or urbanisable land with a building whether it is within or without the ceiling limit except in accordance with the provisions of Section 27.
For Section 27 speaks of transfer of any urban or urbanisable land with a building or a portion only of such building, only with the permission of the competent authority and on the terms mentioned therein.
This Court has invalidated the provisions of the said section to the extent they apply to the vacant land with a building when the land is within the ceiling limit.
But it does apply to land in excess of the ceiling limit and with a building or a portion of it thereon.
It is not possible to accept that there are two provisions, viz. Section 20(1)(b) and Section 27 operating at the same time in the same area.
Also there is nothing either in Section 20(1)(b) or Section 27 to exclude the operation of Section 27.
[751 G, H; 752 A] Maharao Sahib Shri Bhim Singhji etc.
vs Union of India 8.Section 28 does not make any reference to the transfer permitted by the State Government under Section 20(1) (b).
The holder of the vacant land in excess of the ceiling limit has not to face the restriction on the registration of the document of transfer of his land provided under Section 28 when such transfer is permitted by the State Government under Section 20(1)(b), whereas the holder of similar land who does not approach the State Government has to suffer the same when he transfers the land held by him.
The discrimination between the transfers under the different provisions is irrational and, has no nexus with the object ought to be achieved by the classification.
[752 E G] 9.If the power to exempt the land for sale is read in Section 20 (1) (b) with such conditions as the State Government may choose to place and if either the State Government chooses not to place any conditions or to 722 place such conditions as are inconsistent with the provisions of Sections 29 and 30, it would create two sets of lands one where no restrictions are applicable to the construction thereon or only such restrictions as the State Government may choose to impose, and the other where the restrictions on constructions as provided by Section 29 and 30 would be applicable.
[752 G H; 753 A] Per N.P. Singh, J. (Concurring): 1.The object of the Act being imposition of ceiling on vacant land in urban agglomerations and for acquisition of such land in excess of ceiling limit, with a view to prevent the concentration of urban land in the hands of a few persons, speculations and profiteering therein, that object will be defeated if the power under Section 20(1) of the Act is exercised by the State Government to exempt the excess vacant lands, from the application of Chapter III of the Act, so that the holder thereof can transfer such lands.
[753 C, D] 2.Under Indian conditions the expression "undue hardship" is normally related to economic hardship.
That is why from time to time many holders of lands in excess of the ceiling limit, while claiming exemption under clause (b) put forth their bad economic condition and indebtedness to claim exemption along with permission to sell such excess lands.
In the modern set up many holders of such excess lands having undertaken commercial or industrial ventures with the help of the loans from the Banks and other financial institutions, put the plea of repayment of such loans as undue hardship for claiming exemption under clause (b) of section 20(1) aforesaid.
When different provisions take into consideration the lands already transferred by the holder, between the period 17th February, 1975 (as specified in sub.
(4) of S.4; and the appointed day as well as between the period commencing from the appointed day and ending with the commencement of the Act, it should not be easily inferred that the framers of the Act desired that after the commencement of the Act while exercising the power of exemption under section 20(1) (b) permission should be granted to holders of such excess lands to transfer such lands to third parties in order to meet their financial liabilities.
[753 G, H; 754 A F] 3.If Section 21 provides for granting exemption in respect of excess land held by the holder only on a specific condition that the holder shall utilise the same for the construction of dwelling units for weaker section, to 723 serve a public cause, the framers of the Act could not have conceived the grant of exemption under Section 20(1)(b) to the holder of the excess land, only to serve his interest, by selling such excess lands.
[754 H; 755 A F] 4.If the State Government can exempt the vacant land held by the land holder in excess of the ceiling limit, from the applicability of the provisions of Chapter III of the Act, in order that the said holder sells such land to liquidate his debts which amounts to an "undue hardship", then there will be an apparent conflict between the interest of the land holder and the public interest.
In the interest of the land holder the maximum price fetched by sale of such land will be the solution of his hardship, whereas that will run counter, to the object of the Act to prevent speculations and profiteering".
It cannot be said that even in such transfers the dominant purpose of the legislation, to prevent "the concentration of urban land in hands of few persons" is nonetheless served.
The concentration of urban land in hands of few persons has to be prevented with a view to bring about "an equitable distribution of land in urban agglomerations to subserve the common good".
[755 B D] 5.If the vacant lands which have vested in the State are also to be disposed of as stipulated under S.23 strictly keeping in view the spirit and object or the Act, exemption u/s20(1)(b) cannot be granted to holders of such lands to dispose of the lands in the manner they like, to the persons they prefer, at the price they dictate, for clearing their debts.
If it is conceded that indebtedness amounts to an undue hardship, then it may cover the debts incurred even after the commencement of the Act.
[756 D, E] 6.This Court has already held that Section 27(1) in so far as it imposes restriction on transfer of any urban or urbanisable land with a building or of a portion of such building which is within ceiling area, was invalid.
The said sub section (1) of Section 27 was struck down being unconstitutional.
Section 26 of the Act also imposes certain restrictions on transfer of vacant land even within ceiling limit.
It can therefore be stated that Section 26(1) suffers from the same vice.
But neither in that case nor in this case, this court was or is concerned with Section 26.
As such, it is not necessary to express any opinion in respect of Section 26 of the Act, while considering the issue involved in the present appeals.
[756 G, H; 757 A, B] Maharao Sahib Shri Bhim Singhji etc.
vs Union of India & Ors., , referred to.
