The appellant assessee a manufacturers of radiators for automobiles booked copper ingots from a corporation In the United States of America for being brought to Bombay where it was to be rolled Into strips and sheets and then despatched to the assessee for being used for manufacture.
While the ingots were at sea, hostilities broke out between India and Pakistan and, the vessel carrying the goods was seized by the authorities in Pakistan.
The claim of the assessee for the price paid by it for the goods was ultimately settled in its favour by the Insurer in America.
The Indian Rupee In the meanwhile had been devalued and, therefore, in terms of rupees the appellant firm got Rs. 3,43,556/ as against their payment of Rs. 2,00,164/ at the old rates.
The differnece was credited to profit on devaluation in the Profit and Loss Account.
The claim of the appellant that the difference being a causal receipt and non recurring In nature, and as such was not liable to tax, was not accepted by the IncomeTax Officer.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner rejected the appeal of the assessee, being of the opinion that the receipt was one which did not arise directly from carrying on business by the assessee but was the incidental 776 to it, and not finding any merit in the submission that the ultimate realisation was in the nature of capital gains and not revenue recipt.
In further appeal by the assessee, the Tribunal held that when the goods were seized by the Pakistan authorities the character of the goods changed and it became sterilized and, therefore, it ceased to be stock intrade of the assessee, that the devaluation surplus was in nature of capital receipt and not a profit made by the assessee in the course of business, that the money which came to the assessee was as a result of the settlement of the insurance claim and, therefore, the profit that resulted from it could not be considered in the normal course of business.
The High Court in its advisory jurisdiction at the instance of the ' Department negatived the claim of the assessee for two reasons, one the difference in the cost price and the sale price, and the other that it was revenue receipt, and did not agree with the Tribunal as according to it if the assessee had got the goods imported into India and sold them it would have got higher amount as a result of devaluation, and held that there could be no dispute that the assessee was liable to pay tax on the difference of the sale price and the cost.
It further held that the nature of the amount which came in the hands of the assessee was a revenue receipt, and did not agree that the payment made to the assessee was otherwise than for business, as the whole transaction was part and parcel of the business carried on by the assessee and could not be described as extraneous to it.
In the assesses appeal to this Court, on the question whether the excess amount paid to the assessee due to fluctuation in exchange rate was taxable or not.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.
The word 'income ', ordinarily in normal sense, connotes any earning or profit or gain periodically, regularly or even daily in whatever manner and from whatever source.
It is thus a word of very wide import.
Section 2(24) of the Income Tax Act is legislative, recognition of its elasticity.
Its scope has even widened from time to time by extending it to varied nature of income.
Even before it was defined as including profits, gains, dividends and contributions received by a trust it was held to be a word, 'of broadest connotation ' which could not be understood in restricted or technical sense. ' [781 D E] 777 Raghuvanshi Mills Ltd., Bombay vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City, , referred to.
[781 E] 2. 'Casual ' means accidental or irregular.
If the irregular or the accidental income arose as a result of business activity, them even if it was non recurring, it may not have fallen outside the revenue net.
The real test, is therefore, what was the nature and character of the income which accrued to the assessee.
The causal nature of it or non recurring nature were only aids to decide if the nature of income was in the course of business or otherwise.
[782 F] Barendra Prasad Ray and Ors.
vs Income Tax Officer, ; section G. Mercantile Corporation Pvt. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Calcutta National Bank, and Commissioner of Income Tax, Mysore vs Canara Bank Ltd. (1967) LXIII ITR 328, referred to.
[782 G, H, 783 B] 3.
An income which was casual in nature could be brought In the revenue net only if it arose from business.
In other words the receipt or profit of the nature covered by Section 10(3) could be brought to tax if it was the result of any business activity carried on by the assessee.
[783 D] In the instant case, the assessee carried on business of manufacturing radiators and not ingots.
The ingots were imported to be converted into strips and sheets at Bombay.
The link which could create direct relationship between the finished goods and the raw material was snapped even before it reached Bombay.
Payment made for loss of such goods did not bear any nexus with the assessee 's business.
May be that if it would have reached, it could have been 'after conversion into strips and sheets used as raw material.
But so long as it did not reach Bombay and was not converted into raw material, the connection it bore with the assessee 's business was remote.
And any payment made in respect of it could not be said to accrue from business.
[783 E] Strong and Company of Romsey, Limited vs Woodifieid (Survevor of Taves), 5 Tax Cases p.215, referred to.
[783 F] 4.
An income directly or ancillary to the business may be an income from business, but any income to an assessee carrying on business does not become an income from business unless the necessary relationship 778 between the two is established.
[784 B] In the Instant case, what was lost was not raw material, but something which was capable of being converted into raw material.
The necessary nexus between ingots and radiators which could have resulted in income from ingots never came into being.
Thus any devaluation surplus arising out of payment paid for loss of ingots could not be treated as income from business of the assessee.
[784 C] section Income from goods purchased for business is not an income from business.
In the instant case buying ingots by the assessee was not a part of its trading activity.
[784 F] State Bank of India vs Commissioner of Imcome Tax, Ernakulam, , distinguished.
[784 F] 6.
Taxability on profit or deduction for loss depends on whether profit or loss arises in the course of business.
The courts have maintained a distinction between insurance against loss of goods and insurance against loss of profits.
The latter is undoubtedly taxable.
Taxability of the amount paid on settlement of claim by the insurance company depends both on the nature of payment and purpose of insurance.
[785 D E] 7.
Any payment being accretion from business, the excess or surplus accruing for any reason may be nothing but profit.
But where payment is made to compensate for loss of use of any goods in which the assessee does not carry on any business or the payment is a just equivalent of the cost incurred by the assessee, but excess accrues due to fortuitous circumstances or is a windfall, then the accrual may be a receipt, but it would not be income arising from business, and, therefore, not taxable under the Act.
[785 F G] Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs William 's Executors, 26 Tax Cases p.23, referred to.
[785 H] In the instant case, the assessee did not carry on business of buying and selling of ingots.
The compensation paid to the assessee was not for any trading or business activity, but just equivalent in money of the goods lost by the assessee which it was prevented from using.
The excess arose on such payment in respect of goods in which the assessee did not carry on any business.
Due to fortuitous circumstances of devaluation of currency, but not due to any business or trading activity the amount could not 779 be brought to tax.
[786 C D] Commissioner of Income Tax vs Union Engineering Works, , approved.
[786 G]
