R.S., R.M. and S.B. were elected as Members of the Goa Legislative Assembly in the Elections held in November, 1989.
Subsequently, R.S. assumed office of Chief Minister and formed his Council of Ministers including R.M. and S.B. as Ministers.
Thereafter, the appellant (In C.A. 1094/92), a Member of the Assembly, presented a petition to the Speaker of the Assembly seeking disqualification of R.S. on the ground that he had voluntarily given up the membership of his political party.
By its order 821 dated 15.2.91 the Speaker passed an order under Para 6 of the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution disqualifying R.S. on the ground of defection.
R.S. filed a writ petition before the Goa Bench of the Bombay High Court challenging the order of disqualification and by an interim order the High Court stayed the operation of the disqualification order.
During the pendency of the writ petition the Speaker was removed from office and a, deputy speaker was elected in his place who began functioning as Speaker.
R.S. filed an application before the Acting Speaker seeking review of his Disqualification order and on 83.91 the Acting Speaker passed an order, in purported exercise of his power of review under the Tenth Schedule, setting aside the Disqualification order dated 15.2.91.
Consequently tie writ petition filed by R.S. challenging his disqualification order was dismissed as not pressed, by the High Court on 8.1.92 the appellant flied a petition challenging the review order dated 83.91 passed by the Acting Speaker on the ground that the Speaker did not have any power to review the earlier order of disqualification.
Without going into the merits of the case the High Court dismissed the petition at the admission stage on the ground of laches.
The decision of the High Court was impugned before this Courts.
Subsequently, another member of the Assembly, appellant in C.& 1096/92, also filed a writ petition challenging the review order dated 83.91 passed by the Acting Speaker setting aside the earlier order disqualifying R.S, on similar grounds.
The High Court also dismissed the same at the admission stage for the same reason, ie.
laches.
Against the order dismissing the writ petition an appeal was preferred in this Court In the connected appeal (CA 1095/92) the appellant applied to the Speaker seeking disqualification of R.M. and S.B. on the ground of defection and by his order dated 13.12.90 Speaker passed the order disqualifying R.M. and S.B. under the Tenth Schedule.
Both of them filed petitions challenging the disqualification order and by an interim order the High Court stayed the disqualification orders.
In the meantime, in a manner, similar to that in the case of R.S., the Acting Speaker by his order dated 7.3.91, in purported exercise of the review.
set aside the orders dated 13.12.90 disqualifying R.M. and S.B. The appellant filed a petition challenging the orders of review passed by the Acting Speaker.
It was also dismissed by the High Court on the ground of laches.
Against dismissal of the writ petition an appeal was filed before this Court 822 In appeals to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (1) the mere delay in challenging the legality of the authority under which respondents continue to hold public office, after being disqualified as Members of the Assembly, was not a valid justification for the High Court to refuse to examine the main question of existence of power of review in the Speaker acting under the Tenth Schedule, since the discretion of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution must be exercised judicially, so as not to permit perpetuation of an illegality, (2) the doctrine of laches does not apply where declaration sought is of nullity, in order to prevent its continuing operation, and laches is not relevant in the domain of public law relating to public office, where the purpose is to prevent an usurper from continuing to hold a public office; (3) the power of review in the Speaker cannot be implied from the provisions in the Tenth Schedule, and the only remedy available to the aggrieved person is by judicial review of the order of the disqualification; and (4) that the motive and conduct of the petitioners appellants in such matters is not decisive or fatal to the enquiry claimed in the writ petition, inasmuch as the relief claimed by them was not for their personal benefit but for larger public interest and good governance of the State by persons holding public offices.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that (1) even though there is no statutory limitation for filing a writ petition, yet in a case like the present, the apt analogy is of an election petition challenging an election, which is to be filed within 45 days from the date of election of the returned candidate, under Section 81(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, to indicate that unless such a challenge is made promptly the courts would refuse to examine such a question after the lapse of a reasonable period; hence petitions filed after ten months of the date of the order of review made by the Speaker were rightly rejected on the ground of laches; (2) the doctrine of laches applies as much to the writ of quo warranto, as it does to a writ of certiorari; (3) in view of the finality attaching to the order made by the Speaker under para 6 of the Tenth Schedule the power of review inheres in the Speaker for preventing miscarriage of justice, in situations when the speaker himself is of the view that continuance of his earlier order of disqualification would perpetuate injustice; (4) the inherent power of review in the Speaker must be read in the Tenth Schedule, at least upto 12th November, 1991 when the Judgment in Kihoto Hollohan was rendered declaring the availability of judicial 823 review against the Speaker 's order of disqualification made under para 6 of the Tenth Schedule; (5) only a limited judicial review being available against the Speaker 's order of disqualification, as held by the majority in Kihoto Hollohan, some power of review Inheres in the Speaker even thereafter to correct palpable errors failing outside the limited scope of judicial review, and (6) the appellants were not only associated with R.S. at different times but also they obtained benefits from him, thus, in view of the oblique motive coupled with their conduct, the High Court was justified in refusing to exercise its discretionary powers under Article 226 of the Constitution at the behest of the appellants; the power under Article 136 also being discretionary this Court would also be justified in refusing to interfere with the discretion so exercised by the High Court.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The judgment of the High Court that the writ petitions were liable to be dismissed, merely on the ground of laches cannot be sustained.
[834 C] 2.
The exercise of discretion by the Court even where the application is delayed, is to be governed by the objective of promoting public interest and good administration; and on that basis it cannot be said that discretion would not be exercised in favour of interference where it is necessary to prevent continuance of usurpation of office or perpetuation of an illegality.
[839 F] 3.
In the present case the claim is for the issue of a writ of quo warranto on the ground that respondents are holding public offices, having suffered disqualification as Member of the Assembly subsequent to their election, and one of them, continues to hold the high public office of Chief Minister.
The relief claimed in the present case in not the conferment of a personal benefit to the petitioners, but for cessation of the usurpation of public offices held by respondents.
Thus, the relief claimed by the appellants in their writ petitions filed in the High Court being in the nature of a class action, without seeking any relief personal to them, should not have been dismissed merely on the ground of laches.
[837 C D, 839 H, 840 A] 3.1.
The motive or conduct of the appellants, as alleged by the respondents, can be relevant only for denying them the costs even If their claim succeeds, but It cannot be a justification to refuse to examine the 824 merits of the question raised therein, since that is a matter of public concern and relates to the good governance of the State itself [840 A B] 4.
The remedy of an election petition Is statutory, governed by the limitation prescribed therein, unlike the remedy under Article 226 of the Constitution.
That apart, the analogy which is more apposite, is the decision on questions as to the disqualification of Members in accordance with Article 103 in the case of a Member of Parliament or Article 192 in the case of a Member of a House of a Legislature of a State.
For raising a dispute, giving rise to any question whether a Member of a House has become subject to any of the disqualification mentioned in clause (1) of Article 102 or 191, as the case may be, there is no prescribed limitation, and so also for challenging the decision rendered under Article 103 or 192 by a writ petition.
The question of the disqualification of a Member on the ground of defection and the Speaker 's order thereon, rendered under the Tenth Schedule, is of a similar nature and not based on the result of an election which can be challenged only by an election petition in accordance with the provisions of Representation of the People Act, 1951.
[834 F H, 835 A] A.G. vs Proprietor of the Bradford Canal, (1866) L.R. 2 Equity Cases 71, relied on.
Brundaban Nayak.
V. Election Commission of India and Anr., [19651 3 S.C.R. 53, explained and held inapplicable.
The Lindsay Petroleum Company vs Prosper Armstrong Hurd, Abram Farewell and John Kemp, ; The Moon Mills Ltd. vs M.R. Meher, President, Industrial Court, Bombay and Ors.
,A.I.R. ; Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation vs Shri Balwant Regular Motor Service Amravati & Ors., ; ; M/s. Tilok chand & Motichand & Ors.
vs H.B. Munshi & Anr., ; Shri Vallabh Glass Works Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; M/s Dehri Rohtas Light Railway Company Ltd. vs District Board, Bhojpur & Ors., ; Emile Erlanger and Ors.
vs The New Sombrero Phosphate Company and Ors., (1878) 3 Appeal Cases 1218; Anachuna Nwakobi, The Osha of Obosi and Ors.
vs Eugene Nzekwu & Anr., ; Everett vs Griffiths, (1924) 1 K.B. 941; R. vs Stratfort on Avon District Council and Anr.
ex parte Jackson, and Caswell and Anr.
vs Dairy Produce Quota Tribunal for England and Wales, ; , held inapplicable.
825 5.
The Speaker has no power of review under the Tenth Schedule, and an order of disqualification made by him under para 6, thereof Is subject to correction only by judicial review.
[841 F] Khoto Hollohan vs Zachillu and Ors., [1992] Supp. 2 S.C.C. 651, referred to.
Observations in Patel Narshi Thakershi & Ors.
vs Pradyumansinghji Arjunsinghji A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 1273 to the effect that the power to review is not inherent power and must be conferred by law either specifically or by necessary implications, relied on.
5.1.There is no scope for reading in to the Tenth Schedule any of the powers of the Speaker which he otherwise has while functioning as the Speaker in the House, to clothe him with any such power in his capacity as the statutory authority functioning under the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution.
Accordingly any power of the Speaker, available to him while functioning in the House, is not to be treated as his power of privilege as the authority under the Tenth Schedule.
[842 G H, 843 A] Rule 7(7) of the Members of the Goa Legislative Assembly (Disqualification on grounds of Defection) Rules, 1986 and Rule 77 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the Goa Legislative Assembly held inapplicable.
Para 7 has to be treated as non existent in the Tenth Schedule from the very inception.
As held by the majority in Kihoto Hollohan judicial review is available against an order of disqualification made by the Speaker under para 6 of the Tenth Schedule, notwithstanding the finality mentioned therein.
It is on account of the nature of finality attaching by virtue of para 6, that the judicial review available against the Speaker 's order has been labeled as limited in Kihoto Hollohan and the expression has to be understood in that sense, distinguished from the wide power in an appeal, and no more.
Thus the Speaker 's order is final being subject only to judicial review, according to the settled parameters of the exercise of power of judicial review in such cases.
The existence of judicial review against the Speaker 's order of disqualification made under para 6 Is Itself a strong indication to the contrary that there can be no Inherent power of review in the Speaker, read in the Tenth Schedule by necessary Implication.
[845 B E] 826 7.
There is no merit in the submission that the power of review inheres in the Speaker under the Tenth Schedule as a necessary incident of his jurisdiction to decide the question of disqualification; or that such a power existed till 12th November, 1991 when the decision in Kihoto Hollohan was rendered; or at least a limited power of review inheres in the Speaker to correct any palpable error outside the scope of judicial review.
[845 F G] Kihoto Hollohan vs Zachillhu and Ors., [1992] Suppl.
2 S.C.C. 651, explained.
Shivdeo Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors., A.I.R. 1963 S.C. 1909 and Grindlays Bank Ltd. vs Central Government Industrial Tribunal & Ors., ; , distinguished.
The impugned orders of the High Court, dismissing writ Petitions are setaside.
The orders made by the Acting Speaker in purported exerciseof power of review are nullity and liable to be ignored.
[847 E F]
