The prosecution case was that about 20 22 days prior to the occurrence the appellant and his brother removed the fencing over the field of the deceased.
This resulted in a quarrel and created ill feelings between the deceased and the appellant and his brother.
On the date of occurrence, the deceased went to his field.
Later on his wife, P.W.1 and his son, PW2 went to the field carrying meals for the deceased.
The deceased took his meal and at about 12.30 p.m., all the.
three were returning to their village from the field, near at the water course of the village, the appellant, who was coming from the village side, gave a 'lalkara ' to the deceased and he fired a shot from his pistol at the deceased.
The appellant 's brother exhorted him to kill the deceased.
Thereupon the appellant fired three more shots from his pistol.
The deceased fell down and died at the spot.
PW1 accompanied by one Ganpatram went to police station and lodged the first information report at about 3 p.m. and the police investigation was commenced.
The appellant and his brother were sent up for trial, charging the former under section 302 IPC and the latter under section 302/114 IPC.
Both were also charged under section 27 of the Arms Act.
The Trial Court acquitted the appellant and his brother of all the 850 charges, as it found that the prosecution was unable to prove the case against them.
The State 's appeal was partly allowed by the High Court.
The High Court set aside the acquittal of the appellant and convicted him for an offence under section 302 IPC and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment.
The High Court maintained the acquittal of the appellant 's brother.
Under section 2(a) of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970 the present appeal was riled, contending that the judgment of the Trial Court could neither be styled as perverse nor even as unreasonable and that there was no other substantial and compelling reasons which could justify the setting aside of the order of acquittal and, therefore, the High Court should not have interfered with the order of acquittal; that the presence of undigested food in the stomach of the deceased belied the prosecutions, case and that the Trial Court was right in holding that the deceased could not have taken the meals at the time stated by his wife PW1 and his son, PW2 or murdered at 12.30 p.m., as alleged; that the inordinate delay in sending the empty cartridges to the ballistic expert went to show that the possibility that the same had been substituted by the investigating agency could not be ruled out and therefore the conviction of the appellant by the High Court was not justified.
The State submitted that since it was an appeal under Section 2 of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970, this court could itself appreciate the evidence to determine the guilt or otherwise of the appellant; that the findings recorded by the Trial Court were based on surmises and conjectures and the High Court was perfectly justified in reversing the order of acquittal; that the evidence of PW1 and PW2 conclusively established that the crime had been committed by the appellant by his pistol and their testimony had received ample corroboration not only from the statement of the doctor, PW9, but also from the evidence of PW11l the ballistic expert, who had opined that the four empty cartridges had been fired from the licenced pistol of the appellant and could not have been fired from any other weapon; that being rustic villagers much importance could not be attached to the time given by PW1 and PW2 during their depositions about the exact time when the deceased may have had his meals and therefore it could not be said that the medical 851 evidence had in any way belied the prosecution case.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.01.
The process of digestion depends upon the digestive power of an individual and varies from in individual to an individual.
It also depends upon the type and amount of food taken.
The period of digestion is different for different types of food.
Some food articles like mutton, chicken etc.
would take more time for being digested as compared to vegetarian food.
No question at all were asked from the wife of the deceased about the type of food served by her to her husband or the amount of food taken by the deceased.
That apart, the time stated by the witnesses as to when the deceased took his food was only an approximate time as it was not even suggested to PW1 that she had a wrist watch and had actually seen the time when her husband took his food.
Too much play on such slippery factors goes against realism and is not enough to discredit the otherwise reliable testimony of PW1.
[856E F] 1.02.
The doctor opined that digestion begins in 1 or 1 1/2 hours.
From this testimony, what was sought to be made out by the defence was that had the occurrence taken place at 1230 noon, the deceased would have had his meals before 11.00 a.m. as semi digested food was found in the stomach of the deceased.
The emphasis on this aspect of the case by the Trial Court, is misplaced because the medical evidence is only an evidence of opinion and is hardly decisive.
[856 D] 1.03.
The evidence of both the witnesses PW1 and PW2, the widow and son of the deceased, shows that they are consistent in their versions not only about the assailants but also about the manner of assault.
Both the witnesses have given a vivid description of the occurrence.
The statement of PW1 that the deceased took his meals at about 1030 a.m. and that the occurrence had taken at about 12 1230 in the noon cannot be taken to have been contradicted by the medical evidence.
[856 B] 1.04.
The first information report was lodged by PW1 at 3.00 p.m. at a distance of about 13 miles from the place of occurrence and was therefore lodged with great promptitude and the entire version of the occurrence rinds mention in that report.
[857 B] 1.05.
The testimony of the PWs 1 and 2 has impressed the Court and 852 they appear to be truthful witnesses and being the close relations or the deceased would, in the ordinary course of things, be the last person to screen the actual offenders and implicate the appellants falsely.
Their testimony also receives ample corroboration from the medical evidence and the testimony of ballistic expert, PW11.
[857 B C] 1.06.
No suggestion even was made to anyone of the PWs.
6, 7, 8, 10, 12 that the sealed packets had allegedly been tampered with while in their custody.
No such suggestion was even made to PW6 that he had either substituted the carriages sent to the ballistic expert or otherwise tampered with the sealed packets.
There is no possibility of the substitution of the cartridges.
[859 F] 1.07.
Thus there are no suspicious features at all appearing in the evidence which may cast any doubt on the prosecution version that the deceased was shot at with the pistol by the appellant and that he died as a result of the injuries so received.
The prosecution had successfully established the case against the appellant beyond any reasonable doubt.
[858 H, 859 A]
