By Notification No. 94 dated 20th August, 1959 the Governor of West Bengal made Rules under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India for the regulation of recruitment to the Engineering Services under the Department of Works and Buildings of the State Government.
Under these Rules, recruitment to the permanent posts of Assistant Engineers was to be made under Rule 9, while Rule 10 governed recruitment to the temporary posts of Assistant Engineers.
Rule 11 provided for emergency appointment by advertisement and interview through the State Public Service Commission, on the basis of a competitive examination conducted by the Service Commission.
Accordingly, any appointment to a permanent or temporary post of Assistant Engineer, which was not made in accordance with Rule 9, or 10 or 11 was, therefore, not in accordance with these Service Rules.
The respondents in the appeals were petitioners in the writ petitions in the High Court.
They were duly appointed Sub Assistant Engineers who were earlier called Overseer Estimators and though Initially diploma holders having obtained the prescribed degree were eligible for appointment as Assistant Engineers.
They were appointed temporary Assistant Engineers on ad hoc basis, initially for a period of six months in the PWD 1974 to 1976 and in the Irrigation and Waterways Department 920 between 1972 to 1978.
They claimed seniority on the basis of their direct recruitment to the post of Assistant Engineer, and not as promotee from the next below cadre of Sub Assistant Engineers In the promotion quota specified for them in the Rules.
Their initial ad hoc appointment was extended periodically upto 26.2.1980, and during this period, several opportunities were given to these persons to appear before the Public Service Commission to satisfy the condition attached to the ad hoc appointment, but none of them complied with the requirement, declining throughout to appear before the Public Service Commission.
The State Government requested the Public Service Commission to permit regularisation of the services of these ad hoc appointees as Assistant Engineers, without being selected for regular appointment by the Public Service Commission but the Public Service Commission by several letters turned down that re quest.
The Government, finally took the decision on 26th February, 1980 to regularise these persons as Assistant Engineers, and, consequently took three simultaneous steps on 26 2 1980 viz. (1) the requirement in the rules of consultation with the Public Service Commission being dispensed with, (2) absorbtion as temporary Assistant Engineers and (3) a service rule under Article 309 providing for seniority as temporary Assistant Engineers with effect from the same date i.e. 26 2 1980.
This statutory rule clearly provided, that all persons appointed regularly in accordance with rules, prior to 26 2 1980, as Assistant Engineers would rank above the ad hoc appointees so absorbed with effect from 26 2 1980 and the Government implemented this decision.
The question before the High Court related to the fixation of seniority of these Sub Assistant Engineers appointed ad hoc temporary Assistant Engineers for a specified period in the PWD and the Irrigation and Waterways Department, vis a vis the direct recruits in the cadre of Assistant Engineers appointed regularly according to rules in the department prior to the regularisation of the ad hoc appointees.
The writ petitions were dismissed by a Single Judge of the High Court, but the writ appeals were allowed by the Division Bench resulting in grant of the relief claimed by the ad hoc appointees.
In the appeals to this Court by the State of West Bengal, and the adversely affected direct recruits who were respondents in the writ petitions filed by the ad hoc appointees, it has been urged that the claim of 921 the respondents for seniority being given to them retrospectively from the date of their initial ad hoc appointment, made contrary to the rules, in spite of their regularisation being made expressly from 26 2 80, is wholly untenable and against the decisions of this Court particularly the Constitution Bench decision on Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers ' Association and Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra and Ors.
,[1990] 2 SCR 900 = ; , and that the Division Bench of the High Court com mitted an error in reversing the judgment of the Single judge Bench which had dismissed the writ petitions.
The appeals were contested by the respondents by submitting that the initial ad hoc appointment of the writ petitioners was made by a mode permissible under the Service Rules, that appointment was made in relaxation of the rules by the Government which is implicit in the action taken, the initial ad hoc appointment must, therefore, be equated to the regular appointment made under the Rules, and on this equation there is no justification for discrimination between the initial ad hoc appointees and regular appointees coming in by direct recruitment thereafter in accordance with the rules.
It was further submitted that the case fell squarely within the ambit of conclusion (B) of the summary In Maharashtra Engineers case.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD : 1.
There is no dispute between promotes and direct recruits, the claim of the writ petitioners being based only as direct recruits in the Cadre of Assistant Engineers, and not as promotees from the lower cadre of Sub Assistant Engineers to which they had earlier belonged.
The present is, therefore, not a case of a dispute relating to the surplus promotees, who were given promotion regularly in accordance with rules, but in excess of the quota fixed for them under the rules.
In the present case, all the writ petitioners are persons who were given ad hoc temporary appointments for a fixed period, which was extended from time to time till their regularisation on 26 2 1980, and that too by relaxation of the condition of selection by the Public Service Commission, which was an express condition of their ad hoc appointment and a requirement for regular appointment under the Rules.
Assuming the relaxation made in their case by the State Government on 26 2 1980 to be valid, they could be treated as regularly appointed only with effect from 26 2 1980 when the 922 relaxation was given to them, and an order was made simultaneously absorbing them in the cadre of Assistant Engineers, also framing a rule at the same time under Article 309 providing for fixation of their seniority only from that date.
Accordingly, there is no foundation for the claim that they could be treated at par with the direct recruits, regularly appointed prior to 26 2 1980.
[934 C E] 2.
Prior to the steps taken by the State Government on 26 2 1980 for regularisation, there was no basis on which the writ petitioners could claim to be regularly appointed as Assistant Engineers; and, therefore, the manner in which they were regularised, including the mode of fixation of their seniority with effect from 26 2 1980, is decisive of the nature of their regular appointment.
This alone is sufficient to negative their further claim.
They can make no grievance to any part of that exercise, made only for their benefit [934 F G] 3.
The claim of the writ petitioners (respondents in all these appeals) for treating their entire period of service prior to 26 2 1980 as regular service for the purpose of seniority, and fixation of their seniority accordingly, is untenable.
1937 A] 4.
Rule It of the 1959 Rules provides for appointments to be made during emergency, and lays down that such appointments can be made only by advertisement and interview, through the Public Service Commission.
Admittedly, this express requirement in Rule 11 was not followed or fulfilled subsequently, and, therefore, the initial ad hoc appointments cannot be treated to have been made according to the applicable rules.
These ad hoc appointments were clearly not in accordance with the rules, and were made only as a stop gap arrangement for fixed period, as expressly stated in the appointment order itself.
[937 C] 5.
Conclusions (A) and (B) of the Constitution Bench in the Maharashtra Engineer 's case have to be read harmoniously, and conclusion (B) cannot cover cases which are expressly excluded by conclusion (A).
It is.
clear from conclusion (A) that to enable seniority to be counted from the date of initial appointment and not according to the date of confirmation, the incumbent of the post has to be initially, appointed 'according to the rules '.
The corollary set out in conclusion (A), then is, that 'Where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop gap arrangement, the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into 923 account for considering the seniority.
The case of the writ petitioners squarely falls within this corollary in conclusion (A), which says that the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into account for counting the seniority.
[935 D F] 6.
Conclusion (B) was added to cover a different kind of situation, wherein the appointments are otherwise regular except for the deficiency of certain procedural requirements laid down by the rules.
This is clear from the opening words of the conclusion (B), namely, if the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules and the later expression 'till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules '.
Conclusion (B) must be so read as to reconcile with conclusion (A).
[936 B] 7.
Decision about the nature of the appointment, for determining whether it falls in this category, has to be made on the basis of the terms of the initial appointment itself and the provisions in the rules.
In such cases, the deficiency in the procedural requirements laid down by the rules had to be cured at the first available opportunity, without any default of the employee, and the appointee must continue in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service, in accordance with the rules.
In such cases, the appointee is not to blame for the deficiency in the procedural requirements under the rules at the time of his initial appointment.
In such cases also, if there be any delay in curing the defects on account of any fault of the appointee, the appointee would not get the full benefit of the earlier period on account of his default, the benefit being confined only to the period for which he is not to blame.
This category of cases is different from those covered by the corollary in conclusion (A) which relates to appointment only on ad hoc basis as a stop gap arrangement and not according to rules.
[936 E G] 8.
It is, therefore, not correct to say, that the present cases can fall within the ambit of conclusion (B), even though they are squarely covered by the corollary in conclusion (A).
[936 H] 9.
There is, therefore, no escape from the conclusion that the present cases fall squarely within the ambit of the corollary in conclusion (A), of, Maharashtra Engineers ' case and, therefore, the period of ad hoc service of writ petitioners (respondents) on the post of Assistant Engineer prior to 26 2 1980, cannot be counted for reckoning their seniority.
[937 E] 924 Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers 'Association and Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra and Ors.
, ; = ; , explained and followed.
[932 D] A. Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors., ; and Narender Chadha & Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; , referred to.
[932 H]
