The appellant assessee was a cooperative society engaged in the business of banking The previous year relevant to the assessment year 1963 64 was the year ending June 30, 1962.
The business income of the assessee was exempt under the provisions of Section 80(1) as it then stood.
During the aforesaid accounting yew, the assessee received a sum of Rs. 19 being the interest on the deposit made by it with an Electricity Distribution Company.
This deposit had to be made by the assessee as it was required by the conditions notified by the electricity company for supply of energy, and it carried interest.
It was on account of the said deposit that the sum of Rs. 19 was received by the assessee, by way of interest.
The Income tax Officer treated the amount of Rs. 19 as income from other sources, and on that basis, he levied additional surcharge, in a sum of Rs. 81,920.
The assessee appealed to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner who upheld the assessee 's contention that the said sum of Rs. 19 constituted its business income and, was therefore, exempt.
He held that the levy of surcharge was unsustainable.
The Revenue appealed to the Appellate Tribunal which held that it was 'income from business ', and accordingly dismissed the Revenue 's 997 998 appeal.
At the instance of the Revenue, the Tribunal referred the question to the High Court.
The High Court held, that the assumption made by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal that the liability of surcharge was not attracted in case the said sum of Rs. 19 represented business income may not be warranted and that in such a situation the High Court does possess the power to correct the error so long as the point arose out of the Tribunal 's order.
It returned the reference unanswered and directed the Tribunal to consider the case on all points that require consideration of the question whether additional surcharge was attracted.
In the assessee 's appeal to this Court, it was submitted that the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction in making the aforesaid direction, that the High Court widened the scope of enquiry which it was not empowered to do in a reference under Section 256 and that the matter should be sent back to the High Court for answering the question of law as stated by the Tribunal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD : All that the High Court has asked the Tribunal to do is to consider whether the liability of surcharge is not attracted even if the said sum of Rs. 19 is treated as income from business.
The fact that the revenue was also a party to the said erroneous assumption before the Tribunal cannot stand in the way of the Revenue resiling from an er roneous assumption of law.
[1004 D F] In the instant case, the question was whether additional surcharge was leviable for the assessment year 1963 64 under the relevant Finance Act.
The assessee 's contention was that it had no income which was liable to be assessed to income tax inasmuch as its entire income was exempt under Section 81 (1) (a), and it was submitted that the sum of Rs. 19 was also a business income and, therefore, the liability of additional surcharge did not attach to the assessee.
The I.T.O. took the view that the said sum of Rs. 19 represented income from other sources and, therefore, liability of additional surcharge was attracted.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner upheld this contention.
The High Court, however, thought that having regard to the language of the provisions of the relevant Finance Act, the Tribunal ought to examine whether the liability to additional 999 surcharge was attracted even if the said sum of Rs. 19 was treated as income from business.
The High Court was of the opinion that this legal submission, though raised for the first time, did call for serious consideration.
This was done to arrive at a correct decision in law relating to the liability to additional surcharge.
If really, additional surcharge was chargeable according to the Finance Act even In case the said sum of Rs. 19 represented business income, the High Court cannot be called upon to act on the assumption that it is not so chargeable and answer the question stated.
Such a course would neither be in the interest of law or justice.
That the Revenue was also a party to the erroneous assumption of law makes little difference to the principle.
[1004 B F] C.I.T. Bombay vs Scindia Steam Navigation Ltd., 42 I.T.R. 589, relied on.[1004 H] V.R.Y.K.N. Kallappa Chettiar vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; C.L T. vs Ogale Glass Works Ltd., 25 I.T.R. 529; Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay North, Ahmedabad, ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar and Orissa vs Kirkend Coal Co., 74 I.T.R. 67 and Kusumben D. Mahadevia vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City , not applicable.
[1004 H]
