The appellants were charged with offences under Sections 302/ 149, 148,324 and 326 IPC for causing the murder of one IS ' and for causing grievous Injury to one `R '.
The Trial Court acquitted them.
On appeal by the State, the High Court reversed the order of acquittal.
Aggrieved by the High Court 's judgment, the appellants preferred the present appeal.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the version of the occurrence given by PW II in his statement recorded viz. exhibit P12 was materially different from the statement of PW 13 recorded as FIR (Ex.7) and gave a lie to the prosecution case rendering the prosecution case doubtful; that the High Court erroneously ignored the statement of PW 11 holding it inadmissible in evidence on the ground that it had been recorded during the investigation; and that due to the admitted enmity between the parties and the hostility of the Mukhiya of the Gram Panchayat towards Al and A2, it would not be safe to rely upon the testimony of the prosecution witnesses without looking for independent corroboration and in the absence of which the conviction of the appellants was not justified.
Partly allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In view of the admitted enmity between the parties and the close relationship of the witnesses inter se and the close relationship of the accused persons with one another, the possibility that 2 alongwith the actual assailants some others have also been implicated cannot be ruled out.
Prudence therefore requires that this court should look for corroboration of the testimony of PW 13 in respect of each of the accused before finding them guilty.
Since, the prosecution witnesses knew each of the accused, the non identification by any one of them of A5, A6 and A7 renders the presence of these accused and their participation rather doubtful.
It is not possible to say with any amount of certainty that they were actually involved in the commission of the crime along with the other accused persons.
Of course, PW 13 would not leave her own assailants or the assailants of her father, but it is not unknown that in view of the pronounced hostility between the parties, the close relations of Al, A2, A3 and A4, namely, accused A5, A6 and A7 may have also been roped in (8 H, 9 A C).
Though PW 10 and PW 12 did not recognize A4 as one of the accused but the participation of A4, who according to PW 13 had given her the blow with the grass chopping off her two ringers of the left hand, has been conclusively established.
The presence of A3, since deceased, is admitted by all the prosecution witnesses.
The testimony of PW 13, is consistent a bout the participation of Al and A2 alongwith A4 in the crime.
Inspite of long thy cross examination nothing has been brought out to discredit her testimony in so far as either the occurrence or the actual assault on her and the deceased is concerned.
The ocular testimony regarding the participation of the accused in the crime as well as the manner of assault and the nature of weapons used by A 1, A2 and A4 for causing injuries has received ample corroboration from the medical evidence and the recovery of the blood stained clothes and earth from the place of occurrence.
The FIR lodged promptly by the injured witnesses also lends enough assurance as regards the participation of A 1, A2, A3 and A4 in the crime.
Thus, the prosecution has established the case against Al, A2, A3 (since dead) and A4, beyond any reasonable doubt (9 D G) 3.
Since, the presence of A5, A6 and A7 and their participation in the crime is in doubt they are entitled to the benefit of doubt and giving them the benefit of doubt, their conviction and sentence are set aside and they are acquitted.
With their acquittal it is only the four appellants Al, A2, A3 and A4 against whom the prosecution can be said to have established its case beyond reasonable doubt Section 148 IPC under the circumstances would have no application.
Similarly, 3 Section 149 IPC would also not be attracted and A2, A3 and A4 cannot be convicted under Section 302 with the aid of Section 149 IPC.
From the prosecution evidence, however, it stands amply established that the three appellants, Al, A2 and A4 alongwith A3 (since dead) had come together armed with deadly weapons to the house of the deceased and while A I had fired pistol shot at the deceased resulting in his death, A2 had fired from his gun at PW 13 causing her a serious injury on her breast while A4 had caused her grievous injuries with a grass resulting in the chopping off two of her fingerson the left hand.
The crime was committed in the presence of A3.
Therefore, while A2, A3 and A4 cannot he convicted for the offence under Section 302/149 IPC all of them can be said to have shared the common intention with A 1 for committing the murder of the deceased.
The very fact that A 1, A2, A3 and A4 came together armed with deadly weapons, at the night, to the house of the deceased and caused deadly injuries to the deceased and seriously wounded PW 13 and thereafter escaped together would undoubtedly go to show that all of them shared the common intention.
They are, therefore, liable to be convicted with the aid of section 34 IPC.
(9 H, 10 A F) 5.
The evidence on record has established beyond any doubt that A 1 committed the murder of the deceased by firing the pistol shot.
He has, therefore, rightly been convicted by the High Court for the offence under Section 302 IPC and sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life.
His conviction for the offence under Section 27 of the Arms Act and the sentence of two years R.I. is also justified.
Hence, his conviction and sentence on both counts is maintained.
However, the conviction of A2, A3.
and A4, for the offence under section 302/149 IPC is altered to the one under Section 302/34 IPC.
A2 and A4 are sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life (A3 being already dead).
The convic tion of Al, A2 and A4 for the offence under Section 148 is, however, set aside.
The conviction and sentence of the appellants under section 27 of the Arms Act and under Sections 324 and 326 IPC are maintained.
The sentence of imprisonment imposed on A 1, A2 and A4 on different counts shall, however, run concurrently.
(10 H, 11 A C) 4
