The petitioner, a voluntary Organization Interested In protecting environment, approached this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution of India complaining of the widespread illegal mining activity going on in the area declared as a Tiger Reserve In Alwar District in the State of Rajasthan.
It prayed that in the interest of ecology, environment and rule of law, the activity should stop.
It was alleged that the area where the mining activity was carried on was declared as a tiger reserve under the Rajasthan Wild Animals and Birds Protection Act, 1951; as a sanctuary and a National Park under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 and as protected forest under the Rajasthan Forest Act, 1953, and that these notifications prohibit all or any mining activity, and yet the State Government had granted hundreds of licences for mining marble, dolomite and other materials and that such section was contrary to law.
This Court Issued notices to the State Government and the mineowners respondents In the Writ Petition.
An interlocutory direction was also made that no mining operation be carried on in the protected 22 area.
The Court also appointed a Committee under the Chairmanship of a Former Judge of the State High Court to ensure due observance of the various Acts and Notifications that had been issued in respect of the protected area.
The Committee was requested in particular to demarcate the area declared as protected forest under the notification dated January 1, 1975 issued by the Rajasthan Government under Section 29 of the Rajasthan Forest Act.
The Committee submitted its Report dated September 28,1992, stating that the committee had verified and cross checked the tracing maps furnished by the Forest Department with the maps furnished by the Revenue Department and found that both of them matched, and that after looking into the Khasra numbers mentioned in the notification dated January 1, 1975 and the other material placed before it by the parties, the Committee identified the areas declared as protected forest.
It stated that they were not in one contiguous block but were comprised in several blocks or areas.
The 215 mines mentioned in Appendix A to the Report fall completely within the areas declared as protected forest while 47 mines mentioned in Appendix II to the Report fall partly inside and partly outside the areas declared as protected forest.
There was no difference of opinion among the members of the committee regarding the location of the mines but only with respect to the question whether they should be directed to he closed.
The Chairman recommended that the mining operations in all the 215 mines listed in Appendix A should be stopped forthwith and the mining operation in the 47 mines listed in Appendix B be stopped forthwith to the extent they fell within the area declared as protected forest.
The three other Members of the Committee viz. Collector, Chief Conservator of Forest and Chief Wildlife Warden and Additional Director of Mines differed from the Chairman.
They suggested that this Court should accede to the representation of the State Government (Appendix IC ') that the area covered by the mines should be allowed to be excluded from the protected forest, in lieu of which the state Government undertook to provide an equal extent of the area for being included in the protected forest.
The Sate Government 's application to the Court was also to the same effect.
It was stated therein that the protected forest area measures about 800 23 Sq.
kilometers whereas the 262 mines mentioned in Appendixes 'A ' and `B ' cover only an area of 2.08 Sq.
kilometers and that in the interest of the economy of the State, industry and workers, an extent of 5.02 Sq.
kilometers including the area covered by the said mines be allowed to be deleted from the protected forest, the State Government offering to place an equal extent for the purpose of being declared as protected forest.
The mine owners also riled objections to the Report of the Committee and requested that they he allowed to continue their mining operations.
The Government of India which was directed to file an affidavit.
riled the same and stated that the area declared as project tiger/tiger reserve was covered by notification issued under the Rajasthan Forest Act, Environment Protection Act, 1986 and the Mines and Minerals Regulation and Development Act, 1957.
It submitted that the Forest Conservation Act applies not only to reserve and protected forest but to all areas recorded as forest in Government records, and that Mining was non forestry activity and, therefore, cannot be carried on in areas to which the Forest Conservation Act applies, without prior approval of the Government of India.
It was further stated that on May 7,1992 the Government of India had issued the final notification under Section 3 of the Environment Protection Act, 1986 prohibiting all mining activity, except with the approval of the Government of India and that since no permission was obtained under any of the said enactments with respect to the said 262 mines, no mining operations can be carried on in the area unless and until the permission of the Central Government was obtained.
On petitioner 's behalf it was submitted that all the mining activity in the areas notified under the notification dated May 7,1992 should have stopped long ago and continuance of mining activity amounts to gross contempt and constitutes a clear violation of orders; that the State Government appears to be colluding with the mineowners which is evident from the dissent expressed by officers of the State Government who were Members of the Committee to the straight forward and logical recommendation of the Chairman, and that prohibition of mining flows from the provisions, of the Forest 24 Conservation Act as well as the notification issued under the Environment Protection Act in May, 1992.
On behalf of the State Government It was submitted that the State Government and Its, officers were not aware when they granted leases/licences in respect of the listed mine that they fell within the area declared as protected forest and that the certificate issued by the Forest Department indicates that they did not fall within the protected forest area.
It was thus a bonafide grant.
It was further submitted that the State was prepared to abide fully by the orders of this Court, 54 mines had been shut down and it was prepared to shut down all the listed mines if this Court so directs.
A map prepared by the State officers showing the areas covered by tiger reserve, sanctuary, protected forest, and the location of the listed mines was placed before the Court for consideration.
On behalf of the mine owners in Mallana village it was submitted that demarcation of protected forest by the Committee was defective, erroneous and unacceptable for the various reasons set out in the objections riled to the report, that the map produced by the State Government delineating the tiger reserve was incorrect besides being an authenticated, that the mine owners do not admit that their mines fell within the tiger reserve or within the protected forest areas, and that closing down of hundreds of mines employing thousands of workers, wherein a large amount of capital was invested would disturb the economy of the State besides affecting the supplies of marble and other minerals, serving no public purpose.
On behalf of the some of the other mine owners it was submitted that it was unsafe to act upon and to pass any orders based upon the map produced by the State Government; that the declaration as tiger reserve by the Government of India was not under any statutory authority; that the areas declared as protected forest was not coextensive with the area declared as tiger reserve and sanctuary and national park; that none of the mines fell within the sanctuary or the National Park not even within project tiger, and that the mine owners are as much interested In protecting the environment and ecology as the petitioner.
25 Declaring that the relevant laws were violated, and passing directions, the Court, HELD: 1.
This is not a case where the Court is called upon to shut down an activity being carried on lawfully, in the name of higher considerations of ecology and environment.
It is a simple case to ensure observance of enacted laws made by the State to protect the environment and ecology of the area.
In such a case, there is no need to be oppressed by considerations of balancing the interest . of economy and ecology.
That has already been done by the Legislature and Parliament (37 D E).
In the instant case, the petitioner 's grievance is against the executive.
Charged with the delegation of implementing the laws of the land, the executive is yet failing to do its duty by law and by people, and that when faced with the might of money, respect for law is dissolving into respect for gammon (37 E F).
The State Government is empowered not only to declare any forest land as a protected forest but also any waste land as such.
The idea evidently is not only to protect the existing forest but also to bring waste lands under schemes of afforestation.
Once declared as protected forest, the distinction between forest land and waste land disappears.
The entire area becomes a protected forest.
(38 B) 3.
Reading Section 29 of the Rajasthan Forest Act as a whole, it appears, the normal rule is to make an enquiry into the rights of the state Government and of the private parties over the land proposed to be declared as protected forest in the first in stance, prepare a record thereof and then declare it as a protected forest.
But in case of urgency, It is open to the State Government to Issue such notification forthwith subject, of course, to the existing rights of individuals and communities in the area concerned.
(38 F) In the instant case, the notification dated January 1, 1975 issued by the Government of Rajasthan appears to be one issued under the proviso to sub section (3) of Section 29.
(38 G) 4.
Section 29 contemplates only one notification declaring an 26 area as a protected forest.
Whether issued after a normal enquiry and record or without enquiry or record, Section 29 contemplates only one notification and not two in any event.
Therefore, the notification issued is the valid and effective one.
It is not a provisional or preliminary notification.
It is not also the case of the mine owners that leases or licences in their favour were granted prior to January 1, 1975.
All of them were granted in the middle of or in the late eighties.
The savings clause contained in the proviso to sub section(3)does not avail them.
(39 A B) 5.
The Committee appointed by this court to demarcate and identify the areas declared as protected forest was composed of high officials of the Government of Rajasthan.
They had undertaken an elaborate and intensive exercise and have demarcated the areas declared as protected forest with the help of the official maps and records.
There is no reason not to accept the said report.
The several objections submitted by the mine owners cannot prevail over the official maps and records.
They were represented before the commission at the time of the said exercise.
The dissent note appended by the officers of the Government of Rajasthan was not with respect to the demarcation or identification of areas declared as protected forest, but only with respect to the closure of the mines operating within those areas.
The report of the committee is accepted.
(39 D F) 6.
Once an area is declared as a protected forest it comes within the purview of the .
Even the State Government cannot carry on any non forest activity in the said area without prior approval of the Central Government.
That the mining activity amounts to non forest purpose is beyond dispute.
Thus the grant of mining lease /licenses their renewal by the State Govern ment, without obtaining the prior approval of the Central Government in respect of the mines situated within the protected forest after January, 1, 1975 is contrary to law.
(39 G H, 40 B) 7.
All the mines listed in Appendix A to the Committee 's Report do fall within the areas declared as protected forest while the mines listed in Appendix B fall partly with in and partly out side such areas.
(41 B) 27 8.
According to rule 4(6) of the Rajasthan Minor Mineral A ' Concession Rules, 1986 no mining lease could have been granted or renewed within the forest "without clearance from the Central Government in accordance with the forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and the Rules made there under".
Admittedly, no such prior approval or clearance of central Government was obtained.
The purpose of Forest Acts and Environmental Protection Act may not always be the same.
Closure of the mines may not serve the environmental purpose but it may serve the forest purpose.
(40 B) 10.
It is appropriate that the merits of the proposal of the State Government to delete an extent of 5.02 Sq.
kilometers from out of the protected forest be examined by the Ministry of Environment and Forest, forests, and a report submitted to this Court, within three months.
Orders will be passed thereafter on the application riled by the State of Rajasthan.
(40 E) 11.The notification issued by the Central Government under Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act 1986 on May 7, 1992 expressly prohibits the carrying on of mining operations, except with the Central Government 's prior permission, in the "areas covered under project tiger".
The prohibition extends to existing mining leases in Sanctuaries/National Park.
All mining operations are pro hibited therein.
(41 C D) 12.
There can he no legitimate dispute with respect to the correctness of the map produced by Government of Rajasthan or with respect to the area declared as tiger reserve.
Both the State Government and Central Government have delineated it.
May be that the declaration as tiger reserve was without any statutory authority and is relatable to the executive power of the Union of India but the notification issued under Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act puts the stamp of statutory authority over it.
The Central Government has specifically stated in its affidavits that no "prior permission" was obtained with respect to the mines located within the tiger reserve.
On this ground, the mining operations being carried on in the tiger reserve, including the listed mines also appears to be 28 contrary to law.
(42 C D) 13.The situation is that the mining activity in the listed mines mining activities in 54 mines has already been stopped) is illegal and has to stop.
May be that this will have the effect of bringing to halt the activity involving a good amount of capital and a large number of workers.
But in view of the inherent illegality attaching to them, there is no option but to close them.
They cannot be permitted to operate.
If and when the Central Government recommends the plea of the State Government and any of the areas already declared as protected forest are deleted with the leave of this Court, can the mining activity go on in these areas.
(43 D) 14.It is directed that the mining activity in the mines situated outside the protected forest areas but within the tiger reserve may continue for a period of four months.
Within this period it shall be open to the concerned mine owners to approach the Department of Forest and Environment, Government of India for permission to continue their mining operations.
They can continue the mining operations in these mines only if the Central Government permits them and subject to the orders of the Central Government in that behalf.
If no permission is obtained from the Central Government within the said period of four months, the mining activity in the entire area declared as tiger reserve shall stop and cease on the expiry of four months.
(44 B C)
