The nomination paper of the fourth respondent who was one of the candidates for election to the Legislative Assembly of the State, was rejected by the returning officer on the ground that as he was the Headmaster of a Government aided school he was disqualified under section 7(d) and (e) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, to be chosen for election.
One of the voters of the constituency filed a petition praying that the election of the appellant be declared void under section 100(1)(c) of the Act on the ground that the rejection of the nomination paper of the fourth respondent was improper because the latter had ceased to be a Headmaster at the time of his nomination and that, further, the institution was a private one.
The appellant, who was the second respondent in the petition, contended that the nomination paper of the fourth respondent was rightly rejected not only on the ground put forward before the returning officer but also for the reasons that he was interested in Government contracts and that he had agreed to serve as a, teacher under the District Board.
The question was whether in an election petition challenging the validity of the rejection of a nomination paper under s: 100(1)(c) of the Act, it was open to the parties to raise grounds 624 of disqualification other 'than those put forward before the returning officer.
It was contended for the respondent that the proceedings before the Election Tribunal were really by way of appeal against the decision of the returning officer and that, therefore, the scope of the enquiry in the election petition must be co extensive with that before the returning officer and must be limited to the grounds taken before him.
Held, that an election petition is an original proceeding instituted by the presentation of a petition under section 81 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and that the jurisdiction which a Tribunal exercises in hearing an election petition even when it raises a question under section 100(1)(c) of the Act is not in the nature of an appeal against the decision of the returning officer.
Held, further, that in considering whether a nomination paper was improperly rejected under section 100(1)(c), the real question for decision would be whether the candidate was duly qualified and was not subject to any disqualifications as provided in section 36(2) of the Act.
The Tribunal would, consequently, be competent to entertain grounds of disqualification other than those put forward before the returning officer.
The expression " improperly rejected " in section 100(1)(c) of the Act, explained.
Mengh Raj vs Bhimandas, , Tej Singh vs Election Tribunal, JaiPur, and Dhanraj Deshlehara vs Vishwanath Y. Tamaskar, (1958) 15 E. L. R. 260, approved.
