On 28.5.1984, the High Court intimated the government of ten vacancies in the category of Munsifs and requested it to initiate appropriate steps for selection of candidates.
Written test was held in the year 1985 and viva voce was also held by the Public Service Commission.
On 10.12.1985 the High Court requested the Government to select twenty candidates in the place of ten.
On 27.12.1885 the Government requested the public Service Commission to select twenty candidates.
On 11.3.1986 the public service commission sent three select lists, one containing twenty candidates the other containing three Scheduled castes candidates and a waiting list of ten candidates.
The Government received several complaints against the pro cess of selection.
It was toying with the idea of scrapping the entire list and asking for a fresh selection.
95 On 23.12.1986, as the High Court said that there was urgent need for at least thirteen Munsifs, the government approved the name,,, of thirteen persons out of the list recommended by the Public Service commission and published the same.
They were appointed on 30.12.
Meanwhile a writ petition had been riled in the High Court for a direction to the Government to approve and publish the list recommended by the Public Service Commission.
On 30.12.1986, the State stated before the High court that it has already approved thirteen names and approval of the remaining seven persons was under its active consideration.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition as settled.
The Government did not approve any other names in the list in view of the complaints against the selection process by the Public Service Commission.
The candidates in the select list below serial No. 13 were pressing the Government to approve and publish the list and the High Court was also pressing the Government to approve the list in view of the vacancies.
Another writ petition was riled to direct the Government to approve the remaining seven names from the select list.
The High Court (Single judge) allowed the writ petition and directed the Government to approve and publish the list of the remaining candidates submitted by the Public Service Commission to it for appointment as Munsifs, immediately in accordance with the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (judicial) Recruitment Rules, 1967 and to consider the appointment of the candidates (including the writ petitioner .) as Munsifs in the vacancies existing or likely to arise, in accordance with the recommendations to he made by the High Court.
On appeal, the division Bench of the High Court reversed the decision of the Single Judge.
The present appeals by special leave were flied against the 96 decision of the Division Bench,.
contending that once the Public Service Commission prepared and recommended a select list, the Government had no power to sit in judgment over it; that the Government was bound to approve the list as recommended; that the function of the Government under Rule 39 of the 1967 Rules was merely ministerial and formal; that the Government 's action was arbitrary and capricious and vitiated by any admissible and extraneous consideration.
The State Government submitted that the function of the Gov ernment under Rule 39 was not merelY formal or ministerial; that the Government, being the appointing authority, was entitled to scrutinies the list open to the Government either to approve or disapprove the list, either whollY or in part , that a number of complaints were received bY the Government against the selection and many of them were found to he not without substance; that in view of the pressing need expressed by the High Court, the first thirteen candidates in the list were approved in the interest of judicial administration; that refusal to approve the remaining seven names inasmuch as no vacancies were available at that time was a valid and bonafide exercise of power and discretion ton the part of the Government; that the appellants had no legal right to be appointed just because their names were included in the select list prepared by the Public Service Commission.
Dismissing the appeals.
this Court.
HELD: 1.1.
It is true that the Government is the appointing authority for the munsifs but it is misleading to assert that in the matter of selection and appointment the Government has an absolute power.
Such an argument does violence to the constitutional scheme.
(102 F) 1.2.
Rule 39 does not confer an absolute power upon the Government to disapprove or cancel the select list sent by the Public Service Commission Where, however, the Government is satisfied, after due enquiry that the selection has been vitiated either (on account of violation of a fundamental procedural requirement or is vitiated by consideration or corruption.
favourtism or nepotism.
it can refuse to 97 approve the select list.
In such a case, the Government is bound to record the reasons for its action, and produce the same before a Court, if and when summoned to do so, apart from placing the same before the Legislature as required by clause (2) of Article 323.
(103 F H) 1.3.
article 323 (2) is meant as a check upon the power of the Government.
The provision militates against the theory of absolute power in the Government to disapprove or reject the recommendations of the commission.
For the same reason, it must he held that the Government cannot pick and choose candidates out of the list.
It is equally not open to the Government to approve a part of the list and disapprove the balance.
(104 B) 1.4.
Where is respect of any particular candidates an), material is discovered disclosing his involvement in any criminal activity the Government can always refuse to appoint such person but this would not he a case touching the select list prepared and recommended by the commission.
(104 C) 1.5.
In this case the Government itself had asked for a list of twenty and the commission had sent a list of twenty.
It could not have been approved in part and rejected in part.
The number of vacancies available on the date of approval and publication of the list is not material.
By merely approving the list of twenty, there was no obligation upon the Government to appoint them forthwith.
Their appointment depended upon the availability of vacancies.
The list remains valid for one year from the date of its approval and publication, if within such one year, any of the candidates therein is not appointed, the list lapses and a fresh list has to be prepared.
(104 E F) 1.6.
If the Government wanted to disapprove or reject the list, it ought to have done so within a reasonable time of the receipt of the select list and for reasons to be recorded.
Not having done that and having approved the list partly (thirteen out of twenty names), they cannot put forward any ground for not approving the remaining list.
Indeed, when it approved the list to the extent of thirteen, it ought to have approved the entire list of twenty or to have disapproved the 98 entire list of twenty.
The objection, the Government have pertains to the very process of selection i.e., to the entire list and not individually to any of the remaining seven candidates.
(104 G) 1.7.
Mere inclusion in the select list does not confer upon the candidates included therein an indefeasible right to appointment.
(104 H) State of Haryana vs Subhash Chandara Marwaha, ; , M. section Jain vs State of Haryana , A.I.R. 1977 S.C. and State of Kerala vs A. Lakshmikutty: A.I.R. 1987 S.C. 331, referred to.
(111 E) 1.8.
The other aspect is the obligation of the Government to act fairly.
The whole exercise cannot be reduced to a more farce.
Having sent a requisition/request to the commission to select a particular number of candidates for a particular category, in pursuance of which the commission issues a notification, holds a written test, conducts interviews, prepares a select list and then communicates to the Government the Government cannot quietly and without good and valid reasons nullify the whole exercise and tell the candidates when they complain that they have no legal right to appointment.
(105 B C) Shankarsan Dash vs Union of India.
; , referred to.
The Government 's action In not approving the rest of the seven names in the select list is unsustainable but there are certain circumstances which induce the Court not to interfere in this matter.
They are: (1) During the period of one year from the date of approval of thirteen names (23.12.1986/30.121986) no vacancy had arisen, which means that even if the list of twenty had been approved and published on December 23 or December 30, 1986 none of the seven persons would have been appointed.
At the end of one year, the list lapses and becomes inoperative.
(II) When the Government failed to act within a reasonable period from the date of the order (December 30, 1986) of the High Court in writ petition 1316/84 (which was disposed of recording the statement of the Advocate General) the petitioners ought to have moved in the matter.
They did not do so.
They waited for more than twenty months and approached the High Court only on 99 September 14, 1988.
This delay disentitles the petitioners from any relief in the facts and circumstances of the case.
(106 C G)
