These special leave petitions were disposed of by this Court 's order dated 14.1.1993.By the said order the Court gave its conclusions and certain directions observing that reasons In support thereof would be given at a later stage.
Giving the reasons in support of the conclusions, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The Government in a Welfare State has the wide powers in regulating and dispensing of special services like leases, licences, and contracts etc.
The Government while entering Into contracts or issuing quotas is expected not to act like a private individual but should act in conformity with certain healthy stan 129 dards and norms.
Such actions should not be arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant.
In the matter of awarding contracts, inviting tenders is considered to be one of the fair ways.
If there are any reservations or restrictions then they should not be arbitrary and must be justifiable on the basis of some policy or valid principles which by themselves are reasonable and not discriminatory.
(144 G H, 145 A) Erusian Equipment and Chemicals Ltd. vs State of West Bengal ; , Ramana Dayaram Shety vs The International Airport Authority of India and Ors. ; , and Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs State of Jammu and Kashmir and Anr. ; , relied on.
1.2 The concept of reasonableness rinds its positive manifestation and expression in the lofty ideal of social and economic justice which inspires and animates the Directive Principles, and Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness In State action.
(149 C) Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India.
[1978] 2 SCR 621, and E.P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu & Anr. ; , relied on.
1.3 The policy of the Government is to promote efficiency in the administration, to provide an incentive to the uneconomic units to achieve efficiency, to prohibit concentration of economic power and to control monopolies so that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good, and to ensure that while promoting industrial growth there is reduction in concentration of wealth and that the economic power is brought about to secure social and economic justice.
(159 F, 161 C) Monopolies Inquiry Commission 's Report, referred to.
American Jurisprudence 2 vol.
p. 668, referred to.
1.4 In view of the conditions in the tender notice, validity whereof was not questioned, the Government had the right to either accept or 130 reject the lowest offer.
From a perusal of the proceedings of the Tender Committee as well as the opinion expressed by the Financial Commissioner and the other members of Railway Board, it is clear that Rs. 76,000 per bogie could be the reasonable price and the post tender offer at a lower price was made with the hope that the three big manufacturers would get the entire or larger quantity allotted, which, if accepted, would result in monopoly extinguishing the smaller manufacturers.
(46 D G) State of Uttar Pradesh and others vs Vijay Bahadur Singh and others [1982]2 SCC365, State of Orissa and Ors.
vs Harinarayan Jaiswal and Ors.
; , G.B. Mahajan and others V. Jalgaon Municipal Council and others ; , State of Madhya Pradesh & ors.
vs Nandial Jaiswal & Ors. ; , Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. V. Union of India ; , R.K. Garg vs Union of India ; , and Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Limited and another etc.
vs Reserve Bank of India etc. , relied on.
2.1 The cartel is an association of producers who by agreement among themselves attempt to control production, sale and prices of the product to obtain a monopoly in any particular, industry or commodity.
It amounts to an unfair trade practice which is not in the public interest.
The intention to acquire monopoly power can be spelt out from formation of such a cartel by some of the producers.(167B C) Collins English Dictionary; Webster comprehensive Dictionary International Edition; chamber 's English Dictionary; Black 's Law Dictionary: A Dictionary of Modern Legal Usage by Bryan A. Garner; American Jurisprudence 2d Vol.
54, page 677 referred to.
2.2 However, the determination whether an agreement unrea sonably restrains the trade depends on the nature of the agreement and on the surrounding circumstances that give rise to an inference that the parties intended to restrain the trade and monopolise the same.
(167 C D) 131 National Electrical contractors Associations, Inc, et, at, National constructors Associations et.
al., Federal Reporter 2d Series, 678 page 492, Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd., et.
at vs Zenith Radio Corporation et al, 89 L.Ed.
2d 538, referred to.
2.3 Monopoly is the power to control prices or exclude competition from any part of the trade or commerce among the producers.
The price fixation is one of the essential factors.
(171 E) American Jurisprudence 2d Vol.
54, referred to.
2.4 A mere offer of a lower price by itself though may appear to be predatory, does not manifest the requiste intent to gain monopoly and in the absence of a specific agreement by way of a concerted action suggesting conspiracy, the formation of a cartel among the producers who offered such lower price cannot readily be inferred.
(172 B C) Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd. et.
vs Zenith Radio Corporation et.
; , referred to.
Webster Comprehensive Dictionary, International Edition; A dictionary of Modern Legal Usage by Bryan A. Garner; Collins English Dictionary Black 's Law Dictionary; The oxford English Dictionary Vol.
VIII, referred to.
2.5 The opinion of the Tender Committee that the identical price quoted by the three big manufacturers was a cartel price, was only a suspicion which got strengthened by post tender attitude of the said manufacturers who quoted a much lesser price, and cannot positively be concluded on the basis of these two circumstances alone.
There is not enough material to conclude that in fact there was formation of a cartel.
(173 B C) 2.6 A mere quotation of identical price and an offer of further reduction by themselves could not entitle the said manufacturers automatically to corner the entire market by way of monopoly since the final allotment of quantities vested in the authorities who in their 132 discretion can distribute the same to all the manufacturers including these three big manufacturers on certain basis.
Besides.
the authorities reserved a right to reject a lower price.
(172 F, 173 A B) 2.7 However, the opinion regarding formation of a cartel entertained by the concerned authorities including the Minister was not malicious nor was actuated by any extraneous considerations.
They entertained a reasonable suspicion based on the record and other surrounding circumstances and only acted in a bonafide manner in taking the stand that the three big manufacturers formed a cartel.
(173 C) 3.1 The legitimacy of an expectation can be Inferred only if it is founded on the sanction of law or custom or an established procedure followed in regular and natural sequence.
It Is distinguishable from a genuine expectation.
Such expectation should be justifiably legitimate and protectable.
Every such legitimate expectation does not by itself fructify into a right and therefore it does not amount to a right in the conventional sense, A case of legitimate expectation would arise when a body by representation or by past practice aroused expectation which it would be within its powers to fulfil.
The claim based on the principle of legitimate expectation can be sustained and the decision resulting in denial of such expectation can be quashed provided the same is found to be unfair, unreasonable, arbitracy and violative of principle of natural justice.
(182 C, 192 A) Food Corporation of India vs M/s Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries JT , relied on.
Halsbury 's Law of England.
fourth Edition, vol.
1 (1) 151, Administrative Laws of England, Sixth Edition by H.W.R. Wade, page 424, 522, referred to.
Schmidt vs Secretary of State for Home Affairs (1969) 2 Ch.
149;A.G. of Hong Kong vs Ng Yeun Shiu (1983) 2A.C.629;In Council of Civil Service Unions and others vs Minister for the Civil Service (1984) Vol.3 All E.R. 935, Amarjit Singh Ahluwalia vs The State of Punjab & Ors. ; ; Att.
for New South Wales vs Ouin [1990] Vol.
64 Australian Law 133 Journal Reports 327; 'R. vs Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte Ruddock & Ors.
(1987)2 All E R 518, Breen vs Amalcamated Engineering Union & Ors.
(1971) 2 Law Reports Queen Bench Division 173, referred to.
3.2 Legitimate expectation gives the applicant sufficient locus standi for judicial review and the doctrine of legitimate expectation is to be confined mostly to, right of a fair hearing before a decision which results in negativing a promise or withdrawing an undertaking is taken.
The doctrine does not give scope to claim relief straightaway from the administrative authorities as no crystalised right as such is involved.
(191 F) Navyoti Coo Group Housing Society etc.
vs Union of India & Others ; ; Findlay vs Secretary of State for the Home Department (1984) 3 All E R801 and Council of Civil Service Unions case Lord diplock 3.3 Legitimate expectation being less then right operate in the field of public and not private law and to some extent ought to be protected thought not guaranteed.
(193 C) 3.4 Legitimate expectations may come in various forms and owe their existence to different kind of circumstances.
By and large they arise in cases of promotions which are in normal course expected, though not guaranteed by way of a statutory right, in cases of contracts, distribution of largess by the Government and in somewhat similar situations.
(193 D) 3.5 Protection of legitimate expectation would not be available where an overriding public interest requires otherwise.
The protection is limited to that extent and a judicial review can be within those limits.
(191 H; 192 A B).
3.6 A person who bases his claim on the doctrine of legitimate expectation, in the first instance, must satisfy that there is a foundation and thus has locus standi to make such a claim.
The decision taken 134 by the authority must be found to be arbitrary, unreasonable and not taken in public interest.
It that be so then what should be the relief is again a matter which depends on several factors.
(192 C D E) 3.7 The courts jurisdiction to interfere is very Much limited and much less in granting any relief in a claim based purely on the ground of 'legitimate expectation '.
A decision denying a legitimate expectation based on a policy or change of an old policy, or in the public interest either by way of G.O., rule or is made by way of a legislation does not qualify for interference unless in a given case, the decision or action taken amounts to an abuse of power.
(193 E F) Att.
Gen. for New South Wales vs Quin [1990] Vol.
64 Australian Law Journal Reports 327, referred to.
Public Law and Politics edited by Carol Harlow, referred to.
3.8 Therefore the limitation is extremely confined and if the according of natural justice does not condition the exercise of the power.
The concept of legitimate expectation can have no role to plan and the Court must not usurp the discretion of the public authority which is empowered to take the decisions under law and the court is expected to apply an objective standard which leaves to the deciding authority the full range of choice which the legislature is presumed to have intended.
Even in a case where the decision is left entirely to the discretion of the deciding authority without any such legal bounds and if the decision is taken fairly and objectively, the court will not interfere on the ground of procedural fairness to a person whose interest based on legitimate expectation might be affected.
(193 G A; 194 A) 3.9 If a denial of legitimate expectation in a given case amounts to denial of right guaranteed or is arbitrary,discriminatory, unfair or based, gross abuse of power or violation of principles of natural justice, the same can be questioned on ' the well known grounds attracting Article 14 but a claim based on mere legitimate expectation without anything more cannot ipso facto give a right to invoke these principles.
It can be one of the grounds to consider but the court must lift the veil and see whether the decision is violative of these principles warranting interference.
(194 E F) 135 3.10 The concept of legitimate expectation is "not the key which unlocks the treasury of natural justice and it ought not to unlock the gates which shuts the court out of review on the merits," particularly when the element of speculation and uncertainty is inherent in that very concept.
The courts would restrain themselves and restrict such claims duly to the legal limitations.
It is a well meant caution.
Otherwise a resourceful litigant having vested interests in contracts, licences etc.
can successfully indulge In getting welfare activities mandated by directive principles thwarted to further is own interests.
The caution, particularly in the changing scenario, becomes all the more important.
(194 G H; 195 A B) Att.
Gen. for New South Wales vs Quin 1990 Vol.
64 Austraian Law Journal Reports 327, referred to. 3.11 In the instant case, the Rules for entering into contracts lay down certain norms and contain guidelines.
They provide for constitution of Tender Committee and the procedure to be followed in the matter of inviting tenders.
They also provide for negotiations but lay down that selection of contracts by negotiations is an exception rather than a rule and can be resorted to only under certain circumstances.
As per the notice inviting tender, the price quoted is subject to price variation clause and the Railways reserved a right to accept the lowest price or accept the whole or any part or the tender or portion of the quantity offered.
The tenderer cannot expect that his entire tender should be accepted in respect of the quantity.
In the past also there were man ,, instances where the Railways as per the procedure followed, arrived at decisions in respect of both price and quantity for good and justifiable reasons.
(178 A B C) 3.12 There is no legally fixed procedure regarding fixation of price and particularly regarding allotment giving scope to a legitimate expectation.
The Tender Committee is not a statutory authority and its proposals are recommendatory in nature and have to be considered in the distribution procedure culminating in the decision of the approving authority who as a matter of fact, also can take decisions in respect of price and allotment of quantities taking into consideration various other aspects from the point of view of public interest.
(178 D E) 136 4.
The modifications In the decision of the Railways by way of judicial review are not on the ground of legitimate expectation and violation of principles of natural justice but on the other ground namely the decision of the authorities was based on wrong assumption of formation of Cartel.
(195 F G) 5.The status of a manufacturer being a BIFR company or a small manufacturer was not taken Into account so far as the fixation of the price is concerned and these considerations were deemed relevant only for the purpose of allocation of quantities.
The stand taken by the Railways is that smaller manufacturers should survive from the point of view of arresting monopolistic tendencies and from the point of view of public interest.
The Tender Committee proceedings would indicate that on the basis of certain formulae namely the past performance, capacity etc, the allotment was being made.
Therefore, these cannot be said to be irrelevant considerations and as a matter of fact they had been duly given effect to and weightage was given accordingly in respect of allotment of quantities to various manufacturers within the four corners of the limited tender.
(196 C E)
