The three appellants In the two appeals along with 3 others, were tried for having committed murder.
One of the accused being a minor, his trial was separated so that the same could he conducted by the Children Court.
The case of the prosecution was that on the night intervening 6th and 7th October, 1982 the deceased and PW16.
who was the first cousin of the deceased, were returning after witnessing Ram Leela.
At that time the aforesaid 5 accused were also.
returning from the show and it was alleged that they teased some girls of the village who had also gone to see the Ram LeeLa, and that the deceased and PWI6 ' objected to this behaviour of the accused persons.
On this the accused persons abused them which was followed by exchange of abuses from both the sides.
PW13 intervened and pacified them.
Next day at about 2.30p.m.the deceased and Pw16 went to their flour mill to bring back 62 their bullocks and fodder cart.
Tub of the accused with Pharsas, one with a Ballam, and three others with sticks came there.
One of the accused abused the deceased and Pw16 saying that they would teach them a lesson for abusing them the previous night.
Having said so one of the accused gave a pharsa blow from the blunt side on the head of the deceased.
The other gave a pharsa blow on the head of the deceased.
PW16raIsed an alarm and the remaining accused gave blow to PWI6.
PW16 also got a blow of Ballam from the blunt side on his head.
Thereafter an alarm was raised and all the accused persons fled away from the place of occurrence.
The victim was taken to the local Hospital on a tractor and thereafter he was referred to A.I.I.M.S., New Delhi, where PWI examined him and also sent information to the police post at about 4.15 p.m.
The victim reached the A.I.I.M.S. at about 7.25 p.m. where he was examined.
A.S.I., PW17 who had got the information about the occurrence went to the Institute and the statement was recorded.
PW17 took up the investigation.
The victim died in the Institute the next morning at 7.00 a.m.
The postmortem examination was held by PW15 on 8th October, 1982 at 4.30 p.m. on 12th October, 1982 PWI examined one of the accused Suresh under the orders of judicial Magistrate and he made a report regarding the injuries he had received the duration of the time in respect of the injuries which he stated was 3 to 6 days.
The five accused were put up for trial, and the Session Judge convicted and sentenced all these accused for offences under Section 302 read with 149, Sections 148 and 323 read with Section 149 to imprisonment for life.
The High court having dismissed their appeals, the three appellants filed two appeals to this Court.
In the appeals to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that on the materials on record the Courts below should have come to the conclusion that the prosecution had suppressed the real manner of occurrence and had disclosed a version of the occurrence which cannot be accepted.
It was pointed out that the accused Suresh, Vijender and Virender were the sons of accused Hari Sing who was age d about 60 years, and that it was highly improbable on the part of , Hari Singh to join his sons for committing the murder of the deceased 63 Mange Ram who had protested about the behaviour of his sons.
It was submitted that in view of the admitted position that the residential unit, and the tube well being by the side of the flour mill of the deceased there was no question of the accused persons going to the flour mill of the deceased to assault the deceased and PWI6.
It was further submitted that in the First Information Report the name of accused Suresh was mentioned in connection with the previous night 's incident and that he and Satbir gave pharsa blows on the head of the deceased, that PW 16 modified his version of the FIR in court by saying that the injuries on the head of the victim were caused by the back side of the pharsa and that this improvement was introduced after it was found during the postmortem examination that injuries had been caused by application of blunt force which was inconsistent with the case of assault on the head of the deceased by pharsa.
The State raised an objection that in view of the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition of the two accused namely Suresh and Vijender against whom similar allegations had been made, it was not open to this Court to entertain any plea on behalf of the present 3 appellants because it will be deemed that while dismissing the special leave petition this Court had affirmed the findings recorded by the Trial court and the High Court in respect of the manner of occurrence and participation of the accused persons including the 3 appellants.
Allowing the appeals in part, and setting aside the convictions of the appellants under Section 302 read with Section 149 of the Penal Code; under Sections 148 and 323 read with Section 149; this court, HELD: 1.
Appellant Satbir convicted under section 304 Part II and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years.
Appellant Gulbir convicted for an offence under Section 325 Penal code and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years.
Appellant Hari Singh convicted for an offence under Section 323 of the penal code and sentenced to the period of imprisonment already undergone.
(75 H, 76 A B) 2 (a).
In the system of the justice which is being administered by the Courts.
One of the basic principles which has to be kept in view, is that Courts of coordinate jurisdiction, should have consistent 64 opinions in respect of an identical set of facts or on question of law.
If Courts express different opinions on the identical sets of facts or question of law while exercising the same jurisdiction, then instead of achieving harmony in the judicial system, it will lead to judicial anarchy.
(72 D E) (b) Before any such principle is applied It must be held that the earlier order passed by this Court dismissing the Special Leave Petition of the co accused amounts to a judgement or an affirmance of the findings of the High Court, about the manner of the occurrence, participation of the different accused persons and the nature of offence committed by them.
(72 F) 3.
Article 136 (1) of the constitution confers overriding and extensive powers of granting special leave to appeal or rejection thereof in the discretion of this Court.
Article 136 does not confer a right to appeal, it confers only a right to apply for special leave to appeal, which taking all facts and circumstances into consideration may he granted or rejected.
Even in a case where the special leave application is rejected, the order of the High Court does not merge In the Order of this Court, as is the case while exercising the appellate power.
Similarly, when Special Leave Petition is entertained against any final or interlocutory order this Court does not convert itself to a Court of appeal.
(72 D H) Gian Chand vs Kunjbehanlal ; , referred to.
(76 E) 4.
It is a basic principle of the administration of justice that like cases should be decided alike.
It is a very sound rule and practice otherwise on same question of law or same set of facts different persons approaching a Court can get different orders.
(73 D) 5.
The doctrine of precedent is not applicable to an order passed by this Court rejecting a Special Leave Petition.
Any such order cannot be held to be stare decisis so that it is a binding on the Court.
(73 F) 6.
Rejection of the Special Leave Petition gives a finality to an 65 order of the High Court, Inasmuch as the same accused cannot file more than one Special Leave Petition.
But In rare and exceptional cases this Court has exercised power under Article 32 of the Constitution so that there should not he miscarriage of justice and to avoid a direct conflict and confrontation between two orders of this court.
(73 H, 74 A) Harbans Singh vs State of U. P., ; ; Pyare Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh, [1992] SUPP 3 SCC 45 and (77 F) A.R. Antulay vs RS.
Nayak.
; , referred to.
(78 C) 7.
The mare rejection of the Special Leave Petition of co accused persons cannot seal the fate of the appeals of the appellants which have been entertained after leave having been granted by this Court.
The appellants to whom leave has been granted can urge all questions within the framework of Article 136 of the Constitution for consideration.
by this Court and a relief to which such appellants may be entitled cannot be denied to them merely on the ground that a Special Leave Petition In respect of co accused persons with more or less similar charges, evidence and convictions has already been rejected.
(75 F G) 8.
On the basis of the evidence of PW16, the informant, it cannot he said that the accused persons had an Intention to cause such injuries son the victim which may result In his death.
When they caused the injuries from the blunt side of the Pharsa it will have to be presumed that they had knowledge that those Injuries can cause the death, but there was no intention on their part to cause death.
As such the Trial Court and the High Court should not have convicted the appellants under Section 302 read with Section 149.
(71 G H) 9.
(a) On the materials on record in the Instant case, the prosecution has not been able to prove and establish that the appellants had the common object or shared the common intention to cause the murder of the victim.
From the evidence of the prosecution Itself It appears that the flour mill of the deceased and the residential unit of the accused persons being adjacent to each other, suddenly a right took place in which the appellant Satbir gave a blow by the back side (wooden part) of the Pharsa, which caused one of the two injuries on 66 the head of the deceased.
It cannot be held that appellant Satbir had an intention to cause the death of the victim.
In such circumstances it can be said that he had only knowledge that such blow may cause an injury resulting in the death of the victim.
He should have, therefore, been convicted under Section 304, Part II, of the Penal Code.
(75 C E) (b) So far as appellant Gulbir is concerned, according to the prosecution case, he was carrying a stick and he is alleged to have given a stick blow to the deceased on a non vital part of the body.
In this background, he can be held to have committed the offence only under Section 325 of the Penal Code.
(75 F) (c) In regard to the appellant Hari Singh, he was aged about 60 years at the time of the occurrence and the prosecution case itself, is that he is said to have given a stick (lathi) blow to the informant PW 16.
He is not alleged to have given any blow to the deceased.
He has, therefore,to be held guilty for an offence only under Section 323 of the Penal Code.
(75 G)
