In respect of an ancient temple situate in the State of Bihar, disputes arose in I897 between the high priest and the " pandas " regarding the control of the temple which ultimately led to a suit being filed under section 539 (now section 92) Of the Code of Civil Procedure, in the Court of the District judge of Burdwan and a decree was passed by the Additional District judge, under which a scheme was framed for the proper management of the temple.
The decree was confirmed by the Calcutta High Court and the scheme itself was later modified from time to time by the said High Court.
After the coming into force of the Bihar Hindu Religious Trusts Act, 1950, the President of the Bihar State Board of Religious Trusts, acting under section 59 of the Act, served a notice on the respondent, who had been appointed Sardar Panda for the temple under the scheme, asking him to furnish a statement in respect of the temple and the properties appertaining thereto.
The respondent made an application under article 226 of the Constitution to the High Court of Patna challenging the validity of the action taken against him on the grounds (1) that the Bihar 625 Hindu Religious Trusts Act, 1950, was ultra vires the Bihar Legislature, (2) that the Bihar Legislature did not have legislative competence to deal with the temple in question as some of the properties appertaining to the temple were situate outside Bihar, and (3) that, in any case, the Act did not apply to the temple by reason of the fact that the temple and its properties were administered under a scheme made by the Court of the District Judge of Burdwan and approved by the Calcutta High Court both of which were situate outside the territorial limits of Bihar, as otherwise the Act by some of its provisions would seek to interfere with the jurisdiction of courts which are outside Bihar and thereby get extra territorial operation.
Held: (1) that the Bihar Hindu Religious Trusts Act, 1950, is intra vires the Bihar State Legislature Mahant Moti Das vs section P. Sahi, [1959] SUPP.
2 S.C.R. 563 followed.
(2) that it is competent to the Bihar Legislature to legislate in respect of religious trusts situate in Bihar though some of the properties belonging to the trust may be outside Bihar; State of Bihay vs Charusila Dasi, [1959] SUPP.
2 S.C.R. 601 followed.
(3) that the provision of law in sub section
(5) of section 4 Of the Act by which section 92 Of the Code of Civil Procedure shall not apply to any religious trust in the State of Bihar, is valid; and (4) that as under section 4(5) Of the Act religious trusts in Bihar are taken out of the purview of section 92 Of the Code of Civil Procedure, the jurisdiction of the District judge of Burdwan or the Calcutta High Court to deal with the temple in question under section 92 comes to an end; consequently the Act and its several provisions do not suffer from the vice of extra territoriality and the Act applies to the temple in question and the properties appertaining thereto.
