The respondents appeared in the first year D.H.MS (Diploma in Homeopathic Medicine and Surgery) annual examination in june,1988.They had to re appear as they did not get the required percentage of pass marks in two or more subjects.
They were permitted to join the second year class after June, 1988.
Under the interim orders of the High Court, they appeared in the second year annual examination.
Simultaneously, the respondents appeared in the first year D.H.MS.
examination and cleared all the papers.
After re appearing in one or more subjects in the second year Supplementary examination in June, 1990, they were declared passed in the 2nd year D.H.M.S. examination.
The respondents joined the third year D.H.M.S. course and completed the course of study.
When their examination forms were forwarded to the appellant Council, they declined to permit the respondents to appear in the 3rd year D.H.M.S. annual examination, because they did not complete one year course of study between passing the first D.H.M.S. examination and appearing in the second year course.
The respondents preferred a writ petition before the High Court to direct the appellants to permit them to appear in the third year DHMS examination, commencing from 3.9.1991.
Following the view taken in the decision of the Court in C.W.P. No 2307/ 88.
Gurinder pal Singh vs Punjabi University & Ors., which was followed in Harinder Kaur Chandok (Minor) v The Punjab School, Education Board through its Secretary, , the High court allowed the writ petition of the respondents.
Against that order of the High Court, the appeal (C.A.No. 2107/93) was filed by special leave.
The appellants submitted that the High Court was wrong in its construction on regulation 11 of the Homeopathy (Diploma Course) DHMS Regulations, 1983; that if a candidate passed on supplementary examination, he would have to wait till the next academic session; that none of the Regulations indicated carry forward scheme of the subjects, but on the contrary,it was a case of detention every year.
The respondents urged that the interpretation placed by the High Courts on Regulations 8 to 10 was correct; that four chances afforded to the 308 candidate could be rendered nugatory, if the interpretation as stated by the appellants was accepted; that the Regulations did not say that after First D.H.M.S. examination, a student could not study for Second D.H.M.S. course and sit for examination provisionally; that the declaration of result for the Second D.H.M.S. course took place only after a student cleared the First D.H.M.S. examination; that if the Regulations were literally interpreted, that would lead to absurdity and it would run counter to the object of providing a supplementary examination.
As the other appeals (C.A.Nos.
2108 10/93) contained identical issue, all the appeals were heard and decided together.
Allowing, the appeals, this Court, HELD:1.1.
The Regulations 8 10 of the Homeopathy (Diploma Course) DHMS Regulations, 1983 are plain enough and are susceptible only to literary interpretation.
Maxwell:Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition, Page 29, referred to.
1.2.For admission to the First D.H.M.S. examination: i)a student must have regularly attended the courses of instruction, theoretical and practical; ii) for a period of not less than 12 months; iii) to the satisfaction of the head of the College.
(317 B) 1.3.
Eligibility for admission to Second D.H.M.S. examination is based on two conditions: i) A student has passed his First D.H.M.S. examination at the end of one year previously.
This means one year must elapse between the passing of the First year examination and taking of Second Year Examination.
ii) Subsequent to the passing the First year 309 a) he must have regularly attended the courses both theoretical and practical; b) for a period of at least one year; c) to the satisfaction of the head of the College.
(317 F G) Thus, unless and until, these two conditions are satisfied, a student is ineligible for admission to the Second D.H.M.S. examination.
(317 H, 318 A) 1.4 The conditions for eligibility for admission to Third D.H.M.S examination are: i) After passing the Second D.H.M.S examination, one and a half years must have elapsed before taking the Third D.H.M.S. examination.
ii) Subsequent to the passing of the Second D.H.M.S. examination: a) he must have regularly attended the courses both theoretical an practical; b) for a period of 11/2 years; c) to the satisfaction of the college.
(318 F G) 1.5.
Mandatory requirements of Regulation 9 are; i) The lapse of one year period between the passing of First D.H.M.S. examination and taking the Second D.H.M.S. examination.
ii) Subsequent to the passing of the First D.H.M.S. examination to undergo the course of study for one year.
(321 G) 1.6.
Therefore, if a candidate passes in the supplementary examination, the requirement of one year cannot be enforced.
Worse still is a case of a student who passes only at the next annual examination.
Could he he allowed to take the Second D.H.M.S. examination without even completing the First? Should he by chance pass the Second D.H.M.S. and not complete the First, since he has still one more chance to take this examination, what is to happen? 310 The situation is absurd.
The same principle should apply to Regulation 10 where the lapse is one and half years.
(321 H, 322 A) 1.7.The pattern of the examination is: 12 months for First D.H.M.S. examination, 12 months for Second D.H.M.S. examination and 18 months for Third D.H.M.S examination.
These put together with six months of compulsory internship, make up the four years prescribed for the Course in Regulation 3.
(318 G) 1.8.When a candidate completes the subjects only in the supplementary examination, then alone, he passes the examination.
It is that pass which is declared.
If the "doctrine of relation back" is applied, it would have the effect of deeming to have passed in the annual examination, held at the end of 12 months, which on the face of it, is untrue.
(321 A) 1.9.Whatever it is, a candidate has to complete all the subjects within four chances.
Should he fail to do so, he will have to undergo the course in all subjects for one year unless of course, he gets the exemption as stated in proviso to Clause (vii).
In Regulation 11 there is no 'system of carry forward '.
On the contrary, it is detention every year.
Harmonious construction violates the mandatory requirements of Regulation 9.
(321 E F) 1.10.If a student were to sit idle at home after passing the supplementary examination that is his own making.
To avoid such a situation, the Regulation cannot be construed causing violence to the language.
(323 H, 324 A) 1.11.The candidates who, as on the day of Judgment of these appeals, have attended all the courses and have passed all the examinations might make an appropriate representation to the Council of Homeopathic System of Medicines (The appellant) to consider their cases.
The representation shall be filed within a period of four weeks.
The Council of Homiopathic System of Medicines (the appellant) will take appropriate decision.
(327 C) 2.
The adjective 'supplementary ' means an examination to make up the deficiencies.
Thus, it stands to reason only when deficiencies are made up, the whole becomes complete.
(322 D) Oxford Dictionary, Seventh Edition, page 1072, referred to.
(322 B)
