The Respondents acquired some lands for setting up Brick Kilns.
The lands consisted of Abi (cultivated land), Barani (rainfed land) and ghair munkin (waste land) and the Collector fixed the compensation @ at Rs. 23,600, Rs. 17,000 and Rs. 12,000 per acre of the respective lands.
On a reference the Civil Court enhanced the compensation to Rs.33,600 per acre for Abi lands.
No enhancement was allowed in respect of the other categories of land.
It however allowed solatium at 15 % and interest at 6 % p.a. on the enhanced compensation.
On appeal, a Single Judge of the High Court confirmed the same.
These appeals were filed against the said Judgment of the High Court.
The appellants contended that the acquired lands had the potential value for residential and commercial purposes and there was no justification for classification of the lands and all the lands shall be treated at party in determination of market value; that in a similar case, the market value was enhanced to Rs. 75,000 per acre and in view of the fact that certain mutation entries showed a market value of similar lands ranging from Rs. 1,16,000 to Rs. 1,60,000, per acre the appellants claimed for compensation of at least at Rs. 75,000 per acre.
On behalf of the Respondents it was contended that the mutation record was not admissible as no one connected with the sale transactions was examined to prove the documents, the ground for sales, comparative advantages and their respective situation; that the lands possessed comparable or better amenities and whether the lands are very near to the lands under 372 acquisition.
The compensation awarded by the Collector at the rate of Rs. 15,525 per acre was upheld by the Reference Court, and this offered ' a reasonable base to fix the market value of the lands under acquisition.
Partly allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
Neither the appellants nor the Land Acquisition Officer had examined witnesses in proof of the sale transactions referred in the mutation entries.
It is settled law that a claimant is entitled to just and reasonable compensation under section 23, To determine the market value of the lands, it is necessary to examine witnesses to prove the prevailing prices as on the date of publication of the notification under section 4(1).
The sale transaction of the same Lands or sales of lands situated in the neighbourhood possessed of same or similar advantages would furnish as evidence of comparable sales.
It would be possible to have reliable evidence when sale transactions are proved by either the vendor or the vendee and if either of them was not available, the attesting witness who had personal knowledge of the transactions is to be examined by producing either the original sale deed or certified copies thereof as evidence.
Since at the relevant time it was not being insisted upon, none of the witnesses were called to prove the sale deeds or to prove the sale transactions.
Thus, the documentary evidence of sale transactions or the mutation entries on either side are clearly not admissible and therefore, they cannot be looked into, and are accordingly excluded from consideration.
(375 GH, 376 (H E) 2.
The situation of the lands dearly shows that the lands are situated very dose to developed Chandigarh planned city and are very near to Sukha Lake and the railway track.
They are situated within the freezed zone for future potential development of the city.
Though the acquisition was for establishment of Brick Kilns, by its very nature the lands may not immediately be capable of being used for residential or commercial purposes, but certainly possessed of potential value for future development as residential and commercial purposes.
There is a distinction between the lands acquired for Motor Market or Mansa Housing Complex on the one hand and the lands under acquisition on the other hand, though the lands are Abi lands going by the situation of the lands, the market value of the land acquired for motor market do not render any assistance as a comparable price.
This would be of assistance to assess a fair and reasonable compensation in fixing the market value though an amount of guess work is involved.
This Court is conscious of the fact that it should not be founded on feats of imagination hedged with 373 undue emphasis of compulsory deprivation of the possession of the lands of the appellant.
For the exercise of State 's power of eminent domain statutory solatium is the premium the State pays.
Therefore, the approach should he pragmatic to recompense the appellants to secure alternative lands or to invest in profitable business for rehabilitation.
It is seen that the Reference Court awarded a sum of Rs. 33,600 per acre to Abi land.
No doubt there is a steady rise in prices of lands.
Considering the totality of the facts and circumstances, the market value @ Rs. 42,000 per acre would be just and fair for Abi lands and at Rs. 38,000 per acre for Barani lands.
The market value of ghair munkin land at Rs. 12,000 per acre awarded by the Civil Court is confirmed.
The appellants are entitled to solatium and interest on the inhanced market value at 15 per cent and 6 per cent respectively from the date of taking possession till the date of payment as the award and the order of the Civil Court are prior to the periods mentioned in the Amendment Act 1984 came into force,.
(376G,H, 371 A F))
