The private respondent was appointed as sales girl with the petitioner.
The new manager not only insulted, humiliated and he her, he also terminated her services.
On ber plea, the Assistant Registrar who decided the case after seven years, held the Impugned order as Illegal, arbitrary and passed without obtaining the requisite approval.
He ordered reinstatement of the private respondent but did am grant back wages.
The petitioner Informed the private respondent that her joining report could not be entertained.
The letter was forced to approach the appellate and revising authorities the labour court and finally the High Court for back wages and other benefits.
The petitioner approached this court to assail well reasoned finding recorded by the High Court, without the least regard of the financial implications.
Meanwhile as the petitioner was unable to persuade this courtes of the case, the petitioner made attempt to highlight the financial difficulties in payment of back wages.
Surendra Kumar Varma and others vs Central Government Industrial Tribunal Cum Labour Court, New Delhi & Anr. ; , referred to.
The petitioner urged that the private respondent had been pursuing the 478 ` remedy for 16 years.
And the profit margin of the petitioner being very low and the overhead expenses high.
The State and the Centre who granted financial assistance for rehabilitation subject to the condition that the amount be not paid towards past debts, would be rendered in serious predicament.
On facts this court found that it was the petitioner who was not complying with the orders passed by the authorities from time to time, so there was no justification for exercising discretion in favour of the petitioner.
Dismissing the SLP and upholding the order of the High Court, this Court, HELD: Public money has been wasted due to adamant behaviour not only of the Officer who terminated the services of the private respondent but also due to cantankerous attitude adopted by those who were responsible for pursuing the litigation, and literally persecuted her.
Working life of the private respondent has been lost for more than twenty years.
While considering the agony and suffering, the amount of back wages exceeding three lakhs could not be a proper recompense.
And the reinstatement of the private respondent could not be considered as bonafide conduct for modification of the order of back wages.
(480 D) Leaving it open to the petitioner to replenish itself and recover the amount of back wages from personal salary of its officers who were responsible for the endless litigation and for terminating the services of the private respondents this Court clarified that this permission shall have nothing to do with the direction and the step for recovery be taken only after payment of back wages to the private respondent.
(480 G)
