The daughter of the appellant was married to the respondent and a girt child was born out of the wed lock.
The couple went to the U.S.A. alongwith the child, but the latter was sent back on her mother 's behests.
While the child was in the custody of the appellant the mother also came back, and committed suicide, leaving the child in the custody of the appellant.
Meanwhile the first respondent married an American girl and embraced christianity.
Thereupon the appellant applied to the local court for appointment as guardian of the child.
The respondent appeared in court but took the child to U.S.A. forcibly, and entrusted her to the custody of his newly wedded wife.
On being appointed as guardian of the child the appellant filed a complaint of kidnapping against the respondent and three others.
The respondent applied for exemption from personal appearance in the proceedings in criminal court.
The permission was granted subject to the condition that he will appear whenever called upon to do so.
On the completion of the evidence, the advocate of the respondent sought permission for examination under section 313 Cr.
P.C. in place of the respondent.
Thereupon the appellant sought direction for personal appearance of the respondent for being examined under Section 313 Cr.
The Magistrate dismissed the application of the appellant This Court examined the provision of Sub Section (1) of Section 313 Cr.
P.C. and, HELD:Introduced in its present form pursuant to the recommendations made in the 41st Report of the La* Commission, sub section (1) of 468 Section 313 begins with the words: "In every inquiry or trial.
" (472 B) The old sub section (1) of Section 342 has been divided Into two (a) & (b).
Clause (a) us" the expression 'may ' to indicate dot the matter is left to the discretion of the court to put questions to the accused at any stage of the inquiry or trial, whereas clause (b) uses the expression "shall" to convey that it is mandatory for the court to examine the accused after the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined.
(472 C) The proviso was added to sub section (1) with a view to enabling the court to dispense with the examination of the under clause (b) in a summons case in the court has already dispensed with this personal attandence if the court on completion of the prosection evidence finds that there are certain circumstances appearing in the evidence against the accused, the court is obliged by clause (b) to question the accused before be Ls called upon to enter his defence.
(472 D) Section 313 (1) applies to all inquiries and trials under the co&, to give the accused an opportunity to explain the circumstances appearing against him.
The trial court is empowered by clause (a) to question the at any stage of inquiry or trial, while clause (b) obligates it to question the accused before he enters his defence.
The rule of audi alterm partem incorporated therein is intended for the benefit of the accused.
(472 F) The proviso is in the nature of an exception to dawn (b) of sub section (1) of section 313 Cr.
P.C. and applies to a sommons case.
Where the personal presence of the accused has been dispensed with, the magistrate can dispense with the mandatory requirement of clause(b).
(472 G) Since the offence under section 363 [PC is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding two years it is a warrant cm, so even if the court has dispensed with the personal attendence of the accused the examination of the accused u/s 313 Cr.
P.C. is mandatory.
The examination of a lawyer would not be sufficient complaince@ with the @ate of the mid provision.
(473 B) BibhWi Bhushen Dat GWM & Aar.
vs State of West Be"W, A.I.R. (1%9) S.C. 381= 11%9] 2 SCR 104, referred to.
469 In that case this court pointed out that the privilege of making a statement under Section 342 of the old code, is personal to the accused.
This requirement cannot be satisfied by examining his pleader in his place, as the right of the pleader to represent the accused does not extend to the pleader answering questions under section 342 (now 313) Cr.
P.C. (473 E) This court set aside the impugned order and directed the trial magistrate, to pass appropriate orders in regard to the examination of the respondent under section 313 (1) (b) Cr. P. C. (474 D)
