Respondent Company filed a writ application in the High Court to refrain the appellants from giving effect to the vesting of the lands in question and to take possession of tank fisheries lying therein.
The Single Judge directed an action under section 10(2) of the West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act, 1953 and to take possession of the lands pursuant thereto giving an opportunity to the respondents.
The Division Bench on appeal held that appellants should take action under the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 within a period of two months of its judgment, failing which the respondents would he at liberty to deal with and dispose of the lands and until then the appellants were restrained to take possession of the lands.
The Single Judge and the Division Bench found that the Revenue Officer initiated proceedings to revise the old Jama of lands as he found from record of rights that lands were classified as 'Beel ' (marshy land) and the appeal of the respondent under Section 44(3) of the Act was allowed holding that the lands being 'tank fisheries ' old Jama was to be maintained.
481 482 ` The present appeal by special leave was filed against the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court contending that by operation of sections 4 and 5 of the West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act, fisheries being one of the interests that stood extinguished and vested in the State Govt.
free of all incumbrances with effect from 1.6.1956, the respondents lost right, title and interest therein; that since the respondent failed to make an application in form 'B ' within the specified time expressing his intention to retain the lands, the entire lands including tank fisheries stood vested in the State; that as per the entries in the record of rights the lands were only Beel (Marshy lands)and not tank fisheries and, therefore, even the exercise of the option to retain possession was not available; that since the respondent raised a dispute, the Single Judge rightly directed an enquiry under section 10(2) and to take action pursuant to its result under section 10(1); that the Division Bench committed manifest error in treating that the decision of the Tribunal under section 44(3) relating to jama to be final and the lands to be tank fisheries and that the respondent was entitled to retain khas possession with all right, tide and interest therein as an owner; and that the direction given to initiate the action under the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 within the specified period and on failure thereto liberty given to the respondent to alienate the lands was beyond the relief sought in the writ petition.
The respondents submitted that they purchased the leasehold rights in 1937 from the earliest purchaser of the lands who purchased the same from the original Zamindar and since then the respondents were using the lands as tank fisheries; that when notification under section 4 was issued, the lands were being used as tank fisheries; that despite its vesting, by operation of section 6(2), the respondent had right to retain possession as an owner; and the action for dispossession under section 10(1) was illegal; that the liability of dispossession of the respondent from the lands would arise only if the possession was found to be unlawful; and that the Division Bench, therefore, rightly directed to initiate proceedings under the West Bengal Land Reforms Act and to take action thereunder.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD:1.1.
By operation of sub sec.
(1) of Sec.
5 the estate and all the rights of intermediaries including fisheries in the estate shall stand determined and ceased and stood vested in the State free from all incumbrances.
(488 G) 483 1.2."Incumbrance" defined under Sec.
2(h)of the Act means 'in relation to estates and rights of intermediaries therein, does not include the rights of a raiyat or of an under raiyat or of a non agricultural tenant, but shall, except in the case of land allowed to be retained by an intermediary under the provisions of sec.
6, include all rights or interests of whatever nature, belonging to intermediaries or other persons, which relates to lands com prised in estates or to the produce there of.
Therefore, tide to, rights or interests in lands which include fisheries held by an intermediary shall stand extinguished and ceased and stood vested in the state free of all incumbrances.
(488 H, 489 A) 1.3.The exceptions engrafted in the incumbrance and exempted from the operation of Sections 4 and 5 are only the rights of a raiyat or of an underraiyat or of a non agricultural tenant and the right of retention of possession allowed to an intermediary under Sec.
6 of the Act All other rights, interest of whatever nature or tide belonging to the intermediaries or other persons who hold the lands under lease from intermediary should also stood extinguished.
(489 C) 1.4.All grants and confirmation of title, to estates and rights therein, to which the declaration of vesting applies and which were made in favour of intermediaries shall stand determined and ceased by operation of Sec.
5(1) (b) of the Act.
(489 D) 1.5.The respondents being purchasers of lease hold interest in tank fisheries? it also stood extinguished.
1.6.The pre existing right, tide and interest in the lands situated in an estate stood extinguished and ceased to have effect on and from notified date i.e. June 1, 1956 and stood vested in the State free from all incumbrances.
The non obstanti clause under Sec. 6 excluded from the operation of secs.
4 and 5 only of the interest of the respondent to retain physical possession of the lands covered by Sec. 6, subject to sec.
The intermediary by operation of Sec.
10(2) shall be required to submit in form 'B ' within 60 days from the date of issuing notice under Sec.
10(1) of his intention to retain possession of the tank fisheries.
On such submission of Form 'B ', the Collector without dispossessing him/it shall be entitled to prescribe such terms and conditions to which the intermediary or the leasee shall be bound and hold the tank fishery and shall remain in possession, using the tank fisheries for pisciculture or for fishing and subject to payment of such rent as may be determined under the Act and 484 finally entered in the Records of Rights.
(491 E F) 1.7.
The lands once retained under Sec.
by the intermediary and accepted by the authorities pursuant to form 'B ' declaration, the intermediary is entitled to retain possession and is not liable to dispossession so long as he complies with the terms and conditions, if any, imposed and the rent imposed is being paid.
(492 E) 1.8.
The avowed object of Act is to divest the pre existing right, tide and interest of the intermediary in the lands situated in an estate in a district or part of the district and shall stand divested from the Zamindar or intermediary except of a raiyat or under raiyat or non agricultural tenant.
Notwithstanding such divestment thereof the intermediary has been empowered to hold and retain possession directly under the State and hold it as a tenant, subject to such terms and conditions and subject to payment of rent as may be determined under the Act.
Therefore, the entitlement to retain possession of the land i.e tank fisheries in this case is not absolute but hedged with the conditions precedent of expressing his intention to retain possession by filing form 'B 'within 60 days and abiding to comply with such terms and conditions as may be imposed and also payment of rent.
(492 GH, 443 A) 1.9.
By operation of the explanation to Sec.
6(1) (e) "tank fisheries" not only it must be a tank fishery at the date of vesting, but it must also continue to be used for pisciculture or for fishing.
The emphasis on 'being used ' obviously is that the tank fisheries should be continued to be used for public purpose, namely the fish seedling or fish must be made available for public consumption.
(493 B) 1.10.
The intermediary shall hold the tank fishery on the date of vesting as tank fishery but continue to hold and use the same thereafter for pisciculture or fishing as explained in explanation 6(1) (e) of the Act.
Subsequent conversion of the land as tank fisheries is not material.
(493 D) State of U.P. vs Krishna Gopal & Anr., [1988] Supp.
2SCR 391 and Sasanka Sekhar Maity & Ors.
v Union of India, ; , cited.
Saroj Kumar Bose v Kanailal Mondal & Ors., [1985]2 SCR 393 and State of West Bengal v Atul Krishna Shaw & Anr., [1990] Supp. 1 SCR 901, explained.
485 1.11.
The word 'revised ' under sub sec.
(1) of Sec.
44 indicates that the State Govt.
or its officers shall be entitled to revise from time to time the Record of Rights and to make necessary entries or corrections in the relevant columns of Record of Rights in its settlement operations or as per exigency envisaged under the Act and the rules made therein.
The order under Sec.
44(3) becomes final so long as there is no revision effected.
The question of res judicata, therefore, does not arise and the previous appellate order does not preclude the authorities to revise the Record of Rights.
(492 B) 1.12.
The Division Bench of the High Court is not right in its conclusion that the order passed by the appellate authority under Sec. 44 (3) is final and the authorities have no jurisdiction to revise the Record of Rights.
(492 C) 1.13.
Sub section(2) of Sec. 6 expressly postulates that if he holds the tank fisheries should be for continued for use as tank fisheries and it would be subject to such terms and conditions and subject to payment of rent as may be fixed.
The holding of the land is as a tenant, the emphasis is that his possession is without any interest in the land.
Under T.P Act a tenant has lease hold interest in the land.
But in Sec.6(2) as a tenant for the purpose of payment of the rent and retention of possession and appears to he nothing more.
As regards tank fishery is concerned, though exemption has been granted, it is subject to the condition of continued user for pisciculture or fishing.
(495 E) 1.14.
From the scheme of the Act it would appear that the intermediary or the lessee gets no absolute right in the tank fisheries which were already divested but to remain in khas possession and to enjoy the usufruct thereof i.e. for pisciculture or fishing without any interest or sub soil rights and subject to such terms and conditions and subject to payment of rent as prescribed under the Act, but not as owner thereof.
The direction, therefore,by the High Court that the respondents are entitled to dispose of the land is contrary to and in negation of the scheme of the Act and Rules.
Therefore, it is manifestly illegal.
(495 G) 1.15.
The appellant is free to issue notice to the respondent under Sec.
10 (2) of the Act and conduct an enquiry into and rind: (1) on the date of the vesting whether the lands were being used for pisciculture or fishing i.e. tank fisheries; (2) whether the respondent had submitted form `B ' within the prescribed time exercising the option 486 to retain possession of the lands in question as tank fisheries; and (3) whether the respondent is continuing to use the lands in question as tank fisheries.
Reasonable opportunities shall be given to the respondents to prove its/their case.
(496 A B) 1.16.On the enquiry if it is found that the lands are not tank L1.16.On the enquiry if it is found that the lands are not tank L1.16.On the enquiry if it is found that the lands are not tank fisheries as on the date of vesting or that the respondent had not submitted option in Form `B ' to retain possession of the lands as tank fisheries within the prescribed period, then the lands stood vested in the State free from all incumbrances and authorities are entitled to take possession of the land under Sec.
10(1) read with Sec.
10(3).
In case if it rinds that the lands were being used as tank fisheries as on the date of vesting and that the respondents exercised the option within the time to retain possession and is continuing to use the tank fishery for pisciculture or for fishing; and if it has been continuing in possession of tank fishery, It is free to impose, if not already imposed, such terms and conditions as may be necessary to ensure continued use of tank fishery for pisciculture or for fishing, subject to payment of such rent as may be fixed or revised and ultimately entered in the Record of Rights.
In case, the respondent commits contravention thereof, it is open to the State to resume possession.
In case the respondent is not using the tank fishery for pisciculture or for fishing or alienated the lands it is open to the appellants to take possession of the lands and all sales if made by the respondents do not bind the State.
(496 C E)
