The Kerala Forest Act, 1961 regulates preservation of forests and forest produce.
Section 2(f) (i) defines forest produce which includes wood oil.
The respondents in Crl.
Appeals Nos.
420422 of 1993 were found manufacturing/in possession of sandalwood oil.
Proceedings under section 52 (1) of the Act were initiated against them.
They filed applications under section 482, Cr.
P.C. before the High Court challenging the jurisdiction of the trial court on the premise that sandalwood oil was not wood oil as defined under section 2(f) (i) of the Act The High Court allowed the case of the respondents and quashed the complaint*.
Subsequently in another case involving the same controversy, a Division Bench of the High Court held that sandalwood oil was a forest produce within the meaning of section 2(f) (i) of the Act.
**The State and tile accused challenged the respective judgments in the appeals by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the accused that sandalwood oil is not a forest produce inasmuch as there is a distinction between wood oil and sandalwood oil wood oil is a natural produce of forest directly derived as an exudation from living trees in the forest whereas sandalwood oil is a bye product from sandalwood by industrial process utilising the heart wood and 497 498 roots of sandalwood trees removed from the forest as a raw material.
The State contended that extraction of sandalwood oil even by mechanical process would nonetheless be a wood oil; and that since the word 'timber ' defined under section 2 (k) of the Act includes 'sandalwood ' being a forest produce, the oil extracted therefrom would also he within the meaning of the word 'wood oil '.
On the question: whether sandalwood oil is a forest produce within the meaning of section 2(f) (i) of the Kerala Forest Act, 1961.
Allowing the appeals of the State and dismissing the other appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Sandalwood oil is wood oil within the meaning of s.2(f) (i) of the Kerala Forest Act, 1961.
Therefore, it is a forest produce.
(507 G) * Mohammed Ali vs Forest Range Officer: , overruled **Khushboo Enterprises vs Forest Range Officer. , approved.
Kangundi Industrial Works.
Kuppam vs The Govt.
of A.P. , disapproved.
1.2 Sandalwood is forest produce.
Even its roots are also included as forest produce.
They are also 'timber 'within the meaning of section 2(k) of the Act.
(504 D) 1.3 Forest produce as defined in s.2 (f) of the Act, whether found in or brought from a forest or not is a forest produce which include, that is to say, the enumerated items in clauses (1) and (ii).
"Wood oil" is one of the enumerated items as are roots of sandalwood and rose wood.
(502 E) 2.1 The word "wood oil" used in the Act will require purposive interpretation drawing the context in which the words are used and its meaning will have to be discovered having regard to the intention and object which legislature seeks to subserve.
The purposive interpretation would aid conservation of sandal wood, a valuable forest wealth, prevent illicit felling and transportation of them and makes the manufacturers of sandalwood oil 499 accountable to the possession of sandalwood trees or chips or roots etc.
(506C D) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay vs Indian Oil Corporation, ; ; State of Bombay & Ors.
vs The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha & Ors, ; and State of Madhya Pradesh vs M. V Narasimhan, 1197512 SCC, relied on.
2.2 The Legislature does not intend to restrict the word 'wood oil ' nor are there any compelling circumstances in the Act to give restricted meaning that only oil derived from Dipterocarpus trees would be wood oil.
The literal interpretation if given acceptance would lead to manifest frustration of the purpose of the Act.
(506 D) Aditya Mills vs Union of India, [1988] 4SCC315, and Babu Manmohan Das Shah & Ors.
vs Bishun Das, ; , referred to.
Rathi Khandsari Udyog and Ors vs State of U.P. & Ors, [1985]2SCC 485, inapplicable.
Craies on Statute law.
Seventh Edition, referred to.
Stedman 's Medical Dictionan, (23rd Edition), Concise Chemical and Technical Dictionary (Fourth edition); 'Scientific Treatises ' (Vol. 6) by Ernest Guenther; 'Cyclopaedia of India and of Eastern and Southern Asia ' by Edward Balfour; 'Materia Medica of India and their Therapeutics ' by R.N. Khori, Pharma cographia Indica by William Dymock and 'Medical Plants of India and Pakistan ' by J.F. Dastru, referred to.
2.3 The expert opinion is only an opinion evidence on either side and does not aid in interpretation.
(506 E) 3.1 Forest produce defined under section 2(f) of the Act is an inclusive definition.
It is settled law that the word 'include ' is generally used as a word of extension.
When used in an interpretation clause, it seeks to enlarge the meaning of the words or phrases occurring in the body of the statute.
(504 D) 3.2 The word 'include ' in the definition under section 2(f) would show that it did not intend to exclude what.
was ordinarily and in common parlance to be spoken of wood oil.
The expression being technical and being part of an 500 inclusive definition has to be construed in its technical sense but in an exhaustive manner, it cannot be restricted in such a manner so as to defeat the principal object and purpose of the Act (505 H, 506 A) Kishan Lal vs State of Rajasthan, ; and South Gujarat Roofing Tiles Manufacturers Assn.
& Anr.
vs State of Gujarat and Anr.
, ; , referred to.
Fatesang Gimba Vasava & Ors vs State of Gujarat & Ors., , distinguished.
The process by which the oil is extracted is not decisive as oil may be extracted by natural process of exudation or it may be extracted by subjecting to chemical or mechanical process.
The purpose for which the oil is used is also not decisive.
(506 B) 5.
The trial court has jurisdiction to proceed with the trial.
It is for the trial court to find whether the offence as amputed to the accused has been made out at the trial.
(507 G)
