The appellant was one of the Directors of a Company registered under the Companies Act This company was also registered under the Factories Act and its object was to manufacture Motorcycles and its accessories.
It had a Managing Director, Joint Managing Director and Directors including the appellant for managing the establishment.
The respondent an Enforcement Officer, Regional Provident Fund Commissioner 's Office laid 18 complaints against six accused including the appellant (A 6) and the Company employer, for the failure to deposit the contribution for the period October to December 1990 to the Provident Fund Account under the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, Employees Provident Fund Scheme 1952, Employees Family Pension Scheme, 1971 and Employees Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme 1976, offences punishable under Section 14A of the 1952 Act read with para 76 of the 1952 Scheme.
On the Magistrate taking cognizance of the complaint, the appellant filed Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions in the High Court for quashing the complaint as they did not contain the relevant averments constituting offences against the appellant.
It was contended that the appellant was a mere Director of the Company, that he was neither incharge of the company nor was 509 responsible to comply with the provisions of the aforesaid Act and the Schemes thereunder.
Reliance was placed on the definition of 'employer ' in Section 2 (e) of the Act and the liability that had been fastened on the Managing Director or the Manager or occupier of the establishment to abide by the Act and the Schemes.
The High Court dismissed the applications.
The appellant appealed to this Court and contended that the reading the definition of 'employer ' in section 2(e) of the Act with Sections 30,14(1a) and para 31 of the Scheme, demonstrate that the employer in relation to the establishment means the owner or occupier of the factory which includes the Agent or the Manager of the factory under the Factories Act, that there was an occupier and Manager recorded for the instant company, and that they were Incharge of and were solely responsible to comply with the Act and the Schemes thereunder and that no specific averments have been made in the complaint making the appellant responsible for the management of the factory or the liability to comply with the Act and the Schemes.
The complaint laid against the appellant was therefore illegal and the cognizance taken by the Magistrate was vitiated by manifest error of law.
On the question: whether a Director of a Private Company, who is neither an occupier nor a manager can be prosecuted under Section 14(A) of the Employees ' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 for violation of the Provident Fund Scheme.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: (By the Court K. Ramaswamy & R.M. Sahai, JJ.) 1.
The Employees ' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 1952 by Section 2(e) defines 'employer '.
It is an inclusive definition and consists of two clauses which are vide in their sweep.
In Clause (i) are included not only owner or occupier but even the agent or manager.
When it comes to establishments other than factory it is not confined to owner or occupier but to all these who have central or are responsible for the affairs of the company.
It includes even director.
Therefore, every such person who has the ultimate control of the affairs of the company becomes employer Section 2(k) defines `occupier ' which means the person who has the ultimate control of the factory, and where the said affairs are entrusted to a Managing Agent, such agent shall be deemed to be the occupier of the factory.
Therefore, by its extended definition its sweep is enlarged bringing within its scope the person who is incharge of or responsible for,the management or 1 510 ultimate control over the affairs of the factory or establishment.
In the event of entrustment to a Managing Agent, such Managing Agent shall also be deemed 'to be the occupier of the factory '.
(514 GH,) 2.
In the instant case, the appellant having been declared himself as one of the person Incharge of and was responsible for conduct of the business of the establishment or the factory in Form 5A the complaint and non compliance thereof having been enumerated in para 3 of the complaint, it was validly made against the appellant along with other accused for the alleged Contravention.
Necessary allegations bringing out the ingredient of offence have been made out in the complaint.
Therefore, the Magistrate has rightly taken cognizance of the offence alleged against the appellant.
(518 A B) (Per K. Ramaswamy, J.) 1.
The Act and the Schemes are self contained code for deduction from the salary of the employees and the responsibility to contribute in equiproportion of the employer 's share and deposit thereof in the account within the specified time under the Act and the Schemes into the account It is a welfare legislation to provide benefits to the employees as per the schemes.
They need mandatory compliance and violation thereof visits with penal action.
(514 E) 2.
Section 6 fastens the obligation on the employer.
It postulates that the contribution to the fund shall be made by the employer.
(515 A) 3.
Under para 30 of the Employees ' Provident Fund Scheme, 1952 and the other Schemes, the employer shall deposit the contribution to the Fund.
(515 B) 4.
The employer shall, in the first instance, pay both the contributions payable by himself(in the Scheme referred to as employer 's contribution) and also on behalf of the members employed by him directly or through a Contractor, the contribution payable by such member (in the Scheme re ferred to as member 's contribution).
(515 G) 5.
Para 38 provides that the employer shall send to the Commissioner within 15 days of the close of every month, pay the same to the Fund by separate Bank Drafts or cheques and the administrative charges within 25 days of close of the month, the employer shall submit a monthly consolidated 511 statement as per form 5 with particulars mentioned therein.
(515 H, 516 A) 6.
Para 76 also fastens criminal offence for non compliance of the provisions of the schemes on the persons incharge of and responsible for the management or control of the establishment.
Every person, who at the time the offence was committed, was Incharge of and was responsible to the establishment for conduct of its business as well as the company shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(517 C) 8.
Form 5 A read with para 36A give an option to the employer to furnish particulars of ownership and the branches of the department, owners, occupiers, directors, partners, manager or other person or persons who have ultimate control over the affairs of such factory or establishment incharge of and responsible for the conduct of the business of the company and compliance of the statutory obligation fastened under the Act and the relevant schemes.
It is made mandatory to the employer to abide by the same and noncompliance thereof is liable for prosecution under Section 14A of the Act (517 D) Municipal Corpn.
of Delhi vs Ram Kishan Rohtagi & Ors.
; ; and Employees 'State Insurance Corpn.
vs Gurdial Singh & Ors.
[1991] Supp. 1 SCC 204, referred to.
Employees ' State Insurance Corporation vs Gurdial Singh & Ors.
(1991 Supp. 1 SCC 204, and Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Ram Kishan Rohtagi & Ors.
, ; , distinguished.
(Per R.M. Sahai, J.) 1.
The Act is a welfare legislation enacted for the benefit of he employees engaged in the factories and establishments and is directed towards achieving this objective by enacting provisions requiring the employer to contribute towards Provident Fund, Family Pension and Insurance and keep the Commissioner informed of it by riling regular returns and submitting details in forms prescribed for that purpose.
(518 G) 512 2.
Paragraph 36A of the Provident Fund Scheme framed by Central Government under Section 5 of the Act requires the employer in relation to a factory or other establishment to furnish Form 5A mentioning details of its branches and departments, owners, occupiers, directors, partners, managers or any other person or persons who have ultimate control over the affairs of the factory or establishment.
The purpose of giving details of the owners, occupiers and directors etc, is not an empty formality but a deliberate intent to widen the net of responsibility on any and every one for any act or omission.
It is necessary as well as in absence of such responsibility the entire benevolent scheme may stand frustrated.
(519 A B) 3.
The anxiety of the Legislature to ensure that the employees are not put to any hardship in respect of Provident Fund is manifest from sections 10 and 11 of the Act.
The farmer grants immunity to provident fund from being attached for any debt outstanding against the employee.
And the latter provides for priority of provident fund contribution over other debts if the employer is adjudged insolvent or the company is winded up.
Such being the nature of provident fund any violation or breach in this regard has to be construed strictly and against the employer.
(519 C) 4.
Sections 14 and 14A provides for penalties.
The one applies to whosoever is guilty of avoiding payment of provident fund and to employer if he commits breach of provisions mentioned in its various clauses where as Section 14A fastens liability on certain person if the persons committing the offence is company.
The scope of the two sections is same.
Latter is wider in its sweep and reach.
The former applies to anyone who is an employer or owner or is himself responsible for making payment whereas latter fastens the liability on all those who are responsible or are in charge of the company for the offence committed by it.
(519 D E) 5.
Sub sections (1) and (2) of Section 14A extend the liability for any offence by any person including a partner by virtue of explanation if he was incharge or was responsible to the company at the time of committing the offence.
The expression, 'was in charge of and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business ' are very wide in their import.
It could not, therefore, be confined to employer only.
(520 D) 6.
To say therefore that since paragraph 36A requires an employer to do certain acts the responsibility for any violation of the provision should be confined to such employer or owner would be ignoring the purpose and 513 objective of the Act and the extended meaning of 'employer ' in relation to establishments other than the factory.
The declaration therefore in Form 5A in the instant case including appellant as one of the persons in charge and responsible for affairs of the company was in accordance with law, therefore, his prosecution for violation of the scheme does not suffer from any error of jurisdiction or law.
(521 B C)
