In respect of some private dispute between two neighbors a writ application was filed in the High Court.
On the material produced in the case it was treated as a Public Interest Litigation and the High Court was to rind out a solution in respect (if unauthorised constructions alleged to have been made by different owners/occupiers/builders without sanctioned plans or by making deviations from the sanctioned plans.
The High Court wanted to ensure that such unauthorised constructions were not perpetuated on the basis of interim orders of injunction passed by the Civil Courts .
The High Court disposed of the petition holding that the owners/ occupiers/builders were to be given liberty to file fresh building plans and that the Municipal Corporation was to examine such building plans in accordance with law and that the Corporation was to seal and to demolish those constructions which were beyond the compoundable limits.
The High Court also directed that no civil suit would be entertained by any Court in Delhi in respect of any action taken or proposed to be taken by the Corporation with regard to the sealing and/or demolition of any building or any part thereof.
The High Court directed further that person aggrieved by an order of sealing or demolition had the right to file an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957.
522 523 Against the High Court 's order the present appeals were filed by special leave.
On the question, "whether the jurisdiction of the Court has been statutorily barred in respect of suits in connection with the orders passed or proceedings initiated for demolition of constructions, which have been made without sanction or by deviating from the sanctioned plans", allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD:1.1.
With the increase in the number of taxing statutes, welfare legislations and enactments to protect a class of citizens,a trend can be noticed that most of such legislations confer decision making powers on various authorities and they seek to limit or exclude Court 's power to review those decisions.
The result is that the power of the Court under section 9 of the Code is being denuded and curtailed by such special enactments, in respect of liabilities created or rights conferred.
The ouster of the jurisdiction of the Court is upheld on the finding that the rights or liabilities in question had been created by the Act in question and remedy provided therein Was adequate.
(535 D F) 1.2.The situation will be different where a statute purports to curb and curtail a pre existing common law right and purports to oust the jurisdiction of the Court so far remedy against the orders passed under such statute are concerned.
In such cases,the courts have to be more vigilant, while examining the question as to whether an adequate redressal machinery has been provided, before which the person aggrieved may agitate his grievance.
(535 G) 1.3.In spite of the bar placed on the power of the Court, orders passed under such statutes can be examined on "jurisdictional question".
A suit will be maintainable.
(536 F) Katikara Chiniamani Dora vs Guatreddi Annamanaidu, ; ; Desika Charyutttu vs State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1964 SC 807; PYX Granite Co. Ltd. vs Ministry of Housing and Local and Government, and Anisminic Ltd. vs Foreign Compensation Commission; , , relied on.
Wolverhampton New Waterworks Co. vs Hawkesford, [1859] 6 ; Neville vs London "Express" Newspaper Limited.
[1919] Appeal Cases 368; Baraclough vs Brown, [1897] Appeal Cases 615; Secretary of State vs Mask & Co., AIR 1940 P.C. 105; Firm Seth Radha Kishan vs Administrator.
Municipal committee, Ludhiana; , ; Finn of Illuri Subbayya Chetty and Sons vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; ; M/s. Kamala Mills Ltd. vs State of Bombay, ; ; Ram Swarup and Ors.
vs Shikar Chand, ; ; State of Kerala vs M/s. N. Ramaswami Iyer and sons; , ; Rain Gopal Reddy vs Additional Custodian Evacuee Property, Hyderabad, [1966]3 SCR 214; Custodian of Evacuee Property, Punjab & Ors.
vs Jafran Begum, [1967]3 SCR 736; Dhulabhai vs Stale of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; The Premier Automobiles Ltd. vs Kamlaker Shantarm Wadke; , 1 SCC 496; Bata Shoe Co. Ltd. vs Jabalpur Corporation, ; ; Munshi Ram vs Municipal Commitee, Chheharta, AIR 1979 SC 1250= [1979]3 SCC 83; Rain Singh vs Grain Panchayat, Mehal Kalan; , SCC 364; Raja Ram Kumar Bhargava vs Union of India, ; and Sushil Kumar Mehta vs GobindRam Bohra, ; , referred to.
The Delhi Municipal Corporation Act purports to regulate the common law right of the citizens to erector construct buildings of their choice.
This right existed since time immemorial.
But with the urbanisation and development of the concept of planned city, regulations, restrictions, on such common law right have been imposed.
But as the provisions of the Act intend to regulate and restrict a common law right, and not any right or liability created under the Act itself, it cannot be said that the right and the remedy have been given unoflatu e.g. "in the same breath".
(537 E) 1.5.
In spite of the bar prescribed under sub sections (4) and (5) of section 343 and section 347E of the Corporation Act over the power of the Courts, under certain special circumstances,the Court can examine, whether the dispute falls within the ambit of the Act.
But once the Court is satisfied that either the provisions of the Act are not applicable to the building in question or the basic procedural requirements which are vital in nature, have not been followed, it shall have jurisdiction, to enquire and investigate while protecting the common law rights of the citizens.
(537 C) 1.6.
The regulations and bye laws in respect of buildings, are meant to 525 serve the public interest.
But at the same time it cannot be held that in all circumstances, the authorities entrusted with the demolition of unauthorised constructions, have exclusive power, to the absolute exclusion of the power of the Court.
In some special cases where "jurisdictional error" on the part of the Corporation is established, a suit shall be maintainable.
(538 C) 1.7.
The Court should not ordinarily entertain a suit in connection with the proceedings initiated for demolition by the Commissioner, in terms of section 343 (1) (of the Corporation Act.
The Court should direct the persons aggrieved to pursue the remedy before the Appellate Tribunal and then before the Administrator in accordance with the provisions of the said Act.
(538 D) 1.8.
The Court should entertain a suit questioning the validity of an order passed under section 343 of the Act, only if the Court is of prima facie opinion that the order is nullity in the eyes of law because of any "jurisdictional error" in exercise of the power by the Commissioner or that the order is outside the Act.
(538 E) 2.1.
A party is not entitled to an order of injunction as a matter of right or course.
Grant of injunction is within the discretion of the Court and such discretion is to he exercised in favour of the plaintiff only if it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that unless the defendant is restrained by an order of injunction, an irreparable loss or damage will be caused to the plaintiff during the pendency of the suit.
(538 H) 2.2.The purpose of temporary injunction is, to maintain the status quo.
The Court grants such relief according to the legal principles ex debite justitiae.
Before any such order is passed the Court must be satisfied that a strong prima facie case has been made out by the plaintiff including on the question of maintainability of the suit and the balance of convenience is in his favour and refusal of injunction would cause irreparable injury to him.
(539B) 2.3. 'The Court should be always willing to extend its hand to protect a citizen who is being wronged or is being deprived of a property without any authority in law (or without following the procedure which are fundamental and vital in nature.
But at the same time the judicial proceedings cannot be used to protect or to perpetuate a wrong committed by a person who approaches the Court.
(539 1)) 526 2.4.
Power to grant injunction is an extra ordinary power vested in the Court to he exercised taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of a particular case.
The Courts have to be more cautious when the said power is being exercised without notice or hearing the party who is to he affected by the order so passed.
(539 E) 2.5.
In spite of the statutory requirement, in order 39, Rule 3 the Courts have been passing orders of injunction before issuance of notices or hearing the parties against whom such orders are to operate without recording the reasons for passing such orders.
It is said that if the reasons for grant of injunction are mentioned, a grievance can be made by the other side that Court has prejudged the issues involved in the suit.
This is a misconception about the nature and the scope of interim orders.
Any opinion expressed in connection with an interlocutory application has no bearing and shall not affect any party,, at the stage of the final adjudication.
Apart from that now in view of the proviso to Rule 3 of Order 39, there is no scope for any argument.
When the statute itself requires reasons to he recorded, the Court cannot ignore that requirement by saying that if reasons are recorded, it may amount to expressing an opinion in favour of the plaintiff before hearing the defendant (539 H, 540 H) 2.6.
Proviso to Rule 3 of Order39 of the Code, attracts the principle, that if a statute requires a thing to he done in a particular manner, it should be done in that manner or not all.
Taylor vs Taylor, (1875)1 Ch. D. 426; Nazir Ahmed vs Emperor, AIR 1936 PC 253 and Ramachandra Keshar Adke vs Gavind Joti Chavare; , , relied on.
Whenever a Court considers it necessary in the facts and circumstances of a particular case to pass an order of injunction without notice to other side, it must record the reasons for doing so and should take into consideration, while passing an order of injunction, all relevant factors, including as to how the object of granting injunction itself shall be defeated if an exparty order is not passed.
But any such exparty order should be in force up to a particular date before which the plaintiff should be required to serve the notice on the defendant concerned.
(541 C) Supreme Court Practice 1993, Vol. 1, at page 514, referred to.
527 2.8.The Court should first direct the plaintiff to serve a copy of the application with a copy of the plaint along with relevant documents on the counsel for the Corporation or any competent authority of the Corporation and the order should be passed only after hearing the parties.
(541 F) 2.9.If the circumstances of a case so warrant and where the Court is of the opinion, that the object of granting the injunction would be defeated by delay, the Court should record reasons for its opinion as required by proviso to Rule 3 of Order 39 of the Code, before passing an order for injunction.
The Court must direct that such order shall operate only for a period of two weeks, during which notice along with copy of the application, plaint and relevant documents should be served on the competent authority or the counsel for the Corporation.
Affidavit of service of notice should be filed as provided by proviso to Rule 3 of Order 39 aforesaid.
If the Corporation has entered appearance, any such ex parte order of injunction should be extended only after hearing the counsel for the Corporation.
(541 H, 542 A) 2.10.While passing an exparte order of injunction the Court shall direct the plaintiff to give an undertaking that he will not make any further construction upon the premises till the application for injunction is finally heard and disposed of.
(512 C)
