The appellant alongwith Radhey Shyam and Munni Lal were charged with the murder of Gokaran Prasad on 24.11.1975 at about 5 PM.
The Trial Court on consideration of the evidence concluded that the prosecution has failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubts and acquitted the accused persons.
On appeal, the High Court appreciating the facts and circumstances of the case convicted Munni Lal along with the appellant for an offence under Section 302 read with 34 I.P.C. and sentenced each of them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
During the pendency of the appeal the main accused Radhey Shyam died.
This appeal is against the High Court 's Judgment under Section 379 of the code of Criminal Procedure.
Allowing the Appeal in part, HELD : 1.
The High Court has rightly pointed out that PW 6 was not connected with the prosecution party in any manner and there was no reason for him to depose falsely, claiming to be an eye witness of the occurrence.
As such, his evidence can be taken into consideration.
to corroborate the evidence of the informant PW 1.
(587 C) 2.
The occurrence took place at about 5 P.M. and the first information report was lodged at 6.45 P.M. within two hours, the Police Station being at the distance of four miles from the place of occurrence.
In the first information report the same version of the occurrence was disclosed, which has been stated in Court.
Apart from naming himself, PW 1 also named PW 5 and PW 582 6 as eye witness of the occurrence.
The Investigating Officer reached the place of the occurrence at 9.
P.M. the same evening.
In such a situation there does not appear to be any scope for concoction of a false case to implicate the accused persons leaving out the real culprits.
PW 1 being the brother of the deceased, his going to the Court of Tehsildar at Sitapur and returning to village with the deceased is most natural.
His evidence cannot he rejected merely on the ground that he happened to be the brother of the victim.
It has been repeatedly pointed out by this Court that near relations will be the last persons to leave out the real culprits and to implicate those who have not participated in the crime.
Taking all facts and circumstances into consideration, the prosecution has been able to prove the case as disclosed in FIR against the accused persons.
(587 E G) 3.The appellant was a school student and there was no reason on his part to share the common intention of committing the murder of the victim.
By merely pressing down the victim before the other two accused persons, assaulted him, it cannot be held that appellant had shared the common intention of causing the death of the victim.
In the facts and circumstances of the case it has to he held that he shared only the common intention of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
He can be attributed with the intention that the injuries, which were being caused by the other two accused persons, were likely to cause the death of the victim.
(588 E F) 4.
The conviction of the appellant under Section 302 read with 34 I.P.C. as well as his sentence to imprisonment for life is set aside.
He is convicted under Section 304, Part 1, read with Section 34 of the Penal Code sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years.
(588 G)
