The respondent company terminated the appellant 's services on the ground that since he had willingly absented from duty continuously for more than 5 days from December 3, 1980, without leave or prior information of intimation or previous permission of the management, he had been deemed to have left the service of the company on his own and lost the lien and the appointment with effect from December 3, 1980.
It relied on clause 13(2) (iv) of the Certified Standing Order in support of its action.
The appellant 's plea that despite his reporting to duty on December 3, 1980 and every day continuously thereafter, he was prevented entry at the gate and was not allowed to sign the attendance register and that he was not permitted to join duty without assigning any reasons, was not accepted.
The Labour Court upheld the termination order as legal and valid.
It held that the appellant had failed to prove his case, that the action of the respondent was in accordance with the Standing Orders and it was not a termination nor retrenchment under the and that the appellant in terms of Standing Orders lost his lien on his appointment and was not entitled to reinstatement.
Allowing the appeal of the employee, this Court HELD:1.1.
The action of the management in terminating the appellant 's service is violative of the principles of natural justice.
Under clause 13 (2) (iv) of Certified Standing Orders, on completion of eight calendar days ' absence from duty an employee shall be deemed to have abandoned the services and lost his lien on his appointment.
Thereafter, the management is empowered to strike off the name from the Muster Rolls.
But it is not correct to say that expiry of eight days ' absence from duty brings about automatic loss of lien on the post and nothing more need be done by the management to pass an order terminating the service and per force termination is automatic.
The prin ciples of natural justice must be read into the Standing Order No. 13 (2) (iv).
Otherwise, it would become arbitrary, unjust and unfair violating Article 14.
Keshwanand Bharti vs Union of India, and State Bank of India vs Workmen of State Bank of India and Anr. ; , referred to. 1.2.
In the instant case,admittedly,the management did not conduct any domestic enquiry nor gave the appellant any opportunity to put forth his case.
932 The Labour Court did not record any findings on the appellant 's plea that despite his reporting to duty on December 3,1980 and on all subsequent days and readiness to, join duty he was prevented from reporting to duty, nor he was permitted to sign the attendance register, but held that the management had power under clause 13 of the Certified Standing Orders to terminate the service of the appellant.
Under the circumstances, the award of the Labour Court is set aside.
The respondent should reinstate the appellant forthwith with 50 per cent of the back wages.
Certified Standing Orders have statutory force which do not expressly exclude the application of the principles of natural justice.
Conversely, the made exceptions for the application of principles of natural justice by necessary implication from specific provisions in the Act like Sections 25F, 25FF, 25FFF etc.
The need for temporary hands to cope with sudden and temporary spurt of work demands appointment temporarily, to a service of such temporary workmen to meet such exigencies and as soon as the work or service is completed, the need to dispense with the services may arise.
In that situation, on compliance of the provisions of Section 25F resort could be had to retrench the employees in conformity therewith.
Particular statute or statutory rules or orders having statutory flavour may also exclude the application of the principles of natural justice expressly or by necessary implication.
In other respects, the principles of natural justice would apply unless the employer should justify the exclusion on given special and exceptional exigencies.
Col. J.N. Sinha vs Union of India & Anr., [1971] 1 S.C.R. 791, relied on.
Application of the principles of natural justice that no man should be condemned unheard intends to prevent the authority to act arbitrarily affecting the rights of the concerned person.
No decision must be taken which will affect the right of any person without first being informed of the case and be given him/her an opportunity of putting forward his/her case.
An order involving civil consequences must he made consistently with the rules of natural justice.
It is not so much to act judicially but to act fairly, namely, the procedure adopted must he just, fair and reasonable in the particular circumstances of the case.
The procedure prescribed for depriving a person of livelihood must meet the challenge of Article 14 of the Constitution and such law would be liable to be tested on the anvil of Article 14.
The procedure prescribed by a 933 statute or statutory rule or rules or orders affecting the civil rights or result in civil consequences would have to answer the requirement of the Article.
The manner of exercise of the power and its impact on the rights of the person affected would be in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
Article 14 has a pervasive processual potency and versatile quality, equalitarian it its soul and allergic to discriminatory dictates.
Equality is the antithesis of arbitrariness.
Therefore, the principles of natural justice are part of Article 14 and the procedure prescribed by law must be right, just, fair and reasonable and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive.
Mohinder Singh Gill & Anr.
vs The Chief Election Commissioner & Ors. ; State of Orissa vs Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei & Ors.
, ; ; State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, ; and Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621, relied on.
Blak 's law Dictionary 4th Edn.
p. 1487; referred to.
Article 21 of the Constitution clubs life with liberty, dignity of person with means of livelihood without which the glorious content of dignity of person would be reduced to animal existence.
When it is interpreted that the colour and content of procedure established by law must be in conformity with the minimum fairness and processual justice, it would relieve legislative callousness despising opportunity of being heard and fair opportunities of defence.
The order of termination of the service of an employee/workman visits with civil consequences of jeopardising not only his/her livelihood but also career and livelihood of dependents.
Therefore, before taking any action putting an end to the tenure of an employee/workman, fair play requires that a reasonable opportunity to put forth his case is given and domestic enquiry conducted complying with the principles of natural justice.
Delhi Transport Corpn.
vs D. T.C. Mazdoor Congress, and Ors., [1991] Suppl.
1 S.C.C. 600, relied on.
The aim of the rule of natural justice is to secure justice or to put it negatively to prevent miscarriage of justice.
These rules operate in the area not covered by law validly made or expressly excluded.
There can be no distinction between a quasi judicial function and an administrative function for the purpose of principles of natural justice.
The aim of both administrative inquiry as well as the quasi judicial enquiry is to 934 arrive, at a just decision and if a rule of natural justice is calculated to secure justice or to put it negatively, to prevent miscarriage of justice, it must logically be applicable both to quasi judicial enquiry and administrative enquiry and not only to quasi judicial enquiry.
A. K. Kriapak and Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors. , relied on.
An authoritative law laid after considering all the relevant provisions and the previous precedents is no longer open to be recanvassed on new grounds or reasons that may be put forth in its support unless the Court deemed it appropriate to refer to a larger bench in the larger public interest to advance the cause of justice.
Ambika Prasad Mishra vs State of U. P. & Ors. 10 and Keshwanand Bharti vs Union of India, , relied on.
The Constitution Bench in fact went into the self same question visa vis the right of the employer to fall back upon the relevant provision of the Certified Standing Orders to terminate the service of the workman/employee.
Therefore, it is not correct to say that since the present appeal was deleted from the Constitution Bench to be dealt with separately, the finding of the Constitution Bench deprived the respondent of putting forth the plea based on clause 13 of the Certified Standing Order to support the action in question and the respondent is entitled to canvass afresh the correctness of the view of the Constitution Bench.
The definition of 'retrenchment ' in Section 2(oo) of the is a comprehensive one intended to cover any action of the management to put an end to the employment of an employee for any reason whatsoever.
Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corpn.
Ltd., Chandigarh vs Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh and Ors., ; State Bank of India vs Sri N. Sundara Mani; , ; Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd. vs Shambhu Nath Mukherjee & Ors., [1978] 1 S.C.R. 591; Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, ; Robert D ' Souza vs Executive Engineer Southern Railway, and Anr., ; and H.D. Singh vs Reserve Bank of India & Ors., [1985] 4 S.C.C.201, referred to. 935
