The prosecution case was that the appellant, a non resident Indian at Dubai, hatched a conspiracy along with four others to cheat the Bank at Chandigarh.
in furtherance of the conspiracy, the appellant got credit facility by way of Foreign Letters of Credit and issued proforma invoices of his concern and addressed to the Bank through the establishments of other accused.
The Manager of the Bank, another accused, in confabulation with 544 the appellant and other accused, being in charge of foreign exchange department, issued Foreign letter of Credit in violation of import policy.
The Bills of Lading were addressed to the Bank.
The cable confirmation of the Bank was sent to appellant 's concern at Dubai for confirmation of discrepancy.
The appellant confirmed correctness thereof.
Placing reliance thereon, authority letter was issued by the Bank and cables were sent subsequent thereto to remit the amount .
to the Dubai Bank through one Irving Trust Company, At the instance of accused Anand, The Dubai Bank informed the Bankat Chandigarh that the discrepancy in the document adaptable to accused Anand and claimed to have inspected the goods on board in the vessel.
On receipt of the information from the appellant 's concern at Dubai, full amount is US Dollars 4,39,200 was credited against all the three Letters of Credit on discount basis.
The investigation established that the vessel was a non existent one and three Foreign Letters of Credit were fabricated on the basis of false and forged shipping documents submitted by the appellant to the Dubai Bank.
Thus the Bank at Chandigarh was cheated of an amount of Rs. 40,30,329.
The accused were charge sheeted under section read with sections 420, 468, and 471, IPC.
The Trial Court discharged all the accused of the offenses on the ground that conspiracy and the acts done in furtherance thereof had taken place outside India and as no sanction under section 188, Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 was produced, the prosecution was not maintainable.
The High Court in revision held that the conspiracy took place at Chandigarh and the overt acts committed In pursuance of that conspiracy at Dubai constituted offences under sections 420,467 and 471 IPC., and they were triable at Chandigarh without previous sanction of the Central Govt.
The High Court setting aside the order of discharge of the trial Court, directed to continue further proceedings in accordance with law.
That order of the High Court was challenged under this appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution.
The appellant contended that he was not a privy to the conspiracy and the conspiracy did not take place at Chandigarh; and that even assuming that some of the offences were committed in India, by operation of section 188 read with the proviso thereto with a non obstanti clause, absence of sanction by the 545 Central Govt.
barred the jurisdiction of the Courts in India to take cognisance of or to enquire into or try the accused.
The respondents submitted that the conspiracy to cheat the Bank was hatched at Chandigarh; that all the accused committed over acts in furtherance of the conspiracy at Chandigarh and therefore, the sanction of the Central Govt.
was not necessary.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Per K. Ramaswarmy, J. 1.01.
Judicial power of a State extends to the punishment of all offences against the municipal laws of the State by whomsoever committed within the territory.
It also has the power to punish all such offences wherever committed by its citizen.
The general principle of international law is that every person be it a citizen or foreigner who is found within a foreign State is subjected to, and is punishable by, its law.
Otherwise the criminal law could not be administered according to any civilised system of jurisprudence.
(553F) 1.02.
Conspiracy may he considered to be a march under a banner and a person may join or drop out in the march without the necessity of the change in the text on the banner.
In the comity of International Law, in these days, commiting offences on international scale is a common feature.
The offence of conspiracy would be a useful weapon and there would exist no contact in municipal laws and the doctrine of autrefois convict or acquit would extend to such offences.
The comity of nations are duty bound to apprehend the conspirators as soon as they set their feet on the country territorial limits and nip the offence in the bud.
(564 F G) 2.01.
Section 120 A of the I.P.C. defines 'conspiracy ' to mean that when two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done an illegal act, or an act which is not illegal by illegal means such an agreement is designated as criminal conspiracy".
No agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to a criminal conspiracy, unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement in furtherance thereof.
(557 C) 546 2.02.
Section 120 B of the I.P.C. prescribes punishment for criminal conspiracy.
It is not necessary that each conspirator must know all the details of the scheme nor be a participant at every state.
It is necessary that they should agree for design or object of the conspiracy.
Conspiracy is conceived as having three elements: (1) agreement (2) between two or more persons by whom the agreement is effected; and (3) a criminal object, which may be either the ultimate aim of the agreement, or may constitute the means, or one of the means by which that aim is to be accomplished.
It is immaterial whether this is found in the ultimate objects.
(554 E) 2.03.
Conspiracy to commit a crime itself is punishable as a substantive offence and every individual offence committed pursuant to the conspiracy is separate and distinct offence to which individual offenders are liable to punishment, independent of the conspiracy.
(556 D) 2.04.
The agreement does not come to an end with it .
making, but would endure till it is accomplished or abandoned or proved abortive.
Being a continuing offence, if any acts or omissions which constitute an offence are done in India or outside its territory the conspirators continuing to be parties to the conspiracy and since part of the acts were done in India, they would obviate the need to obtain sanction of the Central Govt.
All of them need not he present in India nor continue to remain in India.
(556 E) 2.05.
An agreement between two or more persons to do an illegal act or legal acts by illegal means is criminal conspiracy.
If the agreement is not an agreement to commit an offence, it does not amount to conspiracy unless it is followed up by an overt act done by one or more persons in furtherance of the agreement.
The offence is complete as soon as there is meeting of minds and unity of purpose between the conspirators to de that illegal act or legal act by illegal means.
Conspiracy itself is a substantive offence and is distinct from the offence to commit which the conspiracy is entered into.
It is undoubted that the general conspiracy is distinct from number of separate offences committed while executing the offence of conspiracy.
Each act constitutes separate offence punishable, independent of the conspiracy.
(563 F G) "Jones 'Case, 1832 B & A D 345; Mulcahy vs Reg., (1868) L.R. ; Quinn vs Leathem, ; at 528; B.G. Barsay.
vs The State of Bombay, ; Yashpal vs The State of Punjab, ; Mohammed Usman, Mohamned Hussain Manivar & Anr.v.
State of Maharashtra, [1981] 3SCR 68;Noor 547 Mohammad Yasuf Monin vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; R.K. Dalmia & Anr.
vs The Delhi Administration, ; ; Shivanarayan Laxminarayan & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
and Lennari Schussler & Anr.
vs Director of Enforcement & Anr., 1197012SCR 760, referred to. 2.06.
A conspiracy is a continuing offence and continues to subsist and committed wherever one of the conspirators does an act or series of facts.
So long as it ; performance continues, it is a continuing offence till it is executed or rescinded or frustrated by choice or necessity A crime is complete as soon as the agreement is made, but it is not a thing of the moment It does not end with the making of the agreement.
It will continue so long as there are two or more parties to it intending to carry into effect the design.
Its continuance is a threat to the society against which it was aimed at and would be dealt with as soon as that jurisdiction can properly claim the power to do so.
The conspiracy designed or agreed abroad will have the same effect as in India,.
when part of the acts, pursuant to the agreement are agreed to be finalised or done, attempted or even frustrated and vice versa.
(564 H, 565 A) Abdul Kader vs State.
AIR 1964 Bombay 133; U.S. vs Kissal, ; ; Ford vs U.S., ; at 620 to 622; Director of Public Prosecutions vs Doot and Ors., (1973) Appeal Cases 807 (H.L); Treacy vs Director of Public Prosecutions, (1971) Appeal Cases 537 at 563 (H.L.) and Board of Trade vs Owen.
(1957) Appeal Cases 602, referred to.
Prof. Williams, Glanville: "Vanue and the Ambit of Criminal Law", at 528; Halsbury 's Law of England, third edition Vol.
page 327, Para 6O2; Archobold:Criminal pleadings.
Evidence and Practice 42nd edition, [1985] Chapter 23, In para 28 32 at page 2281; Writ: Conspiracies and Agreements, at pages 73 74; Smith: Crimes, at page 239 and Russel; Crime, 12th edition, page 613, referred to. 2.07.
Sanction under section 188 is not a condition precedent to take cognizance of the offence.
If need be it could he obtained before trial begins.
Conspiracy was initially hatcher at Chandigarh and though its elf is a completed offence, being continuing offence, even accepting appellant 's case that he was at Dubai and part of conspiracy and overt acts in furtherance 548 thereof had taken place at Dubai and partly at Chandigar and in consequence thereof other offences had been ensued.
Since the offences have been committed during the continuing course of transaction culminates in cheating P.N.B. at Chandigarh, the need to obtain sanction for various officer under proviso to section 188 is obviated.
Therefore, there is no need to obtain sanction from Central Govt.
The case may he different if the offences were committed out side India and are completed in themselves without conspiracy.
(566 D E) K. Satwant Singh vs The State of Punjab, ; ; In Re M. L Verghese, AIR 1947 Mad. 352; T. Fakhulla Khan and Ors.
vs Emperor, AIR 1935 Mad. 326; Kailash Sharma vs State, 1973 Crl.
law journal 1021, distinguished.
Purshottamdas Dalmia vs State of Bengal, ; ; L.N. Mukherjee vs The State of Madras, ; ; R.K. Dalmia vs Delhi Administration ; at 273; Banwari Lal Jhunjhunwala and Ors vs Union of India and Anr., [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 338, referred to.
Per R.M. Sahai, J. (Concurring) 1.1.
Language of the section 188, Code of Criminal Procedure is plain and simple.
It operates where an offence is committed by a citizen of India outside the country.
Requirements are, therefore, one commission of an offence; second by an Indian citizen; and third that it should have been committed outside the country.
(567 D) 1.2.
Substantive law of extra territory in respect of criminal offences is provided for by Section 4 of the IPC and the procedure to inquire and try it is contained in Section 1 88 Cr.
P.C. Effect of these sections is that an offence committed by an Indian citizen outside the country is deemed to have been committed in India.
(567 E) 1.3.
Since the proviso to Section 188, Cr.
P.C. begin .
with a non obstinate clause its observance is mandatory.
But it would come into play only if the principal clause is applicable, namely, it is established that an offence as defined in dause 'n 'of Section 2 of the Cr.
P.C. has been committed and it has been committed outside the country.
(567 G) 549 1.4.
What has to be examined at this stage is if the claim of the appellant that the offence under Section 120B read with Section 420 and Section 471 of the IPC were committed outside the country.
An offence is deemed in the Cr.
P.C. to mean an Act or omission made punishable by any law for the time being in force.
None of the offences for which the appellant has been charged has residence as one of its ingredients.
(567 H, 568 A) 1.5.
The jurisdiction to inquire or try vests under Section 177 in the Court in whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed.
It is thus the commission of offence and not the residence of the accused which is decisive of jurisdiction.
When two or more persons agree to do or cause to be done an illegal act or an act which is illegal by illegal means such agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy under Section 120A of the IPC.
The ingredients of the offence is agreement and not the residence.
Meeting of minds of more than two persons is the primary requirement Even if it is assumed that the appellant was at Dubai and he entered into an agreement with his counterpart sifting in India to do an illegal act in India the offence of conspiracy came into being when agreement was reached between the two.
The two minds met when talks oral or in writing took place in India.
Therefore, the offence of conspiracy cannot be said to have been committed outside the country.
(568 B C) 1.6.
If a foreign national is amenable to jurisdiction under Section 179 of the Cr.
P.C. a NRI cannot claim that the offence shall be deemed to have been committed outside the country merely because he was not physically present (568 F) Mobarik Ali Ahmed vs The State of Bombay, ; , referred to.
An offence is committed when all the ingredients are satisfied.
The section having used the word 'offence ' it cannot be understood as part of the offence.
Section 179 Cr.
P.C. empowers a court to try an offence either at a place where the offence is committed or the consequences ensue.
On the allegations in the complaint the act or omissions were committed in India.
In any case the consequence of conspiracy, cheating and forging having taken place at Chandigarh the offence was not committed outside the country therefore the provisions of Sec.
188 Cr.
P.C. were not attracted.
(569 B)
