Notification under section 4 for acquisition of 89 Acres 4 Kanals and 12 Marlas of land in a village in Punjab, published on January 27, 1978.
Appellants claimed compensation Rs. 30,000 per Bigha i.e. Rs. 1500 per Biswa, on the ground that 15 Biswas of land situated near the acquired land had been sold on July 12,1977, for Rs. 24,000 which works out to Rs. 1600 per Biswa.
Land Acquisition Collector classified the acquired land In 6 blocks and awarded Market Value ranging between Rs. 30,000 to Rs, 6000 per acre.
In reference under Section 18, the District Judge disagreed with classification.
The learned Judge, relying on sale deeds dated September 4,1972, June 14, 1976, February 23, 1977 and July 15, 1977, all for small extents, awarded compensation @ Rs. 800 for the rest of land, besides solatium and interest.
Appeals filed in the High Court by State of Punjab and by one batch of claimants.
Another batch of claimants filed cross objections.
The learned Single Judge allowed appeals filed by the State and dismissed appeals and cross objections of the claimants.
Market Value was determined, on working out average price on the basis of sale deeds dated September 4,1972 and June 14, 1976 filed by claimants and mutation entries dated August 31, 1977 and October 4,1977 filed by the State.
Belting was carved at depth of 100 Ft.
from main road and deduction of 1/3rd was made towards development charges.
Consequently market value determined @ Rs. 750 per Biswa for land abutting main road and @ Rs. 500 per Biswa for the rest of land.
Judgment and order of the learned Single Judge was confirmed by Division Bench.
Claimants, by special leave petition filed appeals for higher compensation.
This court determined market value at Rs. 1000 per Biswa and allowing the appeals to that extent, HELD It is settled law that to determine market value of the land, the sales of land under requisition if any or the sales in the neighborhood lands, 646 that possessed of same or similar features or fertility or other advantageous features would furnish basis to fix just and fair market value.
(649 E) The price for which the willing vender would offer the land and willing vendee would agree to purchase it, as a prudent man in normal market conditions, as on date of notification or near about the date, is acid test to fix market value.
Sales and purchases of land at throw away price at arms length or depressed sales or facade of sales made in quick succession to inflate market value do not offer any basis to determine just Market Value.
(649 F) In order to adjudge, whether sales are bonafide, whether consideration mentioned in the deed was infect and really passed, whether the lands covered by sale deeds and relied on possessed of same or similar potentialities or fertilities or advantageous features would be brought out on record only by examination of the vendor or the vendee or if neither of them is available, the attesting witness, who has personal knowledge of the bargain and passing of consideration.
Hence it is mandatory.
(650 A) Periyar & Pareekanni Rubbers Ltd. vs State of Kerala: Sale deeds of small extents being retail price do not offer comparable basis to fix compensation, when large block is acquired.
If sale transactions relate to the lands under acquisition and if found to be genuine and bonafide transactions, then it may be considered but reasonable margin must be given in fixing wholesale price.
(650 E) Collector of Lakhimpur vs Bhuban Chandra Dutta AIR 1971 SC 2015; Mirza Nausherwoan Khan & Another vs Collector (Land Acquisition) Hyderabad ; ; Ram Rattan & Others vs State of Uttar Pradesh ; Smt.
Kaushalya Devi Bogra & Others vs Land Acquisition Officer, Aurangabad Others ; ; Administrator General of West Bengal vs Collector Varanasi ; and Special Tehsildar Land Acquisition vs A Mangal Gowri Court in the first instance has to determine as to which of the sale deeds are relevant, proximate in point of time and offer comparable base to 647 determine market value.
The after average price has to be worked out and the contention that highest value should be fixed cannot he accepted.
(651 D) State of Madras vs A.M. Ranjan & Another ; ; Collector of Lakhimpur vs Bhuban Chandra Dutta AIR 1971 SC 2015; Sint.
Kaushalva Devi Bogra & Others vs Land Acquisition Officer, Aurangabad & Another ; and Administrator General of West Bangal vs Collector, Varanasi ; The Principle of belting is perfectly legal and unexceptionable, as the lands abutting the main road up to a specified depth depending on factual material on record, would fetch higher market value than lands situated in interior area.
(652 A) If the acquired land is undeveloped, deduction of at least 1/ 3rd, is necessary towards development charges.
(652 F) Brig.
Sahib Singh Kalha & Others vs Amritsar Improvement Trust & Others ; Administrator General of West Bengal vs Collector Varanasi ; ; Special Tehsildar, Land Acquisition vs A. Mangal Gowri ; and Bhagwathula Swamnanna & Others vs Special Tehsildar Land Acquisition Visakhapatnam ;
