Despite several letters by the respondent to the Chief Engineer Public works Department the State did not appoint any Arbitrator as provided in Clause 25 of the agreement.
Shri D.K. Roy Choudhry who was appointed as a sole Arbitrator by the learned Single Judge revoking the authority of the Chief Engineer to act as an Arbitrator under the agreement.
On appeal by the State under Section 39(2) of the Act or under Letters Patent.
The High Court dismissed the appeal as not maintainable.
This appeal is against the judgment of the High Court.
Appeal dismissed, HELD: 1.Section 39 of the came upon for consideration in U.O.I vs Mohindra Supply Company [1962]3 SCC 497 and the Court held that no Second Appeal lay under section 39(2) against a decision given by a learned Single Judge under Section 39(1).
is a consolidating and amending act relating to arbitration, it must be construed without any assumption that it was not intended to alter the law relating to appeals.
The Court held that in view of bar created by sub section (2) of Section 39 debarring a second appeal from an order passed in appeal under sub section (1) that the 'conclusion was inevitable that it was so done with a view to restrict the right of appeal within strict limits defined by Section 39 '.
Therefore the maintainability of the appeal under Letters Patent it stands concluded by this 641 decision.
(642 G H) 2.
Sub section (1) of Section 39 of the is extracted below: "(1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders passed under this Act (and from no others) to the Court authorised by law to hear appeals from original decisions of the Court passing the order.
An order (1) superseding an arbitration; (ii) on an award stated in the form of a special case; (iii) modifying or correcting an award; (IV) filing or refusing to file an arbitration agreement; (v) staying or refusing to stay legal proceedings where there is an arbitration agreement; (vi) setting aside or refusing to set aside an award; Provided that the provisions of this Section shall not apply to any order passed by a Small Causes Court.
_ (2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this Section, but nothing in this Section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court".
(643 D E GH) provides that an appeal could lie only from the orders mentioned in the sub Section itself.
Since the order passed by learned Single Judge revoking the authority of the Chief Engineer on his failure to act as an Arbitrator was not covered in either of the six clauses mentioned in Section 39 it is obvious that no appeal could be filed against the order of the learned Single Judge.
(644 642
