A petition was filed in this court by Imams for enforcing their fundamental right against exploitation by Wakf Boards.
Their claim was based on the glaring disparity between the nature of work and the amount of remuneration.
The petitioners sought a direction to the Central and State Wakf Boards to pay them basic wages.
A higher pay scale was claimed for degree holders.
The Union of India and various State Wakf Boards disputed the manner of their appointment, their right to receive any payment, and absence of any relationship of master and servant.
It was variously contended that they were appointed by Mutwallis, or in some cases by the people of the locality where the mosques were situated, and not by the Wakf Boards; that under Islamic religious practice it is voluntary service and there is no entitlement to emoluments; that a certificate from a registered institution is not a necessary requirement for leading in prayer.
It was further contended that the Wakf Boards faced financial difficulties.
The Punjab Wakf Board stated that Imams of mosques in Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh were paid on the basis of their qualification.
A pay scale was indicated, and the Imams were paid regularly and treated as regular employees.
Allowing the petition, this Court, HELD:(1) By Section 15 of the , the Wakf Board is vested not only with supervisory and administrative powers over the Wakfs but even the financial power vests in it.
One of the primary duties is to ensure that the income from the Wakf is spent on carrying out the purposes for which the 743 Wakf was created.
Mosques are Wakfs and are required to be registered under the Act, over which the Board exercises control.
Purpose of their creation is community worship.
The principal functionary to undertake it is the Imam.
It is the responsibility of the Wakf Board to ensure proper maintenance of religious service in a mosque.
To say, therefore, that the Board has no control over the mosque or Imam is not correct.
(747 G H, 748A) (2) In a series of decisions rendered by this Court it has been held that right to life enshrined in Article 21 means right to live with human dignity.
It is too late in the day to urge that since Imams perform religious duties, they are not entitled to emoluments.
(748 E) (3) Financial difficulties of the institution cannot be above fundamental right of a citizen.
If the Boards have been entrusted with the responsibility of supervising and administering the Wakf then, it is their duty to harness resources to pay those persons who perform the most important duty namely of leading community prayer in a mosque, the very purpose for which it is created.
(748 H) (4) The Union of India and the Central Wakf Board are to prepare a scheme within a period of six months in respect of different types of mosques: (7497 H) The scheme shall take guidance from the scale of pay prevalent in the State Punjab and Haryana.
(749 D) Mosques under control of the government will not he governed by this order except if their Imams are not paid any remuneration and have no independent means of income.
The Government may then fix their emoluments on the basis as the Central Wakf Board may do for other mosques.
(749 C) The State Boards shall ascertain the income of each mosque and the number and nature of Imams required full time or part time and their payment is directed.
(749 E) The scheme shall take account of mosques which are small, or in the rural area, or which have no source of income and find 744 ways to raise income.
(749 G) The order for payment to Imams shall come into operation from 1 December 1993.
Every State Board shall implement the scheme.
(749 H, 750 A)
