The appellant was a teacher in the Department of Biochemistry of Rajendra Medical College.
He filed an application for his registration as a student in M.D.
The University forwarded the application to the Principal of Rajendra Medical College.
The Principal objected to appellant 's registration as he was not posted in any of the teaching posts in Rajendra Medical College.
Though the appellant was attached to the Department of Medicine, was a Biochemist attached to that Renal Unit dealing with the subject of Biochemistry.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court for a direction tot he University to permit him to submit his thesis in M.D. (Medicine) examination on the ground that he was a teacher.
The University took the stand that the appellant was not a teacher and he was not eligible for training in M.D. (General Medicine).
The High Court dismissed the appellants writ petition and held that he was not entitled for admission to the examination in M.D. as he did not such it 910 his thesis and did not produce a certificate of having undergone satisfactory training.
The High Court did not decide on the question whether he held a teaching post or not.
The appellant was granted permission to appear for M.D. (Medicine) examination after the University was satisfied that the appellant was holding a teaching post The respondent Association filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the permission given to the appellant to appear for the said examination, contending that he was not a teacher and that he did not undergo the necessary training for 2 years and that he did not do housemanship in General Medicine for one year.
The High Court allowed the writ petition on the ground that the appellant did not undergo training for 3 years prior to his application to appear for M.D. (Medicine) examination.
In this writ petition also the High Court did not decide whether the appellant was holding a teaching post.
The appellant filed this appeal by special leave against the High Court 's judgment.
Allowing the appeal, this Court HELD : 1.1.
On account of the interim order passed by the High Court, the appellant appeared for the examination.
The High Court has, however, by the impugned decision restrained the University from declaring his results in the examination.
(915 G) 1.2.
Since the High Court has not gone into the question as whether the appellant was appointed against a teaching post and has proceeded on the footing that he was appointed, it is not necessary for this Court to go into the said question.
(915 F) 2.1.
The facts of the case would reveal that this was a dispute relating to an individual and turned on the facts.
There was no question of law involved in it.
It is not understood how the respondent Association could convert an individual dispute into a public interest litigation.
(915 H) 2.2 Cases where what is strictly an individual dispute is sought to be 911 converted into a public interest litigation should not be encouraged.
The present proceeding is one of the kind.
(915 H) 3.1.
The requirement of the relevant regulation is that the candidate must have done one year 's housemanship prior to the admission to the Postgraduate degree in the same subject in which he wants to appear for the examination or atleast six months housemanship in the same Department and the remaining six months in the allied Department.
The period of training thus, shall be 3 years after full registration including one year of the.
housejob.(912 B) 3.2.
According to the rules, 4 years, (teaching experience in the College and the Hospital (which is always combined.
with practice in the Hospital) is considered equivalent to one year 's house job experience.
In the face of these facts, it is difficult to understand the stand taken by the State Government in the present proceedings.
(916 D) 3. 3.
The University bad on the facts of the case accepted the contention of the appellant that he had completed 3 years ' training.
It is not understood as to what ' state the State has in denying the said factual position.
(916 B)
