Respondent No. 2 was married to the appellant.
She went to reside with her parents in order to prepare for Higher Secondary Examination.
In the meantime she conceived.
The appellant and his family members asked her to undergo abortion but she refused, and a child was born to her.
In a petition under section 125, Cr.
P.C. riled by respondent No. 2, against her husband, the wife and the child were granted maintenance.
The appellant, disputing the paternity of the child, riled a criminal miscellaneous application for blood group test (if respondent No. 2 and the child.
It was claimed that if it was established that he was not father of the child he would not be liable to pay the maintenance.
The application was dismissed.
Appellant 's revision application was also rejected by the High Court.
The appellant filed the appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court 918 HELD: 1.1 Courts is India cannot order blood group test as a matter of course.
Unlike the English law* in India there is no special statute governing this.
Neither the Criminal Procedure Code nor the Evidence Act empowers the court ; to direct such a test, *Affiliation Proceedings Act.
, 1957; Family Reforms Act.
, 1969; Family Reforms Act, 1987.
1.2 Wherever applications are made for blood group test in order to have roving inquiry, the prayer cannot be entertained.
Bhartiraj vs Sumesh Sachdeo & Ors: , approved.
2.1 Section 112 read with s.4 of the Evidence Act debars evidence except in cases of non access for disproving the presumption of legitimacy and paternity.
It is a rebuttable presumption of lam, that a child born during the lawful wedlock is legitimate, and that access occurred between the parties.
This presumption can only be displaced by a strong preponderance of evidence and not by a mere balance of probabilities.
2.2 There must be a strong prima facie case in that the husband must establish non access in order to dispel the presumption arising under section 112 of the Evidence Act.
Vasu vs Santha: [1975] Kerala Law Times 533 and Raghunath vs Shardabai, , referred to.
Morris vs Davies ; cited.
3 The Court must carefully examine as to what would be the consequence of ordering the blood test; whether it will have the effect of branding a child as a bastard and the mother as an unchaste woman.
Dikhtar Jahan vs Mohammed Faroog.
; , referred to.
4.1 Blood group test is a useful test to determine the question of disputed paternity.
It can be relied upon by courts as a circumstantial evidence which ultimately excludes a certain individual as a father of the child.
4.2 No person can be compelled to give sample of blood for analysis and no adverse inference can he drawn against a person on account of such refusal.
919 Hargovind Soni vs Ramdulari, AIR [1986] M.P. 57, approved.
Vasu vs Santha, [1975] Kerala Law Times 533, Polavarapu Venkeeswarlu vs Polavarapu Subbayya, , referred to.
Subayya Gounder vs Bhoopala, AIR [1959] Madras 396; Venkateswarlu vs Subbayya, AIR [1951] Madras 910; Hukum Chand Boid vs Kamalan and Singh, Cal. 927, cited.
Wilson vs Wilson, Lancet [1942] 1.570; Re L 1968 [1] All England Reports 20; B. R. B. vs J. B., [1968] 2 All Eng.
Reports 1023, referred to Tauylor 's 'Principles and Practice of Medical Jurisprudence (Vol. 2); 'Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology (8th Edition) by Rai Bahadur Jaising P. Mod, cited.
`Forensic Sciences ' edited by Cyril H. Wecht, referred to.
In the instant case the purpose of the application for blood group test was nothing more than to avoid payment of maintenance, without making any ground whatever to have recourse to the test.
The High Court was right in confirming the order of the court below rejecting the application.
