Sangita was married to accused 2 on 28th April, 1984.
In the intervening night of 14115 September 1984, the accused found Sangita burning.
Sangita 's body suffered 100% burns and the smell of kerosene was noticed even in the spot panchnama.
There had been problems relating to dowry, and she had complained of ill treatment and of being beaten because of failure to pay the dowry amount.
The trial judge acquitted accused 1 4 her father in law, husband, mother in law and sister in law respectively.
The High Court examined the evidence a fresh, while castigating the trial judge for having gone merely on the statement of the Public Prosecutor that only a case under Ss. 306, 498 A and 34 was made out.
The High Court Convicted the accused under S.302 r/w 34, S.201 r/w 34 and 498 A r/w 34.
Partly dismissing the appeal, this Court.
HELD: 1.
It was a case of murder and not suicidal death.
It is not possible that there were no 'cries ' from the deceased while she was burning.
This is not possible even in a case of suicide.
Some of the symptoms of internal and external injuries are common in 879 case (if strangulation and burns.
But some symptoms that occur in the case of strangulation, and not in case of burns, are present in this case.
Dr. K.S. Narayan Reddy, The Essentials of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 6th edn.
p. 55, relied on.
The prosecution rests its case only on circumstantial evidence.
Therefore, it is necessary to examine the impelling circumstances attending the case and examine whether the cumulative effect of those circumstances negatives the innocence of the appellant ,; and serves a definite pointer towards their guilt and unerringly leads to the conclusion that with all human probability the offence was committed by the appellants and none else.
State of U.P. vs Dr. Ravindra prakash Mittal, JT(1992) 2 SC 114 at 121.
applied.
Taylor, Medical jurisprudence, relied on.
On an appreciation of the circumstances which arc established as being closely linked to one another, the complicity of appellants 1 and 2 is not in doubt.
But it is not necessary that appellants 3 and 4 also participated in the murder of the deceased.
They are given the benefit of doubt and accordingly acquitted.
