There were two parallel Services of Engineers in the Indian Railways.
One was the Indian Railways Service of Engineers (Class (I) who were subjected to competitive written and personality tests and appointed by the President of India.
The other Service was the temporary Assistant Engineers (later known as Temporary Assistant Officers) appointed by the Railway Board, on selection based (on interview alone.
In addition to the minimum educational qualifications which was the same for both the services three years experience as Civil Engineer was required for the Railway Service of Engineers.
The temporary Assistant Officers were gradually absorbed into the Indian Railway Service of Engineers and the Railway Board took a decision that they would be given weightage in seniority on the basis of half the total length of continuous service in working posts in Railways prior to their permanent absorption into Class I subject to a maximum weightage of five years.
Writ Petitions were filed in this Court by the Federation of Temporary Officers Association in a representative capacity seeking relief in their seniority status.
This Court dismissed the Writ Petitions holding that the classification of temporary, Assistant Officers separate from the Indian Railway Service 1019 Engineers Class I, was neither discriminatory nor violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution; and that the object of recruitment, methods of recruitment, appointing authority and training imparted being different, no question of their entitlement to equal rights arose fill they were absorbed into the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class 1.
This Court also approved ,the measures of the Railway Board in regard to giving weightage of half the length of service as temporary Assistant Officers subject to a maximum of five years.
Their claim for equal status for equal pay and equal work was also rejected.
(Katyani Dayal & Ors.
vs U.0.1.
; In the present Writ Petitions and Civil Appeals filed in a representative capacity, the relief claimed were on the same lines as in Katyani Dayal,s case.
As directed by this Court the affected parties were impleaded in their representative capacity, so that the decision of this.
Court would he binding on every member of both the classes of employees.
On behalf of the Petitioners/Appellants, it was contended that equal pay for equal work with equality in all other conditions of service including avenues of confirmation, absorption, promotion, pension and security have become inflexible postulates of service jurisprudence.
The respondents contended that what was being asked was a virtual review of Katyani Dayal 's case which could not be permitted.
It was also contended that principles of constructive res judicata would bar the re agitation of the issues decided in Katyani Dayal 's case if not the strict principles of res judicata ; and that when the matter has been settled in this particular service, its unsettling by means of a petition under Article 32 of the Constitution was impermissible.
Dismissing the matters, this Court HELD: 1.
The distinction between the two services was well marked in Katyani Dayal 's case and the important question of equality was once for all settled.
To find fault with it, at this juncture again on the touch stone of equality dimension would be to unsettle a settled position.
That venture is neither in the interest of justice nor in the interest of service.
When there has been complete absorption of the personnel of one service into the other, and the seniority of the absorbers is to he reckoned from their date of absorption as stipulated in their appointment letters with weightage of half the length of 1020 service subject to a maximum (of give years, it would otherwise be imprudent now.
at this point of time to dig up old issues, The rule or weightage also appears to be reasonable and this is a pattern which has been noticed and approved In many a Service.
Similarly when the dispute raised between the Officers in a representative capacity and Engineers riot so represented, still it was a dispute raised before this Court which has been decided finally.
(1026 B D) Katyani Dayal Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors,[1980] 3 SCR 139 referred to.
The dispute now sought to he raised under Article 32 of the Constitution between the Officers in a representative capacity and Engineer.% across also in a representative capacity is barred by principles of res judicata as also by the rule of Constructive res judicata.
(1026 D E) 3.
It cannot he said that the State is prohibited from creating separate channels of service.
Equally when absorption had been made possible and its pace quickened with weight age, it is difficult to find fault with the scheme at this point of time to look for a substitution, as that would unsettle a settled position, established more than a decade ago.
(1026 E F) Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association vs State of Maharashtra & Others ; , followed.
Raghunandan Prasad Singh vs Secretary, Home (Police) Department Government of Bihar and Ors. & Dr. O.Z Hussain vs Union of India,[1990] Supp.
SCC 688, referred to.
