The Director General, Ordnance Factories (D.G.) issued a Circular dated 6.11.1962 to the effect that the Diploma holders who have been appointed as Supervisor Grade 'B ' (technical) or in equivalent grades, should on completion of one year 's satisfactory service be promoted the post of Supervisor Grade 'A ' (Tech.) and the Diploma holders who worked satisfactorily as Supervisor 'A ' (Tech.) or in equivalent grades for 2 years should be promoted as Chargeman.
Subsequently the D.G. issued another Circular dated 20.1.1966 according to which promotions were to be in accordance with normal rules,i.e.
on the basis of their listing by the relevant Departmental Promotion ' Committee and not merely on satisfactory completition of 2 years continuous service as Supervisor 'A ' Grade or equivalent grades.
In effect, the first Circular was withdrawn by the second Circular.
In 1973 some Supervisors Grade 'Al riled a Writ Petition before the High Court claiming benefit of the first circular.
Without going into the merits of the controvery, a Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the Writ Petition on the ground of delay.
On appeal, a Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the Writ Petition on merits.
On further appeal this Court directed that the cases of those appellants be considered for promo906 907 tion as Chargeman Gr.
II and they promoted them, unless they were found unfit, from the dates on which they ought to have been promoted.
(Virendra Kumar & Ors.
vs U.O.I, C.A. No. 441/1981 decided on 2.2.81).
Thereafter the present appellants riled Writ Petitions before the High Court praying for the same relief as was granted by this Court in Virendra Kumar 's case.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petitions.
The Special Leave Petitions filed by the Union of India against the Judgment came to be dismissed.
Consequently.
the D.G. issued an order giving antedated seniority to the appellants for the purposes of promotion.
The appellants were also given deemed dates of promotion to post of chargeman Gr.11 from the dates when they completed two years of service as Supervisor Gr. 'A ' and consequent seniority in the other higher grades.
This resulted in some employees who were senior to the appellants in the cadre of Chargeman Gr.
II and other higher grades becoming junior to the appellants.
These employees who were 'adversely affected by the order of the D.G. giving ante dated seniority to the appellants and were not impleaded as parties at any stage of the litigation, challenged the DG 's order before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
The Tribunal allowed the application and set aside the DG 's order giving ante dated seniority to the appellants.
Aggrieved by the Judgment of the Tribunal, the appellants preferred the present appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
This Court has authoritatively laid down in Paluru 's case that Civil Appeal No. 441/81 Virendra Kumar vs U.O.I, was not correctly decided.
The appellants have throughout been basing their claim on Virendra Kumar 's case.
Once the base is knocked out by the judgment of this Court in Paluru 's case the appellants are left with no ground to sustain the order dated February 20/25, 1987 issued by the D.G. by which they were given ante dated seniority.
[917 B C] 1.2.
Even if it is assumed that the High Court judgment had become final with the dismissal of the SLP against it, and could Rot have been reviewed by the High Court or the Tribunal, it became final only between the parties inter se.
The first circular was issued in the year 1962.
The appellants riled writ petitions in the High Court twenty years thereafter seeking enforcement of the first circular.
The petitioners wanted the clock to be put back by two decades through the process of the Court.
All those 908 persons who were promoted in accordance with the rules during that long period and were not parties before the High Court could not be made to suffer for no fault of theirs.
On the other hand some employees challenged the order dated February 20/25, 1987 which affected them adversely within the period of limitation before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
In any case the judgment of this Court in Virendra Kumar having been over ruled in Paluru 's case, the appellants have neither the law nor the equity on their side.
The judgment of the Tribunal being in conformity with the law laid down by this Court in Paluru 's case there is no ground to interfere with the same.
[918 A D] Paluru Ramkrishnaiah & Ors. etc.
vs Union of India & Anr., ; , followed.
Virendra Kumar & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, Civil Appeal No. 441/81 decided on 2.2.1981, referred to.
