The respondent, who owned landed properties at Banaras in Uttar Pradesh and at Purnea in Bihar, was heavily indebted and applied to the Collector, Banaras under section 4 of the U. P. Encumbered Estates Act, 1934, for, liquidation of his debts.
The Collector, acting under section 6, forwarded the application to the Special judge, appointed under the Act who on March 21, 1940, passed after the enquiry directed by the Act three money decrees in favour of three creditors of the respondent and forwarded them to the Collector for execution.
Section 14(7) of the Act provided that such decrees were to be deemed to be decrees of a civil Court 365 of competent jurisdiction.
Section 24(3) of the Act provided that for purposes of execution against property outside U. P. such decrees were to be deemed to be in favour of the Collector.
The execution of the decrees was commenced by the Additional ' Collector, Banaras against the respondent 's properties in U. P. Thereafter, the Additional Collector applied to the Additional Civil judge, Banaras, and on January 4, 1947, got the said decrees transferred to the Subordinate judge, Purnea and on March 17, 1947, he applied to the Subordinate Judge for execution of the decrees by attachment and sale of the respondents properties at Purnea.
The Subordinate judge made an order directing execution to issue, but, on appeal, the High Court set aside the order on the ground that the Subordinate Judge had no jurisdiction to entertain the execution application.
Held, that the Subordinate judge Purnea had jurisdiction to execute the decrees.
By virtue of section 14(7) of the Act a decree of the Special judge was, within U. P., a decree for all purposes of the Code of Civil Procedure and could properly be transferred under section 39 Of the Code for execution to a Court outside U. P.
No question of extra territorial operation of the Act arose in the application of section 14(7) to the decrees as the Purnea Court was merely applying the U. P. Act to decrees passed in U. P.
For the purposes of execution and sale the Additional Collector was to be deemed to be the Collector as he exercised the Collector 's powers in this regard.
As such the applications for transfer and execution of the decree were properly made by the Additional Collector.
It was the same Court which exercised the powers of the Additional Civil Judge as also those of the Special judge.
The order of transfer of the decree made by the Additional Civil judge could be treated as having been made by the Special judge.
As such it was made by the same Court which passed the decrees and was a good order under section 39 of the Code.
The application for execution before the Subordinate judge, Purnea was made while execution proceedings in respect of the same decrees were pending before the Additional Collector, Banaras and was a continuation of the same.
No question of limitation could arise in respect of such an application.
