The Company after regular enquiry and pending permission of the Industrial Tribunal under section 33 of the , suspended some workmen without pay, whereupon the workmen filed applications under section 33A of the Act before the 'Industrial Tribunal on the ground that their suspension without pay beyond ten days was against the provisions of the Standing Orders governing their conditions of service to the effect that an employee might be suspended provided the suspension without pay, whether as punishment or pending enquiry, did not exceed ten days.
The Tribunal dismissed the workmen 's applications under section 33A and granted permission to the Company to dismiss the workmen concerned.
The workmen appealed.
The Appellate Tribunal upheld the order granting permission to dismiss the workmen but came to the conclusion that the words " pending enquiry " in cl. 27 Of the Standing Orders included proceedings before the Industrial Tribunal and that there was breach of the Standing Orders.
Held, that the employer could apply under section 33 Of the , for permission to dismiss an employee when after a regular enquiry he had come to the finding that the case against the employee was proved and that the punishment of dismissal was the proper punishment.
The Industrial Tribunal had not to enquire into the conduct of the employee or the merits of dismissal but see whether a Prima facie case had been made out and a fair enquiry made by the employer.
The time taken before the Tribunal in such proceedings was beyond the control of the employer.
Standing Orders were concerned with employers and employees and not with Tribunals.
In the instant case, the words " pending enquiry " in cl. 27 of the Standing Orders, referred only to the enquiry by the employer and not to the pro ceedings before the Tribunal.
The principle laid down in Lakshmi Devi Sugar Mill 's case that workmen would not be entitled to payment of wages during the whole period of suspension if the Tribunal gave permission to, dismiss them, would apply only to cases where there was a ban under section 33 and the employer had to apply under that section for lifting the ban after completing the enquiry.
720 Rampalat Chamay vs The Assam Oil Co. Ltd., (195 4) L.A.C. 78, dissented from.
The Automobile Products of India Ltd. vs Rukamji Bala, , referred to.
Lakshmi Devi SugaR Mills Ltd. vs Pt.
Ram Sarup, ; , followed and explained.
