Sub section (1) Of section 35 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, provided: the Income tax officer may on his own motion rectify any mistake apparent from the record and shall rectify any such mistake which has been brought to his notice by an assesses : Provided that no such rectification shall be made, having the effect of enhancing or reducing a 548 refund unless. the Income tax Officer. has given notice to the assessee of his.
intention so to do and has allowed him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
" The appellant, a private limited company, was assessed to income tax for the assessment year 1953 54 under the provisions of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, and as per the assessment order dated June 30, 1955, the amount of depreciation allowed under section 10(2)(vi) of the Act was Rs. 3,48,1O5.
On August 8, 1955, the appellant made an application before the Income tax Officer for rectification of the order under section 35 of the Act, pointing out certain mistakes in calculation in regard to the depreciation amount.
By his order of February 27, 1956, the Income tax Officer corrected the written down value of the different properties of the appellant and determined the total allowable depreciation to be Rs. 1,94,074.
The appellant challenged the order dated February 27, 1956, on the grounds, inter alia, (1) that he was not given a written notice of the intended rectification of the written down value, (2) that the provisions under which the Income tax Officer acted, i.e., section 35 of the Act, was not meant for the purpose of making corrections in written down values, the correct provision being section 34 which specifically refers to excessive depreciation, and (3) that, in any case, he had exceeded his jurisdiction under section 35 of the Act in calculating the depreciation on the written down value of the buildings and machinery of the appellant acting suo motu, and that he could correct only those mistakes which had been pointed out by it.
It was found that notice was given to the appellant of the intended determination of the written down value, though it was not a written notice, and that the matter was discussed with its representative.
Held : (i) that the object of the provision as to notice under section 35 Of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, is that no order should be passed to the detriment of an assessee without affording him an opportunity for being heard and that if, as a matter of fact,the assessee knew of the proceedings and the matter had been discussed with him, an adverse order would not be invalid merely because no written notice was given.
(2) that the word " record " used in the phrase " mistake apparent from the record" in section 35(I) of the Act refers not only to the order of assessment but comprises all proceedings on which the assessment order is based and the Income tax Officer is entitled for the purpose of exercising his jurisdiction under section 35 to look into the whole evidence and the law applicable to ascertain whether there was an error.
If he doubts the written down value of the previous year it is open to him to check up the previous calculations and, if he finds any mistake, to make fresh calculations in accordance with the law applicable including the rules made thereunder.
A mistake contemplated by this section is not one which is 549 to be discovered as a result of an argument but it is open to the Income tax Officer to examine the record including the evidence and if he discovers any mistake he is entitled to rectify the error provided that if the result is enhancement of assessment or reducing the refund, then notice has to be given to the assessee and he should be allowed a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Venkatachalam vs Bombay Dyeing & Mfg. Co., Ltd., ; , Commissioner of Income tax vs Khemchand Ramdas, [1938] L.R. 65 I.A. 236 and Sidhramappa Andannappa Manviv.
Commissioner of Income tax, , relied on.
