The question involved in this appeal was whether under the customary law of the Punjab a sister was a preferential heir in respect of her brother 's self acquired property, to a collateral.
The respondent, the sister, relied on a custom, which she termed a special custom, and on that basis claimed her brother 's property, and the appellant, a collateral of the 8th degree of her brother, resisted her claim relying solely on a general custom stated in paragraph 24 Of the Rattigan 's Digest of the Customary Laws of the Punjab to the effect that sisters were excluded by collaterals in the matter of inheritance to non ancestral property.
The Subordinate judge, and the District judge on appeal, held in favour of the appellant but the High Court reversed their decisions holding that, there was no such general custom as recorded by Rattigan and that it was in any event for the appellants to prove that custom and this he had failed to do.
The High Court also held that the respondent had succeeded in proving the custom set up by her.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the High Court was in error in placing the onus of proving the custom on him since the custom was a general custom as stated by Rattigan.
Held, that no distinction could be made between a general custom or other customs so far as the need of proof was con cerned and the ordinary rule was that all customs, general or otherwise, had to be proved unless by repeated recognition by the courts a custom had become entitled to judicial notice under section 57(1) of the Evidence Act.
Raja Rama Rao vs Raja of Pittapur, (1918) L.R. 45 I.A. 148, relied on.
Although there could be no doubt that Rattigan 's Digest was of the highest authority on questions of custom of the Pun jab, it was not possible, regard being had to the formidable array of conflicting decisions of the courts as to its existence, to take judicial notice of the custom mentioned in paragraph 24 of the Digest, without further proof.
Case law reviewed.
Although the respondent had in the plaint relied on a custom and termed it a special custom, that could not amount to an 782 admission which would obviate the necessity of proof of the general customs or its terms by the appellant.
Even supposing that the High Court was not correct in its finding that the respondent had proved the custom entitling her to succeed, as the custom set up by the appellant had not also been established, section 5 Of the , applied and the case had to be decided by the personal law of the parties.
The respondent was entitled to base her claim on the personal law although in her plaint she had relied on a custom.
The personal law of the parties was the Hindu law and the respondent was entitled to succeed under that law also.
Daya Ram vs Sohel Singh, 110 P.R. 1906, Abdul Hussein Khan vs Bibi Sona Dero, (1917) L.R. 45 I.A. 10 and Mst.
Fatima Bibi vs Shah Nawaz, Lah. 98, relied on.
