A habeas corpus application was made to the High Court alleging that one S had been illegally arrested and kept in unlawful custody without any charge being made against him and without obtaining remand from a Magistrate.
By way of a return the appellant, a sub Inspector of Police, filed a false affidavit controverting the allegations made in the application.
He was prosecuted and convicted under section 193, Indian Penal Code.
The appellant challenged his conviction on the grounds that: (i) as he was not bound under the law to file an affidavit, the case did not fall under section 191 of the Indian Penal Code and he could not be convicted under section 193 ; and (ii) the affidavit having been affirmed as true to the best of the knowledge and belief of the appellant it could not be said which part was true to his knowledge and which to his belief.
Held that, the appellant was rightly convicted.
It was not necessary for the application of section 191 of the Indian Penal Code that the accused should be bound under the law to make an affidavit.
If he chose to me one and bound himself on oath to state the truth he was liable under section 193 Of the Code if e made a false statement and it was no defence to say that he was not bound to enter the witness box or make an affidavit.
In the present case it was necessary for the appellant to file an affidavit as he was bound to place the facts and circumstances justifying 728 the detention which could only be done by an affidavit.
Ordinarily, where the detention is under orders of the detaining authority in exercise of his plenary powers or of a Court an affidavit may not be necessary in making the return but where it becomes necessary for the detaining authority to justify its action by disclosing facts it has to file an affidavit.
Held, further, that explanation 2 to section 191 of the Code brings a false statement affirmed to the belief of the accused also within the mischief of section 191 and thus makes it punishable under section 193 of the Code.
Emperor vs Lachmi Narain, I. L. R. 1947 All.
155, dis approved.
