In resisting the workmen 's claim for bonus for the year 1955 56 the appellant contended that in calculating gross profits for the purpose of the Full Bench formula the following items of income should be excluded : (i) Income earned by way of rent, light and power; (ii) estate revenue derived from sale of excess coconuts used in preparing oil grown in the appellant 's groves; (iii) profit from sale of empty barrels; and (iv) sale proceeds of tin cans, scraps, logs, planks, gunnies etc.
as they were extraneous income unrelated to the efforts of the workmen.
The appellant also claimed that a profit of Rs. 3 lacs appearing in the accounts due to a change in the method of valuation was no real profit due to the efforts of labour and should not be taken into account.
In calculating the available surplus the appellant claimed that it was entitled to 4% interest on the depreciation reserve used as working capital.
Held, that the four items were earned by the appellant in the normal course of its business and could no be excluded from the gross profits on the ground that it had not been proved that they were the result of the direct efforts of labour in the bonus year.
Though there must be contribution of the workmen in earning profits before they could be entitled to profit bonus, it was not necessary to establish direct connection between the efforts of the workmen and each item of profit earned.
Profits earned in the normal course of business were generally the result of the joint effort of capital and labour.
Income or profit may be extraneous if it either did not really arise in that year or it arose out of fortuitous circumstances altogether unconnected with the efforts of labour or arose out of sale of fixed or capital assets.
2 Mill Owners Association, Bombay vs The Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh, Bombay, , Shalimar Rope Works Mazdoor Union Howrah vs Shalimar Rope Works Ltd., Howrah, , referred to.
The profit of Rs. 3 lacs due to change in the method of accounting was extraneous income and had to be excluded.
It was not income in the normal course of business as it was not likely.
to arise again.
It had arisen out of fortuitous circumstances and had nothing whatsoever to do with the efforts of labour.
The appellant was entitled to a 4% return on the deprecia tion reserves used as working capital.
If reserves were not used for this purpose the concern would have to borrow money and pay interest thereon.
