The Income tax Officer found that the assessee, an unregis tered firm, had made a profit in the assessment year 1940 41.
He treated it as registered under section 23(5)(b) of the Act, assessed the partners and carried the profit to their individual returns, making no demand on the firm.
For the next two assessment years, however, the firm was assessed as unregistered firm.
For all the three assessment years, the Income tax Officer treated the firm as " resident and ordinarily resident ".
The firm appealed against all these assessments.
The appeals were all consolidated and heard together by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
He found that the firm was non resident, the computation of income made by the Income tax Officer was erroneous, that in the assessment year 1940 41 there was a loss and during the subsequent years the firm had made profits.
He, therefore, directed the Income tax Officer to modify the assessments accordingly.
Thereupon the Income tax Officer gave relief to the partners for the year 1940 41 and directed certain refunds to be made to them.
The firm was not satisfied and moved both the Income tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 987 found to have incurred a loss in the first of the three assessment years, it could not for that year be treated as a registered firm and was entitled to carry forward the loss to the subsequent years.
They declined to interfere on the ground that the direction of the Income tax Officer under section 23(5)(b), not being appealable, had become final and the time within which the original order of the Income tax Officer could be rectified had also run out.
The firm went up to the Commissioner and the Central Board of Revenue, but to no effect.
Thereafter it moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
The single Judge who heard the matter declined to interfere.
The Division Bench on appeal agreed with the single judge.
The firm appealed to this Court.
The question for decision was whether after the finding of profit made by the Income tax Officer had been turned to one of loss by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner on appeal, the original decision of the Income tax Officer to treat the firm as a registered one under section 23(5)(b) could remain intact.
Held, that since the Income tax Officer could treat an un registered firm as a registered one under section 23(5)(b) of the Indian Income tax Act only if there was a profit, the reversal of the finding of profit made by him by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner must automatically take away the jurisdiction of the Income tax Officer to act under that section and his order made thereunder must fall through.
It made no difference in the instant case, whether the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 's order was one under cl.
(a) Of section 31(3) or under cl.
(b) of that section, for the effect of the order in law in either case would be the same, namely, the annulment of the assessment resulting in the restoration of the case back to its original position.
It was not correct to suggest that under proviso (d) to section 24(2) Of the Act the losses of an unregistered firm could be carried to the partners ' account as if the firm was registered.
That proviso was not intended to enable the Income tax Officer to forego the obligation laid on him by cl.
(b) Of section 23(5), i.e., to find out the interest of the Revenue, and thus to render the words 'during any year in proviso redundant.
The effect of the provisions of section 23(5)(b) and the proviso (d) to section 24(2), which must be read together, was that the proviso was to be invoked subject to the conditions under section 23(5)(b) to obtain more revenue for the State by applying section 23(5)(a).
Although the Appellate Assistant Commissioner could not have interfered with the order made by the Income tax Officer under section 23(5)(b) of the Act in an appeal against that order, the position must be different when the assessment itself was subject to appeal under section 31 Of the Act, and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner under section 31(4) authorised the Income tax Officer to modify the assessment in the light of his direction.
It would, therefore, be the duty of the Income tax Officer to consider de 988 novo whether in the altered circumstances the provisions of section 23(5)(b) of the Act could at all be applied.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Tribune Trust, Lahore, , Commissioner of Income tax vs McMillan & Co., ; and Commissioner of Income tax vs Amritlal Bhogilal & CO., , considered.
