The appellant manufactured hume pipes and had factories in different parts of India, Pakistan and Ceylon.
For determining the available surplus for the payment of bonus for the year 1954 55 the appellant claimed deductions as prior charges on account of (i) losses suffered on the Lahore factory written off, (ii) expenditure on patents written off, and (iii) debenture redemption reserve.
It also claimed 6% return on the preference shares as return on paid up capital.
The losses on the Lahore factory had been incurred in the previous years which had been carried forward from year to year and had been written off as irrecoverable in the bonus year.
The amounts spent on the purchase of the patents which had been worked off in the previous years had also been written off in the bonus year.
The appellant had issued debentures in 1942 43 redeemable in 1962 63 and claimed Rs. 3,50,000 as the annual contribution towards the redemption reserve.
The appellant bad issued preference shares on which the shareholders, under the terms of the issue, were not entitled to more than 5%, but the appellant claimed a return of 6% on these hatres also as return on paid up 949 capital as provided in the Full Bench formula.
The dispute regarding bonus had been raised by the workmen of the Wadala factory alone, the workmen of other factories having settled the matter had been paid the agreed bonus.
The respondents claimed that the bonus calculations should not be made on the basis of All India figures but on the basis of the actual amounts paid or payable by the appellant under the settlements.
Held, that the losses on the Lahore factory and the patents written off could not be allowed as prior charges as they were merely debits in connection with the working of previous years.
Nor could the amount on account of the debenture redemption reserve be allowed as a prior charge as no such charge was envisaged by the Full Bench formula of the Labour Appellate Tribunal ; but this amount could be taken into consideration when distributing the available surplus among the various interests entitled thereto.
In determining the available surplus the Full Bench formula must be adhered to in its essential particulars as otherwise there would be no stability or uniformity of practice.
A deduction of more than 5% return on the preference shares could not be allowed as that was the maximum return which the shareholders could get on these shares.
Even though the Full Bench formula mentioned 6% return on paid up capital it was not to be literally construed and the Tribunal could, if the circumstances warranted, increase or decrease the rate.
In calculating the actual amount of bonus to be paid calcu lations had to be made on the basis of All India figures otherwise the respondents would have an advantage over those workmen with whom settlements had been made and would get larger amounts of bonus merely by reason of the fact that the appellant had managed to settle the claims of those workmen at lesser figures.
