A music performance attended by a large number of persons including two police informers Bankey and Asa Ram was going on on a platform in front of the house of one Ram Saroop.
At that time there was a full moon and the light of a gas lamp and several lanterns.
The informers had placed their guns on a cot close to the platform and one Bharat Singh was sitting on that cot.
The accused along with 15 or 20 persons suddenly arrived armed with fire arms to kill the informers and stood behind a well on the southern side, from where they shouted that no one should run away and advanced firing shots.
Two persons were killed on the spot.
Bharat Singh was hit and he ran northwards pursued by the culprits and was also shot dead.
The culprits turned over the dead bodies and on seeing Bharat Singh 's face they exclaimed that Asa Ram informer had been killed.
They then passed in front of Ram Saroop 's house and disappeared.
While going they carried away Bankey 's gun from the cot.
The appellants and seven others were sent up for trial for this occurrence.
At the trial the defence alleged that prosecution had developed its case.
The police statements of the eye witness did not mention the facts regarding the scrtitiny of the (lead bodies and the presence of the gas lantern, and the defence counsel put the following two questions with respect to these omissions to the first eye witness produced : 1.
" Did you state to the Investigating Officer that the gang rolled the dead bodies of Nathi, Saktu and Bharat Singh and scrutinised them and did you tell him that the face of Asa Ram resembled with that of the deceased Bharat Singh ?" 2. " Did you state to the Investigating Officer about the presence of the gas lantern ?" The Sessions judge disallowed the questions and on account of this order similar questions were not put to the other eye witnesses.
The Sessions judge convicted the appellants under section 302 Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to death.
The appellants appealed to the High Court and made an application alleging that the Sessions judge had not allowed the defence counsel to put omissions amounting to material contradictions to 876 the eye witnesses and prayed that the eye witnesses be summoned so that the questions disallowed may be put to them.
Though the High Court held that the omissions amounted to contradictions and that the Sessions judge had wrongly dis allowed cross examination with respect thereto, it found that even after ignoring these two circumstances there were other facts which showed that the culprits had come close to the eye witnesses and that they had unmistaken opportunity of identifying the appellants in the light of the full moon and the lanterns.
The High Court accordingly dismissed the application for summoning the eye witnesses holding that no prejudice had been caused to the appellants by the disallowance of the cross examination in respect of omissions and also dismissed the appeals and confirmed the convictions and sentences of the appellants.
Held, (Per SINHA, KAPUR, SARKAR and SUBBA RAO, JJ.) that the omissions did not amount to contradictions and that the Sessions judge was right in disallowing cross examination in respect thereof.
A statement to the police could be used under section 162 of the Code only for the purpose of contradicting a statement in the witness box under the second part of section 1, Evidence Act, but it could not be used for the purpose of cross examining the witness under the first part of section 145.
A statement made to the police but not reduced to writing, could not be used for any purpose, not even for contradiction.
It was incorrect to say that all omissions in regard to important features of the incident which were expected to be included in the statement made before the police, should be treated as contradictions.
An omission in the police statement could amount to a statement and be used as a contradiction only when (i) it was necessarily implied from the recital or recitals found in the statement, (ii) it was negative aspect of a positive recited in the statement or (iii) when the statement before the police and that before the Court could not stand together.
It was for the the trial judge to decide in each case, after comparing the part or parts of the statement recorded by the police with that made in the witness box, whether the recital intended to be used for contradiction was one of the nature indicated above.
In Ye Ponnusami Chetty, Mad. 475 ; In 'Ye Guruva Vannan, I.L.R. ; Ram Bali vs State, A.I.R. 1952 All 289; Badri Chaudhry vs State, A.I.R. 1926 Pat. 20, Sakhawat vs Crown, I.L.R. , referred to.
Rudder vs The State, A.I.R. 1957 All. 239; Mohinder Singh vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1932 Lah.
103; Yusuf Mia vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1938 Pat.
579; State of M. P. vs Banshilal Behari, A.I.R. 1958 M.P. 13, disapproved.
Held, (Per IMAM and HIDAYATULLAH, JJ.) that the questions that were put by the defence counsel were properly ruled out by the Sessions judge as they did not set up contradictions, but attempted to obtain from the witnesses versions of what they 877 had stated to the police which were then to be contradicted.
The reference to section I45 Evidence Act in section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure brings in the whole of the manner and machinery Of section I45 and not merely the second part.
An accused is entitled to cross examine the witness under the first part of section 145 with respect to the police statement.
Relevant and material omissions amount to vital contradictions which can be established by crossexamination and confronting the witness with his previous statement to the police.
In the circumstances of the present case even if the defence had been allowed to put questions concerning the omissions, it would not have affected the credibility of the witnesses and no prejudice was caused to appellants by the disallowance of the questions.
