On March 23, 1948, while certain disputes were under adjudication the workmen pressed the same demands upon the company for immediate solution without awaiting the award of the tribunal.
The company refused to meet the demands and thereupon the workmen went on an illegal sit down strike.
The company closed the works indefinitely and notified that all those workmen who had resorted to the illegal strike were discharged from that date.
On July 5 the company notified that the works would open on July 6 and all old employees could apply for reengagement upto July 21.
A majority of them applied for being retaken and all those who applied upto July 21 were taken but those who applied after that date were refused.
On November 18, 1953, the Government made a reference in respect of the reinstatement Of 250 old workmen who had not been retaken.
No list of the 250 workmen was sent to the tribunal nor was such a list filed even during the adjudication proceedings but after the arguments on behalf of the company were over a carelessly prepared list Of 220 persons was filed before the tribunal by the workmen on December 14, 1953.
The Tribunal ordered reinstatement without specifying who were to be reinstated.
It directed the company to give a general notice notifying the strikers to come and join their duties on a fixed date and to reinstate those who applied within the time allowed.
On appeal, the Labour Appellate Tribunal upheld the order of reinstatement in respect Of 15 workmen only.
Held, that there was no reason for ordering reinstatement of any of the workmen on such a vague reference made after such an unreasonable delay.
It was reasonable that disputes should be referred as soon as possible after they had arisen and after conciliation proceedings had failed, particularly in cases of wholesale discharge of workmen followed by fresh recruitment of labour.
Though the workmen were discharged during the pendency of a dispute in violation of section 33 of the , the remedy of the workmen was to apply under section 33 A of the Act; but that was not done.
This defect in the discharge of the workmen could be ignored in the circumstances of this case on account of the illegal strike, the failure to 151 avail of the remedy under section 33 A and the delay and vagueness of the reference which all show that the workmen were not interested in reinstatement.
