These appeals by special leave arose from applications made by the respondents, who were employed as timekeepers in the time office of the Central Railway Workshop and Factory, Parel, Bombay, claiming payment of overtime wages under the (4 of 1936).
The case of the respondents was that they were workers within the meaning of section 2(1) of the (LXIII Of 1948) and as such were entitled to overtime wages under section 59 of the said Act.
Alternatively, they urged that even if they were not workers within the meaning of section 2(1) of the said Act, they would nevertheless be entitled to overtime wages under the section 59 by reason Of section 70 of the Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, 1948 (Bom.
79 of 1948).
The validity of the claim on both the grounds was disputed by the appellant.
The Authority under the found that only four of the respondents, who were required to do the work of progress timekeepers, could claim the status of workers within the meaning Of section 2(1) Of the and the rest were merely employees of the workshop, but the Authority accepted the alternative case made by the respond ents and directed the appellant to file a statement showing the overtime wages due to each of the respondents and ordered it to pay the same.
Held, that the Authority was right in the view that it took Of section 70 Of the Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, 1948, and its decision must be affirmed.
On a proper construction Of section 70 Of the Act it is clear that the first part of the section excludes a factory and its employees from the operation of the Act; but the second part makes the relevant provisions of the applicable to them.
The non obstante clause in the section shows that the employees in a factory, although they might not be workers within the meaning Of section 2(1) of the , are entitled to claim overtime wages as provided for by that Act.
It is not correct to say that section 4 Of the Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, 1948, has the effect of excluding the operation Of section 70 Of the Act.
Section 4 applies only to establishments and not to factories; but even if it applied, to factories 18 138 that cannot materially affect the application Of section 70 which is intended to operate not withstanding the other provisions of the Act.
Consistently with its policy, the Act, which provides for overtime wages for employees in all establishments, provides for overtime wages for employees in factories as well by making the relevant provisions of the applicable to them.
