The respondents, who were non residents carrying on business at Secunderabad within the territories of the Nizam of Hyderabad, were acting as agents of two firms in Bombay and Madurai, in British India, for the supply of certain goods to the Nizam 's Government.
In respect of the Commission due to the respondents by the firms the agreement between the parties was that the amounts were to be paid to the respondents in cash or by cheques at Secunderabad.
For these amounts cheques drawn by the firms on the Bombay and Madras branches, respectively, of the Imperial Bank of India, were sent by post at Bombay and Madurai to the respondents at Secunderabad, and when received, they were credited in their books of account, the cheques being sent to their banker there for collecting and crediting to their account.
For the assessment year 1945 1946 the Income tax Officer, Berhampur (in British India), assessed these sums as taxable income holding that the amount was received in British 869 India and not at Secunderabad.
The Appellate Tribunal found that all the cheques received at Secunderabad by the respondents were treated by them as payment.
The respondents claimed that in view of the agreement between the parties that the amount of commission should be paid at Secunderabad, when the cheques were sent by post, the post office was the agent of the debtor and not of the respondents, that the amount must be treated as having been received when the post office delivered the cheques to the respondents, and that, consequently, the amount cannot be treated as having been received in British India.
The Income tax authorities relied on the decision in Commissioner of Income tax vs Ogale Glass Works Ltd., [1955] I S.C.R. 185.
Held, that in the case of payment by cheques sent by post the determination of the place of payment would depend upon the agreement between the parties or the course of conduct of the parties.
If it is shown that the creditor authorised the debtor either expressly or impliedly to send a cheque by post the property in the cheque passes to the creditor as soon as it is posted.
But where, as in the present case, the agreement was that the amount was to be paid at Secunderabad, outside British India, when the cheques were received by the respondents there the amount must be deemed to have been received at that place, and, therefore, the amount was not liable to be taxed in British India.
Commissioner of Tncome tax vs Ogale Glass Works Ltd., , distinguished.
