On September 7, 1952, the appellant went to Dum Dum Aerodrome to board a plane for Hong Kong.
On his search by the customs authorities a sum of RS.
25,000 was recovered from him which he had not declared in his declaration form and for which he had no permit from the Reserve Bank of India for taking out of India.
On September II, 1952, the Reserve Bank authorised Inspector Mitra to move the Additional District Magistrate, 24 Parganas under section 19(3) Of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, for permission to proceed against the appellant.
On September 16, 1952, Mitra applied to the Magistrate for a search warrant and for a warrant of arrest and both warrants were issued.
The appellant was arrested and released on bail with a direction to appear before the Magistrate on September 19 On September 19, the Magistrate granted bail to the appellant but refused him exemption from personal attendance before the Court and granted time till November 19, 1952, for completing the investigation.
This time was extended upto January 2, 1953 and then upto February 2, 1953.
In the meantime on January 27, 1953, Mitra was authorised under section 23(3)(b)) Of the Act to file a complaint against the appellant.
The complaint was filed on February 2, 1953, before the Additional District Magistrate who transferred the case to a Magistrate I Class for trial.
On the same day the Magistrate I Class recorded the presence of the appellant, allowed his application for reduction of security and fixed March 26, and 27, 1953, for evidence.
Upon conclusion of the trial the Magistrate acquitted the appellant but on appeal the Calcutta High Court convicted him.
The appellant contended that the entire trial was without jurisdiction as the Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence on September 16, 1952, without there being a complaint in writing by a person authorised as required by section 23(3) of the Act.
Held, that cognizance of the offence was taken by the Additional District Magistrate on February 2, 1953, after the complaint had been filed and the trial was valid.
As to when cognizance is taken of an offence will depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Mere issuing of a search warrant or warrant of arrest for the purposes of investigation did not, by 94 themselves, amount to taking of cognizance.
Cognizance was taken when a Magistrate applied his mind for the purpose of proceeding under section 200 and subsequent sections of Ch.
XVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure or under section 204 Of Ch.
XVII of the Code.
In the present case cognizance was taken when on February 2, 1053, the Additional District Magistrate applied his mind to the case with a view to issuing a process and sent the case for trial to another magistrate.
Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, West Bengal vs Abani Kumar Banerji, and R. R. Chari vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , applied.
The facts found clearly established that the appellant attempted to take out of India the currency notes in question, and such attempt was also an offence.
The High Court had rightly rejected his explanation that he had applied to the Reserve Bank for a permit to take the currency notes out of India and that as the permit had not been received he had handed over the notes to the customs authorities for safe custody.
