The appellant was the lessee under Praga Industries and took on lease buildings and machinery for five years with option of renewal.
The subject matter of dispute for adjudication was with regard to the questions about (1) the quantum of bonus payable to the workmen for the year 1954, and (2) fixation of scale of wages with graded annual increments for different categories of workmen.
In view of the fact that the lease in its favour was due to expire shortly, the appellant had suggested to the Tribunal that the question of classifying the workmen into skilled and unskilled workmen and providing for systematic grades of pay with increments may conveniently be deferred to a future date; the 21 162 respondents agreed to this proposal and so both the parties represented to the Tribunal that they would be satisfied if an interim order was made providing for the increment in the wages of the workmen.
Accordingly, the Tribunal refrained from fixing any wage structure, and as an interim measure, ordered increment of wages at 4 per cent.
and directed the appellant to grant such an increment every year until the workmen were classified and their pay scales were introduced to reach a particular maximum.
The above increment applied to the monthly, time and piece rated workmen.
The appellant challenged the propriety of the course adopted by the Tribunal and contended that the Tribunal was asked to fix a wage structure, but instead it had passed merely an interim order which was irregular.
The appellant also contended that the claim for the additional bonus for the year 1954 by the workmen was not justified as the financial position of the appellant was not satisfactory, and it was in debts and had not even paid rent due to the lessor, and in fact, had ploughed back the amount of rent due into the business as working capital.
The appellant also resisted the direction for payment of bonus on the ground that the award involved an unfair distribution of the available surplus and claimed rehabilitation charges for the leased property and machinery and interest on the amount of unpaid rent.
Held, that where the parties themselves represented to the Tribunal that the question of classifying respondents into skilled and unskilled workmen and providing for systematic grades of pay with increments may be conveniently deferred to a future date and they would be satisfied with a reasonable interim order providing for increment in the wages of the workmen, it was not open to the parties to challenge the award based on such representation at a later stage.
That although generally a wage structure with annual increments was not provided for piece rate workers, who are paid for the work they do, the rate of wages fixed for such workers could legitimately be revised on a proper case being made out in that behalf.
Held further, that where an amount earmarked as due for payment for some other purpose was utilised as working capital, it should carry interest, even though shown as liability in the profit and loss account and the same should be taken into consideration for arriving at the surplus available for the purposes of bonus.
That no prior charges for rehabilitation could be allowed where land, machinery and building for business were taken on lease.
Where new machinery was purchased the amount of rehabilitation was covered by the depreciation allowed.
