R was the karta of the Hindu undivided family which became interested in a business concern which was then being carried on by others.
With a view to taking over the said business as a going concern, a company was floated with R as one of the promoters.
Pursuant to an agreement with the vendors.
of the business and in anticipation of the incorporation of the company, R on behalf of the company, took over the concern, carried it on and supplied the finance at all stages out of the joint family funds.
On December 19, 1930 the contemplated company was incorporated under the Indian Companies Act as 321 ' a private company with limited liability, in which of the total 950 ordinary shares, R had 326 shares and his brother 356 shares.
The Articles of Association of the company provided for the appointment of R as the first managing director of the company.
Prior to the accounting year relevant to the assessment year I943 44 the amount received by R as managing director 's remuneration was credited in the books of the Hindu undivided family just as the dividends on the shares held in the names of R and his brother had been done.
For the assessment year I943 44 it was claimed that the amount which R received as the managing director 's remuneration in the relevant accounting year was his personal earnings and that it should not be added to the income of the Hindu undivided family, but the Income tax Officer rejected this claim.
It was contended for the assessee that under the Indian Companies Act a Hindu undivided family cannot, by reason of the definition given in section 2(9 A) be appointed a managing agent of company and that the office of managing director involves a personal element and the appointment of a managing director must necessarily be of a particular person for his personal skill and other qualities and therefore the remuneration received by him must be his personal earnings.
Held, that though vis a vis the company the managing director was undoubtedly the individual person who was appointed as such and the company was not concerned with the managing director 's Hindu undivided family or the members thereof, the question whether the amount received by the karta by way of managing director 's remuneration was his personal income or was the income of the Hindu undivided family arises as between the karta and the members of his family and would depend on whether it was earned with the help of joint family assets.
In the present case, on the facts found that the promotion of the company, the taking over of the concern and the financing of it were all done with the help of the joint family funds and that R did not contribute anything out of his personal funds, held that the managing director 's remuneration received by R was, as between him and the Hindu undivided family, the income of the latter and should be assessed in its hands.
Kaniram Hazarimal vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, ; V. D. Dhanwatay vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madhya Pradesh and Bhopal, In re Haridas Purshottam, and Gokul Chand vs Humam Chand Nath Mal, (192I) 48 I.A. 162, relied on.
Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs section N. N.
Sankaralinga IYer,l ; Murugappa Chetty vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, ; Sardar Bahadur Indra Singh vs Commissioner of Incomc tax, Bihar and Orissa, 41 322 and Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa vs Darsaram, , distinguished.
