Section 2(b) of the Delhi and Ajmer Merwara Rent Control Act 1947, provided as follows: , " section 2.
In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in in the subject or context, (a). . . . . . . . . . (b) Premises ' means any building or part of a building which is, or is intended to be, let separately for use as a residence or for commercial use or for any other purpose. but does not include a room in a dharamshala, hotel or lodging house.
" The respondent occupied two rooms in the appellant 's hotel, described as the Ladies ' and Gents ' Cloak Rooms, where he used to carry on his business as a hair dresser.
The document executed by the parties purported to be one as between a licenser and licensee and provided, inter alia, that the respondent was to pay an annual rent of Rs. 9,600 in four quarterly installments, which was later reduced to Rs. 8,400 by mutual agreement.
The respondent made an application for standardisation of rent under section 7(1) of the Delhi and Ajmer Merwara Rent Control Act, 1947, and the Rent Controller of Delhi fixed the rent at Rs. 94 per month.
On appeal by the appellant, the I District judge reversed the order of the Rent Controller and dismissed the application holding that the Act did not apply.
The High Court in revision set aside the order of the District judge and restored that of the Rent Controller, holding that the agreement created a lease and not a license and that section 2 of the Act did not exempt the two rooms from the operation of the Act.
The two questions for determination in this appeal were, (1) whether the agreement created a lease or a license and, (2) whether the said rooms were rooms in a hotel within the meaning of section 2(b) of the Act.
Held, (Per section K. Das and Sarkar, jj., Subba Rao, J. dissenting), that the rooms let out by the appellant to the respondent were rooms in a hotel within the meaning of section 2(b) of the AjmerMerwara Rent Control Act, 1947, and were as such excluded from the purview of the Act and the respondent was not entitled to claim standardisation of rent under its provisions.
Per section K. Das, j In order that a room may be 'a room in a hotel ' within the meaning of the Act, it must fulfill two conditions, (1) it must be part of the hotel in the physical sense and, (2) its user must be connected with the general purpose of the hotel of which it is a part, 369 A hair dresser 's business provided one of the amenities of a modern hotel and as such it was connected with the business of the hotel.
There could be no doubt from the terms of the agreement executed by the parties in the instant case that it was a lease and not a licence.
Per Sarkar, J.
The words "room in a hotel" in section 2(b) of the Act must be given their plain meaning and a room in a hotel must, therefore, mean any room in a building in the whole of which the business of a hotel was carried on.
Per Subba Rao, J.
Although the document executed by the parties was apparently in a language appropriate to a licence, the agreement between them, judged by its substance and real intention, as it must be, left no manner of doubt that the document was a lease.
It had all the characteristics that distinguished it from a license, namely, (1) that it created an interest in the property in favour of the respondent, and, (2) it gave him exclusive possession thereof, which, in the absence of any circumstances that negatived it, must indicate a clear intention to grant a lease.
Errington vs Errington, ; and Cobb vs Lane, , referred to.
The words 'room in a hotel ', properly construed, must mean a room that was part of a hotel and partook of its character and did not cease to do so even after it was let out.
Consequently, where a hotel, as in the instant case, occupied the entire building, and rooms were let out for carrying on a business different from that of a hotel, such rooms could not fall within purview Of section 2 of the Act.
There could be no reasonable nexus in this case between a hair dresser 's business and that of a hotel as there was nothing in the document in question to prevent the tenant from carrying on any other business, or to bind him to give any preferential treatment to the lodgers, who could take their chance only as general customers, the tenant 's only liability being to pay the stipulated rent.
