The appellants, who were the managements of the three hotels, decided to dismiss some of their workmen who were found guilty of misconduct as a result of enquiries held by them and suspended them without pay pending the receipt of the permission of the Industrial Tribunal under section 33 Of the .
The workmen applied to the Industrial Tribunal for the grant of interim relief pending disposal of the applications and the Tribunal granted the relief prayed for amounting to full wages and a sum of Rs. 25 per head per month in lieu of food.
The managements appealed against such grant, but the Labour Appellate Tribunal dismissed the appeal .
The appellants came up to this court by special leave.
The two questions for ,decision in the appeals were, (1) whether any wages were at all payable to the suspended workmen pending permission being sought under section 33 to dismiss them and the decision of the applications under section 33 Of the Act, and, (2) whether the Industrial Tribunal was competent to grant interim relief except by an interim award that was published.
Held, that it was well settled that under the ordinary law of master and servant the power to suspend the servant without 477 pay could not be implied as a term in an ordinary contract of service between the master and the servant but must arise either from an express term in the contract itself or a statutory provision governing such contract.
Hanley vs Pease & Partners, Limited, ; Wallwork vs Fielding and Ors.
, ; Secretary of State for India in Council vs
Surendra Nath Goswami, I.L.R. and Rura Ram vs Divisional Superintendent, N. W. R., I.L.R. VII (1954) Punj. 415, referred to.
But section 33 of the , which took away the right of the employer to dismiss the employee except with the permission of the Industrial Tribunal, introduced a fundamental change in industrial law in modification of the common law by empowering the employer by implication to suspend the contract of employment and thus relieve himself of the obligation to pay the wages and the employee of rendering service, where, as a result of a proper enquiry, he came to the conclusion that an employee should be dismissed.
In the peculiar circumstances created by the enactment of section 33 Of the Act it was just and fair that Industrial Tribunals, which had the power to go beyond the ordinary law of master and servant, should imply such a term in the contract of employment.
The result, therefore, would be that if the Tribunal granted the permission, the suspended contract would come to an end and there would be no further obligation on the part of the employer to pay any wages after the date of suspension.
If on the other hand, the permission was refused.
the workmen would be entitled to all their wages from the date of suspension.
Western India Automobile Association vs The Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, and Rohtas Industries Ltd. vs Brijnandan Pandey, ; , referred to.
Lakshmi Devi Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Pt.
Ram Sarup, ; ; The Management of Ranipur Colliery vs Dhuban Singh, C.A. 768/57, decided on 20 4 59, M/s. Sasa Musa Sugar Works (P) Ltd. vs Shobrati Khan, C. As.
746 and 747/57, decided on 29 4 59 and Phulbari Tea Estate vs Its Workmen, [1960] (1) S.C.R. 32 explained and relied on.
But the employer 's power of suspension could not take away the power of the Tribunal to grant interim relief to the workmen under the Act, the words " incidental thereto " occurring in section 10(4) of the Act made it clear that interim relief, where admissible, could be granted as a matter incidental to the main question under reference, although it might not be expressly mentioned in the terms of the reference.
It is not necessary to decide whether an interim relief of this nature amounted to an interim award.
Even assuming that the Industrial Tribunal could not grant interim relief except by an interim award which required publication that could not preclude 478 this Court from granting interim relief in the same manner as the Industrial Tribunal could and sections 15, 17 or 17A could have no of application to such an order passed by this Court.
Ordinarily interim relief could not be the whole relief the workmen would get in case of final success and the appellants should not be made to pay more than half the amount adjudged by the Industrial Tribunal as interim relief in these cases.
