The relations between one G and his wife were strained and she went to live with her father B and her brother V, the appellant.
G, with three others, went to the quarter of B and he went inside and came out dragging his reluctant wife behind him.
She caught hold of the door and G started pulling her.
At this the appellant shouted to his father that G was adamant and thereupon B replied that he should be beaten.
The appellant took out a knife from his pocket and stabbed G once.
The knife penetrated the heart of G and he died.
B and the appellant were 647 tried for the murder of G; B was acquitted and the appellant was convicted under section 304 Part II Indian Penal Code and sentenced to three years rigorous imprisonment.
The appellant contended that he had acted in the right of private defence of person under section 100 fifthly Indian Penal Code, which extended to the causing of death as G had assaulted his wife with the intention of abducting her.
The respondent urged that section 100 fifthly applied only when the abduction was of such a nature as was punishable under the Penal Code.
Held, that the appellant had the right of private defence of the body of his sister which extended to the causing of death of G.
The extended right under section 100 arose when there was the offence of assault of one of the types mentioned in the six clauses of that section.
It was not necessary that the intention with which the assault was committed must always bean offence itself.
The word " abduction " used.
in the fifth clause of section 100 meant nothing more than what was defined as " abduction " in section 362, and it was not necessary, to get the protection of this clause, that the abduction must be of a type punishable under the Penal Code.
Further, the appellant had not inflicted more harm than was necessary and was not guilty of any offence.
Emperor vs Ram Saiya, I.L.R. 1948 All.
i65, overruled.
jagat Singh vs King Emperor, A.I.R. 1923 Lah.
155, Daroga Lohar vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1930 Pat.
347, Sakha vs The State, I.L.R and Dayaram Laxman vs State, A.I.R I953 Madhya Bharat 52, referred to.
