A complaint was filed against seven persons under SS. 409, 465, 467, 471 and 477A of the Indian Penal Code.
After examining the complainant summonses were issued to the accused to answer a charge under section 406. 'The trial started as in a warrant case; prosecution witnesses were examined and cross examined and the statements of the accused were recorded, and the Magistrate heard arguments on the question of framing charges.
Thereafter, he framed charges under SS. 409 and 465 read with SS. 471 and 477A, and without giving previous intimation of his intention to do so, passed an order committing the appellants to the Court of Sessions.
The appellants, contended that the commitment was illegal because the case having begun as a warrant case it was incumbent upon the Magistrate, when he decided to commit the case to the Court of Session, to follow the procedure provided in Ch.
XVIII Code of Criminal Procedure, but he failed to comply with the provisions of SS. 208 to 213 of.
737 that Chapter.
The complainant urged that even if the provi sions of SS. 208 to 213 had not been complied with no prejudice was caused to the appellants and the commitment could not be( quashed.
Held, that the commitment order was illegal as the Magistrate had failed to comply with the provisions of section 208 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The proceedings having begun as in a warrant case, if the Magistrate, at a subsequent stage, was of the view that the case should be committed to the Court of Sessions, he had to act under section 347(1) of the Code and to follow the procedure prescribed for inquiries under Ch.
XVIII of the Code.
When, in the present case, the Magistrate decided to commit the case, he should have refrained from framing the charge and should have informed the accused of his intention to commit and should have called upon the accused to produce defence evidence, if any.
The failure of the Magistrate to intimate his decision to commit to the accused deprived them of the right to produce defence evidence, if any, under section 208.
The denial of this right was itself sufficient to cause prejudice to the accused and failure of justice inasmuch as the accused were prevented from leading evidence which might have induced the Magistrate not to frame the charge against them.
Subramania Iyer vs King Emperor, (1901) L.R. 28 I.A. 257 Pulukuri Kotayya vs King Emperor, (1948) L.R. 74 I.A. 65, and ' Narain Rao vs The State of Andhra Pradesh, , referred to.
