The cement factory in question which is in the State of Bihar belonged to the appellant company and a limestone quarry owned by the same company As situate about a mile and a half from the factory.
Limestone being the principal rawmaterial for the manufacture of cement, the factory depended exclusively for the supply of limestone on the said quarry.
On behalf of the labourers in the limestone quarry certain demands were made on the management of the company but as they were rejected they went on strike; and on account of the non supply of limestone due to the strike, the management had to close down certain sections of the factory and to lay off the workers not required during the period of closure of the sections concerned.
Subsequently, after the dispute between the management and the workers of the limestone quarry was settled and the strike came to an end, a demand was made on behalf of the workers of the factory who had been laid off during the strike, for payment of lay off compensation under section 25C of the , but the management refused the demand relying on cl.
(iii) to section 25E of the Act, which provided that " no compensation shall be paid to a workman who had been laid off. . . if such laying off is due to strike. . on the part of workmen in another part of the establishment ".
The Industrial Tribunal took the view that the limestone quarry was not part of the establishment of the cement factory and that the workmen in the latter were not disentitled to lay off compensation by reason of Cl.
(iii) of section 25E of the Act.
The appellant company appealed by special leave to the Supreme Court and contended that the decision of the Tribunal was erroneous because the facts of the case showed (a) that in respect of both the factory and the limestone quarry there was unity of ownership, unity of management, supervision and control, unity of finance and employment, unity 704 of labour and conditions of service of workmen, functional integrality, general unity of purpose and geographical proximity, and (b) that the strike was decided on by the same Workers ' Union which consisted of the workmen at the factory and the quarry.
It was contended for the respondents inter alia (1) that the conclusion of the Industrial Tribunal that the factory and the limestone quarry are not parts of one establishment is a finding of fact which should not be disturbed in an appeal by special leave, (2) that the effect of the Explanation to section 25A of the Act is to negative the idea of a factory and a mine forming parts of one establishment, and (3) that since in the matter of reference of industrial disputes, the Act gives jurisdiction to two distinct authorities, the Central Government in respect of the limestone quarry and the State Government in respect of the factory, the two units, the factory and mine, cannot be treated as one establishment.
Held: (1) that the question whether the factory and the limestone quarry form one establishment depends upon the true scope and effect of the expression "in another part of the establishment" in cl.(iii)of section 25E of the , and involves a consideration of the tests which should be applied in determining whether a particular unit is part of a bigger establishment, and though for that purpose certain preliminary facts must be found, the final conclusion to be drawn therefrom is not a mere question of fact ; (2) that the true scope and effect of the Explanation to section 25A of the Act is that it explains what categories, factory, mine or plantation, come within the meaning of the expression " industrial establishment "; it does not deal with the question as to what constitutes one establishment and lays down no tests for determining that question; (3) that existence of two jurisdictions does not necessarily imply that for all purposes of the Act, and particularly for payment of unemployment compensation, the factory and quarry must be treated as separate establishments ; and, (4) that on the facts of the present case the limestone quarry and the factory constituted one establishment within the meaning of cl.
(iii) of section 25E of the Act and that the workmen at the factory were not entitled to claim lay off compensation.
