The appellant company was an all India concern and carried on the major part of its business in Calcutta.
Its clerical and non clerical staff in Bombay raised disputes relating to gratuity and age of retirement and contended that the scale of gratuity for both the clerical and non clerical staff provided by the existing scheme of the company was low and should be raised and that the age of retirement for the clerical staff should be raised from 55 to 60.
The company resisted the claim on the ground that the existing scheme having been enforced on the basis of an agreement between the company and the large majority of its staff, both clerical and non clerical, working in Calcutta, the same could not be changed at the instance of a small minority.
The tribunal rejected this contention and raised the age of retirement to 60.
It also raised the scale of gratuity and made it uniform for the clerical and non clerical staff.
The appellant reiterated its contention in this Court.
Held, that although it was advisable for an all India concern to have uniform conditions of service 'throughout the country, that were not to be lightly changed, industrial adjudication in 52 India being based on an industry cum region basis, cases might arise where it would be necessary to change the uniform scheme so that it might accord with the prevailing conditions in the region where the Industrial Tribunal functioned, in order to ensure fair conditions of service.
Consequently, in the instant case, where the Industrial Tribunal found that the existing scheme was neither adequate nor in accord with the prevailing conditions in the region, it was not bound to refrain from altering either the age of retirement or the gratuity scheme on the ground the appellant 's concern was an all India one.
Nor could the decision of the Tribunal to raise the age of retirement of the clerical staff to 60 be said to be an improper one.
Guest, Keen, Williams (Private) Limited, Calcutta vs P. J. Sterling and Others, ; referred to.
