It was a contradiction in terms to say that a strike in a public utility service, which was clearly illegal, could also be justified.
The law does not contemplate such a position nor is it warranted by any distinction made by the .
It should be clearly understood by workmen who participate in such a strike that they cannot escape their liability for such participation and any tendency to condone such a strike must be deprecated.
The only question of practical importance, that arises in such a strike is, what should be the kind and quantum of the punishment to be meted out to the participants and that question has to be decided on the charge sheet served on each individual workman and modulated accordingly.
In determining the question of punishment, distinction has to be made between those who merely participated in such a strike and those who were guilty of obstructing others or violent demonstrations or defiance of law, for a wholesale dismissal of all the workmen must be detrimental to the industry itself.
If the employer, before dismissing a workman, gives him Sufficient opportunity of explaining his conduct, and no question of mala fides or victimisation arises, it is not for the Tribunal, in adjudicating the propriety of such dismissal, to look into the sufficiency or otherwise of the evidence led before the enquiring officer or insist on the same degree of proof as is required in a Court of Law, as if it was sitting in appeal over the decision of the employer.
In such a case it is the duty of the Tribunal to uphold the order of dismissal.
Consequently, in the present case, where the appellants, who were carrying on business in water transport service, notified as a public utility service, dismissed their workmen for joining an illegal strike, on enquiry but without serving a charge sheet oil 2 each individual workman and the Industrial Tribunal directed their reinstatement, excluding only those who had been convicted under section 143 of the Indian Penal Code but including those convicted under section 188 of the Code, with full back wages and allowances, Held, that the decision of the Tribunal to reinstate those who had been convicted under section 188 of the ' Code must be set aside and the wages and allowances allowed to those reinstated must be reduced by half and the award modified accordingly.
Held, further, that the , Must be read as subject to the paramount law of the land, namely, the Constitution, and the finality attaching to an award under sections 17 and 17A of the Act, must, therefore, yield to the overriding powers of this Court under article 136 of the Constitution.
As the award in the instant case did not fall within the Provisos to section 17 of the Act, it was not correct to contend that the appellants had any other remedies thereunder to exhaust before they could come up in appeal to this Court.
Nor was it correct to contend that the Government of Assam was a necessary party in the appeal inasmuch as it had acted by virtue of delegated powers of legislation under the Act in making the award enforceable as law.
A State Government plays no part in such a proceeding except to make the reference under section 10 of the Act, nor has it anything to do with regard to the publication of the award, which is automatic under section 17 of the Act, or its operation, unless the case falls within the provisos to section 17A of the Act.
A lock out lawfully declared under section 24(3) of the Act, does not cease to be legal by its continuance beyond the strike, although such continuance may be unjustified.
