The respondent booked certain goods on September 4, 1947, with the N. W. Railway at Quebec in Pakistan to New Delhi.
The wagon containing the goods was received at the Indian border station of Khem Karan on November 1, 1947, duly sealed and labelled indicating its destination as New Delhi.
It reached New Delhi on February 3, 1948, and was unloaded on February 20, 1948, but no immediate information was sent to the respondent.
On June 7, 1948, the respondent was asked by the E. P. Railway to take delivery of the goods lying at New Delhi station but when the respondent went there the goods were not traceable.
Again, on July 24, 1948, the respondent was asked to take delivery of the goods when only a small portion of the goods 76 were offered to him subject to the payment of Rs. 1,067 8 0 as freight but the respondent refused to take delivery.
On August 4,1949, the respondent filed a suit for Rs. 1,62,123 with interest as compensation for non delivery of goods against the Dominion of India.
The trial court found that the E. P. Railway was guilty of negligence in handling the goods and decreed the suit for Rs. 80,000, and on appeal the High Court confirmed the decree.
The appellant contended that there was no privity of contract between the respondent and the E. P. Railway and he could only have a claim against the N. W. Railway in Pakistan, and that the suit was barred by limitation.
Held, that there was an implied contract of bailment between the respondent and the E. P. Railway and that Railway was liable for the loss.
The conduct of the parties indicated that the respondent delivered the goods to the N. W. Railway with an authority to create the E. P. Railway as his immediate bailer from the point the wagon was put on its rails.
The N. W. Railway must be deemed to have had implied authority to appoint the E. P. Railway to act for the consignor during the journey of goods by the E. P. Railway and by force of section 194 of the , the E. P. Railway became an agent of the consignor.
The N. W. Railway left the wagon with the E. P. Railway and the latter consciously took over the responsibility of the bailer, carried the wagon to New Delhi and offered to deliver the goods to the respondent.
The respondent also accepted this relationship.
From these facts, even if an agency could, not be implied, a tacit agreement between the two Railways to carry the respondents goods to New Delhi could be implied resulting in a contract of bailment between the E. P. Railway and respondent.
Kulu Ram Maigraj vs The Madras Railway Company, I.L.R. , G.I.P. Railway Co. vs Radhakisan Kushaldas, I.L.R. , Bristol and Exeter Railway vs Collins, VII H.L.C. 194 and De Bussche vs Alt, (1878) L.R. 8 Ch.
D. 386, referred to.
Held, further that the suit was not barred by limitation.
Even if article 30 of the Indian Limitation Act applied, as contended for by the appellant, the burden was on the appellant, who sought to non suit the respondent, to establish that the loss occurred beyond one year from the date of the suit.
Thus the appellant had failed to establish by any clear evidence.
