The stage carriage permits of the petitioners, who were also the petitioners in Writ Petition NO.
75 of 1959, previously, reported, were expiring on 31st March, 1958, and were renewed up to March 31, 959.
A fresh scheme of nationalisation having 131 been approved and published under section 68C of the Motor Vehicles Act, the Regional Transport Authority, in order to avoid inconvenience to the public, granted temporary permits to the petitioners till the State Transport Department obtained their permits.
The Department applied for permits under section 68F(1) of the Act in accordance with the scheme admittedly less than six weeks before the date when they were to take effect, contrary to the provision of section 57(2) of the Act.
The petitioners had also applied for renewal of their permits.
The Regional Transport Authority issued permits to the Department and rejected the renewal applications of the petitioners.
The petitioners moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for quashing ,that order.
The High Court held that the issue of permits to the Department was invalid as the provision of section 57(2) had not been complied with, and the refusal of renewal of the petitioners ' permits was incorrect, but it dismissed the Writ Petition on the ground that the relief that could be granted to the petitioners could only be short lived.
The petitioners applied for a certificate to enable them to appeal to this Court and while that application lay pending, applied to this Court under article 32 of the Constitution.
It was contended on their behalf that before the renewal application could be rejected and permits granted to the Department under section 68F(1) of the Act, the Department must apply for permits in respect of all the routes covered by the scheme so that there could be no possibility of any discrimination between an operator and an operator in infringement of article 14 of the Constitution as also their rights to carry on their business under article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
It was further contended that non compliance with the provision of section 57(2) of the Act disentitled the Department to any permits at all.
It was contended on behalf of the Department that it was open to it to implement the scheme by stage and it was denied that there could be any discrimination in doing so or that section 57(2) applied to an application under section 68F(1) of the Act.
Held (per Sinha, C.J., Imam, Wanchoo and Das Gupta, JJ.), that it was clear from the language of s 68F of the , that an application by a State Transport Undertaking for a permit thereunder must be made in the manner prescribed by Ch.
IV of the Act and, therefore, there could be no doubt that such an application must fall within the purview of section 57(2) of the Act.
Consequently, the orders granting the application for permits made by the State Transport Department in the instant case, admittedly in breach of section 57(2) of the Act, were on that ground alone liable to be quashed.
Section 68C of the Act contemplates that where there is no intention to operate an entire route but a portion of it, that portion alone should be specified as the route and not the whole of it or any portion thereof as in the instant case.
The scheme, however, clearly intended that all the routes in their entirety 132 were to be taken over and so the qualifying words were mere surplusage.
Per Kapur, J. On a proper construction of sections 68C and 68F of the Act, it would not be correct to say that the Legislature intended that the scheme as approved must be implemented all at once or not at all.
It would be impractical to suggest that the whole scheme should be implemented in a rigid manner.
Some flexibility in implementing it must necessarily be implied for otherwise nationalisation of transport services, the accepted State policy in India, was likely to be indefinitely held up, if not thwarted.
The language used by section 68F lends no support to such a contention nor do the words " in pursuance of " occurring, therein mean that the whole of the scheme has to be put into operation and not a portion of it.
Bradford Corporation vs Myers, , referred to, If the State cannot take over routes for which application can be immediately made, the taking over must become not only difficult but extremely expensive as other interests may supervene in the meantime.
Where, therefore, it intends to run a scheme within a reasonable time, there can be no reason why it should not apply for different routes within a reasonable time so long as it acts honestly, fairly and without any oblique motives.
Since the State Undertaking in the present case had imple mented a part of the scheme and made fresh applications for permits in the manner provided by section 57(2) and their relevant provisions of Act, it is not necessary to pass a formal order quashing the permits granted in its favour.
K. N. Guruswamy vs The, State of Mysore, [1955] 1 section C.R. 305 referred to.
