Twelve named persons, including the two appellants, were charged with having formed an unlawful assembly with the common object of committing the murder of three persons.
The Sessions Judge acquitted seven of the accused but convicted five under section 302 read with 149 and section 302 read with 34 of the Penal Code.
He sentenced the appellants to death and the other three to imprisonment for life.
On appeal, the High Court acquitted one of the other three convicted persons but maintained the conviction and sentences of the appellants and the two others.
The High Court held that there were ten to thirteen persons in the unlawful assembly though the identity of all the persons except four had not been established, that all these persons had the common object and the common intention of killing the victims and that the killing was done in prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly and in further ance of the common intention of all.
The appellants contended that they having been charged with sharing the common object and common intention with certain named persons, it was not 173 open to the High Court to hold that they shared the common object or the common intention with certain other unspecified persons or with some of the persons who had been acquitted, and that in the absence of any finding that the appellants gave the fatal blows they could not be held constructively liable for the murders either under section 149 or section 34, Penal:Code, for blows given by some unknown persons.
Held, that the appellants had been rightly convicted.
Even though the number of convicted persons was less than five the High Court could still apply s 149 in convicting the four persons.
There was nothing in law which prevented the High Court from finding that the unlawful assembly consisted of the four convicted persons and some unidentified persons, who together numbered more than five.
In doing so the High Court did Dot make out a new unlawful assembly different from that charged ; the assembly was the same assembly but what had happened was that the identity of all the members had not been clearly established.
Kapildeo Singh vs The King, , Dalip Singh vs State of Punjab, ; and Nay Singh vs State of Uttar Pradesh; , , applied.
There was no difficulty in the application of s 34, Penal Code as the number of convicted persons was four and there was a clear finding that they shared the common intention with some others whose identity was not established.
Even if it was not known which particular person or persons gave the fatal blows, once it was found that the murders were committed in furtherance of the common intention of all, each one of such persons was liable for the murders as though they had been committed by him alone.
The section was intended to meet a case where members of a party acted in furtherance of the common intention of all but it was difficult to prove exactly the part played by each of them.
Wasim Khan vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, [1956] S.C.R. 191, referred to.
Prabhu Babaji Navle vs The State of Bombay, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 51, distinguished.
