The respondents filed a petition in the High Court of Jammu Kashmir Motor Vehicles Rules.
The High Court held that the said rule was ultra vires as offending article 14 of the Constitution.
The appellants filed an application in the High Court for a certificate under article 132(1) of the Constitution which was rejected on the ground that no substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution was involved in the case.
Thereafter the appellant applied to this Court for special leave under article 132(2) of the Constitution, which was granted with liberty to the respondents to raise the question of maintainability of the appeal.
There was no controversy between the parties in regard to the interpretation of article 14 of the Constitution, and the dispute centered round the question whether the impugned rule stood the test of reasonable classification.
The respondents raised a preliminary objection that special leave under article 132(2) of the Constitution could be granted by this court only if it was satisfied that the case involved a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution, and that since, in the present case, the interpretation of article 14 of the Constitution was not in dispute by reason of a series of decisions of this Court and no question of law, much less a substantial question of law, could arise for consideration, no special leave could be granted under the said Article.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that whenever a question of classification was raised that by itself involved the interpretation of article 14 of the Constitution so far as the impugned classification was concerned.
Held, that the principle underlying article 132(2) of the Constitution is that the final authority of interpreting the Constitution must rest with the Supreme Court.
With that object that Article is freed from other limitations imposed under articles 133 and 134 and the right of appeal of the widest amplitude is allowed irrespective of the nature of the proceedings in a case involving only a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution.
The interpretation of a provision means the method by which the true sense or the meaning of the word is understood.
Where 347 the parties agree as to the true interpretation of a provision or do not raise any question in respect thereof, the case does not involve any question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution.
A substantial question of law cannot arise where that law has been finally and authoritatively decided by this Court.
In the instant case, the question raised does not involve any question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution.
T.M. Krishnaswami Pillai vs Governor General in Council (1947) 52 C.W.N. (F.R.) 1, Bhudan Choudury vs The State of Bihar, ; , Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri vs Union of India; , , Ram Krishna Dalmia vs justice Tendolkar; , and Mohammad Haneef Quayeshi vs State of Bihar, [1959] S.C.R.629, relied on.
