A deed dated September 10, 1931, described as a sale deed, recited that the transferors were indebted and that to discharge the liability three items of immovable properties, described in the deed and separately valued, were conveyed in full ownership and that possession was delivered to the transferees.
The deed further provided, inter alia (1) that if the transferors demanded reconveyable of any or all of the items of the properties within 5 years, the transferees shall reconvey to them at their expense for the price mentioned in the deed, (2) that if within four years and six months the transferees did not exercise the right of reconveyance as aforesaid and the transferees did not desire to retain all or any of the properties, they had a right to get back the amount of consideration of the deed and return all the three or any of the properties in the condition in which by vis major, Government action or any reason whatsoever they may be, and 118 (3)that if the transferors failed to comply with the transferees ' request to take back the properties a breach of agreement of reconveyance rendering the transferors liable to pay damages shall be committed.
There was also a clause that the transferors shall lose the right of getting a reconveyance after the expiry of the period of 5 years.
On the same date as the deed of sale the transferors executed an agreement by which they undertook to pay the difference between the net rent to be recovered by the transferees from the properties and interest at the rate of nine per cent on the price till the date of reconveyance.
In a suit for redemption brought by the transferors on August 26, 1943, on the footing that the deed dated September 10, 1931, was A, mort gage by conditional sale, the transferees contended that by the transaction an absolute conveyance of the properties was intended and that the conveyance was subject to a condition of repurchase to be exercised within a period of five years from the date of the deed.
The evidence showed that the price paid for the properties under the deed was wholly inadequate.
Held, that the question whether a transaction ostensibly of sale may be regarded as a mortgage is one of intention of the parties which has to be ascertained from the provisions of the deed viewed in the light of the surrounding circumstances.
In a sale coupled with an agreement to reconvey there is no relation of debtor and creditor nor is the price charged upon the property conveyed, but the sale is subject to an obligation to retransfer the property within the period specified.
In a mortgage by conditional sale a relation of debtor and creditor is created, the transfer being a security for the debt.
Oral evidence of intention is not admissible in interpreting the convenants of the deed but evidence to explain or even contradict the recitals as distinguished from the terms of the document may be given.
Evidence of contemporaneous conduct is admissible as a surrounding circumstance, but evidence as to subsequent conduct of the parties is inadmissible.
Narasingerji Gyangerji vs Panuganti Parthasarathi and Others, (1924) L.R. 51 I.A. 305, relied on.
Held, further, that in the present case, the deed dated September 10, 1931, on a true construction in the light of the surrounding circumstances showed that the transaction was one of mortgage enabling the transferors to redeem the properties.
