The respondent mills, a registered dealer under the Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1947 (Act 111 of 1947), was carrying on business of manufacture and sale of gunny bags, hessian and other jute products at Katihar.
During the period April 1, 1950, to March 31, 1951, it sold and despatched its wares worth about Rs. 92,24,386 1 6 to dealers outside the State and realised a sum of Rs. 2,11,222 9 6 as sales tax from them.
In assessing the sales tax payable by the said respondent for the relevant period the Superintendent of Sales Tax, Purnea, held that the said amount of sales tax had been realised in contravention of section 14A of the Act read with r. 19 of the Bihar Sales Tax Rules, and directed its forfeiture under the proviso to that section.
The respondent challenged the validity of the said order under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
The High Court held that the proviso to section 14A of the Act was ultra vires the State Legislature as it violated articles 20(1) and 31(2) of the Constitution and set aside the order of forfeiture and quashed the proceedings under section 14A of the Act.
The State of Bihar appealed to this Court.
It was urged by way of preliminary objection on behalf of the respondent that since the proviso to section 14A of the Act had no application to the facts of the case, there was no occasion to decide its constitutional validity.
The contention of the appellint was that the proviso did apply to the respondent inasmuch 332 as he had contravened the conditions and restrictions imposed by the proviso to r. 19.
The question for determination, therefore, was whether the said respondent could be said to have realised any amount by way of tax in respect of such part of its turn over as was allowed to be deducted from his gross turn over for the determination of his taxable turn over under the Act or the rules, as contemplated by the later part of the said proviso.
Held, that the preliminary objection must prevail.
Held, further, that before the penalty of forfeiture could be imposed upon a dealer under the proviso to section 14A of the Bihar Sales tax Act, 1947, it had to be shown that he had acted contrary to the conditions and restrictions prescribed by the Rules and it was not enough to show that the collection of the sales tax made by him was otherwise illegal or improper.
The contravention of the statutory provisions contained in section 14A or of the Rules prescribing conditions and restrictions in that behalf alone could form the basis of the imposition of the penalty of forfeiture prescribed by the said proviso.
With the insertion of section 33 into the Act with retrospective operation, prohibiting the imposition of the tax on sales taking place outside the State and in view of the decision of this Court in State of Bombaay vs The United Motors (India) Ltd. ; , the proviso to r. 19 must be construed on the basis that the sales in question were outside the scope of the Act and no tax could be imposed on them.
It could not, therefore, be said that that part of the respondent 's turnover which was in question was an allowable deduction within the meaning of the said proviso.
Such allowable deductions as are contemplated by the proviso are clearly based on the provisions of sections 6, 7 and 8 of the Act as is quite clear from the Explanation to section 5 of the Act.
State of Bombay & Another vs The United Motors (India) Ltd.
An allowable deduction under the said proviso was not the same thing as exclusion of a part of the turn over on the basis of section 33(1)(a)(1) of the Act.
It stands on an entirely different footing.
Transactions which fall within the said section are in substance outside the Act and no tax can be imposed on them.
The transaction in question did not, therefore, fall within the proviso to r.19 and the proviso to section 14A was not attracted and the order of forfeiture passed against the respondent was unjustified and illegal.
