The petitioner company applied to the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports, Government of India, New Delhi, for five import licences and obtained them from the joint Chief Controller of Imports and Exports, Bombay, purporting to grant the same on the authority of the former, and placed orders for goods covered by these licences, some of which actually arrived in Bombay.
Before the goods could be cleared, the company received a notice from the Chief Controller stating that whereas there were reasons to believe that these five licences had been obtained by fraud, the Government, in exercise of the power specified in cl. 9 of the Imports Control Order, 1955, proposed to cancel them unless sufficient cause was shown before the Chief Controller.
The petitioner company by a telegram requested the Chief Controller to furnish particulars of the alleged fraud and give an opportunity to inspect the relevant papers and documents relied upon by him.
By a letter it gave an explanation stating that the petitioners were the victims of foul play by some one bent upon causing damage to them and bringing them in the bad books of the authorities.
In that letter the company reserved to itself the right to add to, amend or alter the explanation after it had obtained inspection of the said papers and the particulars of the alleged fraud.
The representatives of the company met the Chief Controller as also the Director of Administration of his office and renewed the request for the said particulars and the inspection.
No particulars were furnished, nor was inspection allowed, but the Chief Controller told the representatives that the issue of the licences had not been authorised by him and the same had been fraudulently obtained and the Director of Administration told them that the recommendations against which the disputed licences were granted by the joint Controller were not genuine, but the said representatives, instead of denying the fraud alleged, ascribed it to some other party as they had done before.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that cl. 9(a) of the Imports Control Order, 1955, infringed articles 19(1)(f) and (g) and 31 of the Constitution and that no reasonable opportunity was given to the petitioners of being heard as required by cl. 10 of the Imports Control Order.
409 Held (per Sinha, C.J., Gajendragadkar, Das Gupta and Shah, JJ.), that cl. 9 of the Imports Control Order does not give unbridled authority to cancel a licence nor is there any scope for arbitrary action in this regard in view of the provision of cl. 10 of the Order which amply fulfils the requirement of natural justice.
It is not correct to contend that before a licence can be cancelled under cl. 9, it must be shown not merely that fraud was committed but that the licensee was also a party to the fraud.
The entire scheme of control and regulation of imports by licences being based on the grant of licences on a correct statement of fact, that basis disappears if the grant is obtained by fraud or misrepresentation, and it is wholly immaterial whether the licensee is or is not a party to such fraud or misrepresentation.
The provision for cancellation of a licence under cl. 9, therefore, constitutes.
a reasonable restriction on the rights conferred by article 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution and, being imposed by a valid law, cannot contravene article 31.
There can be no absolute standard of reasonableness and what constitutes reasonable opportunity of being heard in the peculiar facts and circumstances of each case is a matter to be decided by the Court.
The Court has to satisfy itself that the person against whom action was proposed had a fair chance of convincing the authority that the grounds on which such action was proposed were either non existent or did not justify it.
So judged, it could not be said that the omission to give the petitioners, in the instant case, who were more concerned to show that the company was not a party to the fraud than that no fraud had at all been committed, further particulars or inspection of the papers amounted to a denial of reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Per Subba Rao, J. Judged in the light of well recognised principles, there can be no doubt that the Chief Controller of Imports, acting under cls.
9 and 10 of the Imports Control Order, 1955, performs a quasi judicial function and is bound to follow the principles of natural justice in cancelling a licence.
Rex vs Electricity Commissioners, Ex Parte London Electricity joint Committee Co., , Rex vs London County Council, Ex Parte Entertainments Protection Association Ltd., and Province of Bombay vs Khusaldas section Advani, ; , referred to.
The language of cl. 10 clearly indicates that when the charge is one of fraud, the affected party is entitled to know the particulars of the alleged fraud and to inspect the documents on which it is based and to a personal hearing.
It was impossible, in the facts and circumstances of this case, to hold that the petitioners, who did not admit having committed the fraud and must be assumed to be innocent, were afforded reasonable opportunity of being heard within the meaning of 410 cl.
10 of the Order to prove their innocence.
Unless the particulars were given to them and the documents shown to them it was not possible for them to know if any fraud was at all committed and if so by whom.
The order of cancellation of the licences was, therefore, arbitrary and must be quashed.
