In ascertaining the surplus available for the payment of bonus according to the Full Bench formula the Industrial Court allowed the statutory depreciation but did not give any credit for the rehabilitation amount claimed.
The Industrial Court estimated the amount required for rehabilitation at Rs. 60 lakhs; out of this amount it deducted Rs. 51 lakhs representing the reserves and the balance of Rs. 9 lakhs spread over a period Of 15 years gave the figure of Rs. 6o,000 as the amount that should be set apart for the year in question for rehabilitation.
This amount being less than the statutory depreciation the Industrial Court held that the appellant was not entitled to any deduction on account of rehabilitation as a prior charge.
The appellant contended that the balance sheet disclosed that the entire reserves had been used as working capital and consequently the said reserves should not be excluded from the amount claimed towards rehabilitation.
Held, that the appellant had failed to prove that the reserves had in fact been used as working capital and as such the amount was rightly deducted by the Industrial Court from the amount fixed for rehabilitation.
The Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Its Workmen. , referred to.
In view of the importance of the item of rehabilitation in the calculation of the available surplus it was necessary for tribunals to weigh with great care the evidence of both parties to ascertain every sub item that went into or was subtracted from the item of rehabilitation.
If parties agreed, agreed figures could be accepted.
If they agreed to a decision on affidavits, that course could be adopted.
But in the absence of agreement the procedure prescribed by 0.
XIX, Code of Civil Procedure had to be followed.
The accounts, the balance sheet and profit and loss accounts were prepared by the management and the labour had no hand in it.
When so much depended on this item it was necessary that the Industrial Court insisted upon a clear proof of the item of rehabilitation and also gave a real and adequate opportunity to labour to canvass the correctness of the particulars furnished by the employers.
Indian Hume Pipe Company, Ltd. vs Their Workmen.
[196o] 2 S.C.R. 32, Tata Oil Mills Company Ltd. vs Its Workmen ; and Anil Starch Products Ltd. vs Ahmedabad Chemical Workers ' Union.
C.A. No. 684 Of I957 (not reported), referred to, 842
