The appellants were prosecuted for having committed offences under section 120B read with Ss. 302 and 436 of the Indian Penal Code and their case was taken up for trial before the Third Tribunal constituted under the West Bengal Tribunals of Criminal jurisdiction Act, 1952 (W.B. Act XIV of 1952).
By a notification dated September 12, 1952, and issued under section 2(b) of the Act the Government of West Bengal declared the whole area within the jurisdiction of Kakdwip and Sagar Police Stations to be a disturbed area and specified the period from January 1, 1948, to March 31, 1950, to be the period during which the notification was to be effective.
The case against the appellants was that between the dates mentioned in the notification, they took leading part in a violent movement called the Tebhaga movement in Kakdwip and incited the Bhagehasis, i.e., the cultivators who actually cultivated the land, to claim the entire crop instead of 2/3 share of it and that they preached murder and arson amongst the cultivators and such preaching was followed by arson and murder on a large scale.
The appellants moved the High Court for an order quashing the proceedings against them on the ground that section 2(b) of the Act, which allowed the Government to declare an area in which " there was " disturbance in the past to be a disturbed area, offended article 14 Of the Constitution as discriminating between persons who had committed the same offences and whose trials had already concluded before the notification under the normal and more advantageous procedure and others whose trials had not concluded and who had to be tried by a less advantageous and special procedure prescribed by the Act.
The application of the appellants was first heard by a bench of two judges but as there was difference of opinion between them the matter was referred to a third judge, and the High Court by a majority held that the provisions of the impugned Act were intra vires and did not offend article 14 of the Constitution.
On appeal by special leave challenging the vires Of section 2(b) and the proviso to section 4(1) Of the Act, Held (per Sinha, C.J., Gajendragadkar and Shah, jj.), that the equality before law, guaranteed by article 14, no doubt prohibits class legislation but it does not prohibit the Legislature to legislate 647 on the basis of a reasonable classification.
If any state off acts can reasonably be conceived to sustain a classification, the existence of that state of facts must be assumed.
Chiranjitlal Choudhuri vs The Union of India and Others, ; and Kedar Nath Bajoria vs The State of West Bengal, ; , followed.
Where the classification is reasonable and is founded on an intelligible differentia and that differentia has a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute, the validity of the statute cannot be successfully challenged under article 14.
Since the classification made by the impugned Act is rational and the differentia by which offenders are classified has a rational relation with the object of the Act to provide for the speedy trial of the offences specified in the Schedule, section 2(b) and the proviso to section 4(1) of the Act cannot be said to contravene article 1 Of the Constitution even though the procedure prescribed by the Act may amount to discrimination.
The State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, [1952] S.C.R. 284, distinguished.
Kathi Raning Rawat vs The State of Saurashtra, [1952] S.C.R. 435, Lachmandas Kewalram Ahuja and Another vs The State Of Bombay, ; and Gopi Chand vs Delhi Administration, ; , considered.
Per Sarkar and Subba Rao, jj.
(dissenting).
Whether a law offends article 14 or not does not depend upon whether it is prospective or retrospective for both prospective and retrospective ' statutes may contravene the provisions of that Article.
Although the general rule is that a law must apply to all persons, it is permissible to validly legislate for a class within certain well recognised limits.
The true test of a valid classification is that it must be capable of being reasonably regarded as being based upon a differentia which distinguishes that class from others, and the differentia itself must have a reasonable relation with the object the statute has in view.
Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri justice S.R. Tendolkar; , , followed.
The object of the Act in question being to secure a speedy trial of certain offences committed in a specified area during a specified period of time in the interest of the security of the State and the maintenance of public peace and tranquillity in a disturbed area, a distinction made between the cases where the trials had been concluded and the cases where the trials had not yet been concluded, is not a distinction which has any rational relation to the object.
In order to secure that object it is necessary to place both classes of persons in the same situation.
Gopi Chand vs Delhi Administration, ; , distinguished.
648 The Act in so far as it permits an area which was a disturbed area in the past to be declared a disturbed area for the purposes of the Act offends article 14 of the Constitution and is, therefore, unconstitutional and void.
That portion Of section 2(b) which declares an area to be a disturbed area in the past and the notification in question must therefore be held to be void.
