Rule 54 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1949, provided as follows: " Review.
Upon receipt of such application, the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, call for the relevant records and other information from the Provincial Government, and after considering any explanation that may be offered by the Provincial Government, cancel the order of the Provincial Government or revise it in such manner as the Central Government may deem just and proper.
The appellant was granted mining leases in respect of five areas and possession was delivered to him.
On an application for review made by one of the respondents under r. 52 of the Rules, the Central Government, without giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, cancelled the leases with regard to two of the areas and directed the State Government to grant leases in respect thereof to the said respondent.
The appellant applied to the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for quashing the said order.
The Single judge who heard the application as well as the Division Bench on appeal held that the order of cancellation was an administrative order and the appellant was not entitled to a hearing.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant in this Court that rr.
52 55 of the Rules showed that the proceeding before the Central Government was a quasijudicial proceeding and, consequently, the rules of natural justice must apply.
Held, that the contention must prevail and the order of cancellation be quashed.
In exercising its power of review under r. 54 of the Mineral Concessions Rules, 1949, the Central Government acted judicially and not administratively.
Assuming that the act of the State Government in granting a mining lease was an administrative act, it was not correct to say that no right of any kind passed to the lessee thereunder untill the review was decided by the Central Government where a review had been applied for.
Rule 52, therefore, by giving the aggrieved party the right to a review created a lis between him and the lessee and, consequently, in the absence of anything to the contrary either in r. 54 or the statute itself, there could be no 99 776 doubt that the Central Government was acting quasi judicially under r. 54.
Province of Bombay vs Kushaldas section Advani.
[1950] S.C.R.621, applied.
R. vs Electricity Commissioner.
(1924) I. K. B. 171, referred to.
