The petitioner who entered into contracts with the Government of India for the supply of certain quantities of sugar of foreign origin, placed orders with dealers in foreign countries and made arrangements for transporting the goods to Bombay by engaging steamers.
When the goods were on the high seas and before the vessels arrived at Bombay harbour, the petitioner delivered to the Government the shipping documents including the bill of lading pertaining to the goods and received the price.
After the goods reached the port, they were taken delivery of by the Government of India after paying the requisite customs duties to the authorities concerned For the assessment year 1954 55, the Assistant Collector of Sales Tax held that sales tax was payable by the petitioner in respect of the transaction relating to the sugar sold to the Government.
The petitioner claimed, inter alia, that the sales had taken place in the course of import and therefore they were not liable to sales tax under article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution of India.
But it was contended for the Sales Tax Authorities that the sales were not in the course of import and that, in any case, under the terms of the contracts the intention of the parties was that notwithstanding the delivery of the bills of lading against payment the property in the goods should not pass to the Government till actual delivery was made.
Held: (1) that under article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution of India the course of the import of the goods starts at a point when the goods cross the customs barrier of the foreign country and ends at a point in the importing country after the goods cross the customs barrier; (2) that an importer can, if he receives the shipping documents, transfer the property in the goods when they, are on the high seas to a third party by delivering to him shipping documents against payment and such a sale is one made in the course of import; (3) that the delivery of a bill of lading while the goods are afloat is equivalent to the delivery of the goods themselves; Sanders Brothers vs Maclcan & Co., , relied on.
(4) that on a true construction of the contracts in question the property in the goods passed to the Government of India 853 when the shipping documents were delivered to them against payment; and (5) that the sales in question took place in the course of.
import into India and were exempted from sales tax under Art.286(1)(b) of the constitution.
State of Travancore Cochi vs The Bombay Co. Ltd., ; , followed.
