The appellants were appointed under an agreement in writing by the Governor General as agents for purchasing and supplying ghee required for the Army personnel with effect from October 1, 1937.
After the outbreak of the World War 11 there was an enormous increase in the demand of ghee by the Government and the agreement was revised by mutual consent on June 20, 1942, and the original rates of payment were scaled down.
On December 6, 1943, the appellants made a representation to the Government for enhancing the rates as conditions had become 794 abnormal.
According to the appellants they were given assu rances that their, claims would be favourably considered by the Government and relying on these assurances they continued to supply ghee in quantities demanded by the Government incurring heavy extra expenditure.
The Government did not enhance the rates and the matter was referred to arbitration under the agreement of 1937.
Before the arbitrators the appellants contended that the agreement Of 1942 was not binding upon them and claimed payment on the basis of the agreement Of 1937; and in the alternative claimed payment on the basis of increased rates of mandi charges, additional buying remuneration and contingency charges.
These claims were resisted by the Government and it was denied that any assurances were given by the Government to enhance the rates.
The arbitrators incorporated the points of contest in the form of issues.
By an award dated May 2, 1954, the arbitrators rejected the primary claim of the appellant holding that the agreement of 1942 was binding.
On the alternative claim they awarded a sum of money for loss suffered by the appellants on account of establishment and contingencies, and another sum for mandi and financing charges.
The award was filled in the Court of the Commercial Sub judge, Delhi, and the Government applied to have it set aside.
The Sub judge held that though there was an error on the face of the award in ordering the payment of additional remuneration and financing and overhead charges the award could not set aside as specific questions had been expressly referred for adjudication to the arbitrators and the award was binding on the parties.
On appeal the High Court held that no specific questions of law had been referred to the arbitrators and that the award was vitiated by errors apparent on the face of the award.
Held, that the award was liable to be set aside because of an error apparent on the face of the award.
An arbitration award may be set aside on tile ground of an error on the face of it when the reasons given for the decision, either in the award or in any document incorporated with it, are based upon a legal proposition which is erroneous.
But where a specific question is referred, the award is not liable to be set aside oil the ground of an error on the face of the award even if the answer to the question involves an erroneous decision on a point of law.
In the present case there was a general reference and not a specific reference on any question of law.
Champsey Bhara and Co. vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning & Weaving Co., Ltd., L. R. 50 1.
A. 324, In the matter of a arbitration between King and Duveen L.R. 1913 2 K.B.1).
32, and Government of Kelantan vs Duff Development Co., Ltd., L. R. , relied on.
The contract provided for payment of charges at rates specified therein and the arbitrators could not ignore the express covenants between the parties and award amounts not agreed to be 795 paid.
A contract is not frustrated merely because the circumstances in which it was made are altered.
The courts have no general power to absolve a party from the performance of his part of the contract merely because its performance has become onerous on account of an unforseen turn of events.
Constantine 's case , Hirji Mulji vs Cinemas Ltd. Steamship Co., Ltd., , British Movietonews Ltd. vs London and District Cinemas, L. R. and Parki son &Co., Ltd. vs Commissioners of Works.
(1949) 2 K. B. D. 632, referred to.
British Movietonews Ltd. vs London and District Cinemas Ltd. (1951) 1 K.B.D. 190, disapproved.
The award which ignored the express terms of the contract prescribing the remuneration payable could not be justified as proceeding upon the basis of quantum meruit.
Compensation quantum meruit may be awarded for work done or services rendered only when the price thereof is not fixed by a contract.
For work done or service rendered pursuant to the terms of a contract, compensation quantum meruit cannot be awarded where the contract provides for the consideration payable in that behalf.
