The General Manager of the appellant Mills ordered the transfer of four workmen from the appellant mill to a new mill, which had been purchased subsequently.
The only connection between the two mills was the identity of ownership and, but for it, one had nothing to do with the other.
The concerned workmen protested to the said order of transfer and did not acceed to the request, thereupon they were served with notice for disobedience of standing orders and were called upon for explanation which the workmen did and thereafter they were dismissed from service.
The Labour Appellate Tribunal found that the management had no right to transfer the workmen to the new factory and therefore the order dismissing them was illegal.
The appellants came up by special leave before the Supreme Court and contended that the right to transfer an employee by an employer from one of his concerns to another is implicit in every contract of service.
The question is whether a person employed in a factory can be transferred to some other independent concern started by the same employer at a stage subsequent to the date of the employment.
Held, that apart from any statutory provision, the right of an employee and an employer are governed by the terms of contracts between them or by the terms necessarily implied therefrom; but in the absence of an express agreement between the employer and employees it cannot necessarily be implied that the employer has the right to transfer the employee to any of its concerns in any place, and that the employee has a duty to join the concern to which he may be transferred.
In the instant case, it was not a condition of service of employment of the concerned workmen either express or implied that the ' employer had the right to transfer them to a new concern started by the employer subsequent to the date of the employment.
Alexandre Bouzourou vs The Ottoman Bank, A.I.R. 1930 P.C. 118, Mary (Anamalai Plantation Workers ' Union) vs Selali arai Estate, (1956) I.L.L.J. 243 and Bata Shoe Company, Ltd vs Ali Hasan, (1956) I.L.L.J. 278, discussed.
