The first petitioner, who had migrated to West Pakistan, applied to the High Court of Madhya Bharat for a writ of abeas corpus for directions to produce petitioners 2 and 3, his minor children, before the Court on the allegation that they were wrongfully confined and, upon the dismissal of the said application, applied to the District Judge of Ratlam under the Guardian and Wards Act for his appointment as guardian of the person and property of the said minors.
The District judge rejected he application and appointed the second respondent as such Guardian.
The first petitioner appealed to the High Court against the said order of the District judge but that appeal was Dismissed.
He applied for special leave to appeal to this Court but that application was also rejected.
Thereafter the first Petitioner, as natural guardian of petitioners 2 and 3, filed the present petition under article 32 of the Constitution.
His casee in substance was that the interest of the second respondent was adverse to that of the minors, that he had misappropriated their property and that the first respondent, the State of Madhya Bharat, was bound to take steps to protect the property of the minors which it had failed to do and had thus rendered itself liable to make good the loss sustained by the minors in consequence.
Held, that the petition was wholly misconceived, and must be dismissed.
The Court can exercise jurisdiction under article 32 of the Constitution only in enforcement of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution.
Where on account of the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the right alleged by the petitioner does not exist and therefore its infringement cannot arise, this Court cannot entertain a petition under that Article for protection of the alleged right.
A claim as to denial of equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws can be made against executive action or against legislative process but not against the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction.
Nor can an order of this Court rejecting an application for special leave under article 136 of the Constitution be circumvented by an application for a writ under article 32.
