The respondent brought a suit for partition against the petitioner in respect of certain Watan lands.
The trial court decreed the suit but the High Court of Bombay reversed that decree.in appeal.
The Privy Council restored the decree of the trial court and an Order in Council was drawn up accordingly.
Execution of the said decree was resisted by the petitioner on the ground that the lands in suit being admittedly remuneration attached to the office of the Patil and as such governed by the Bombay Hereditary Offices Act, 1874 (Bom.
III of 1874) were not liable to partition.
A certificate under section 1o of the Act was issued by the Collector at the instance of the petitioner and the executing Court cancelled the execution case.
The respondent appealed to the High Court and that court following its own Full Bench decision in Rachapa vs Amingouda, (1881) V Bom.
283, held the certificate to be invalid since it was not addressed to the Privy Council which had passed the decree and set aside the order of the executing court.
Thereafter a fresh certificate under section 1o of the Act was issued by the Collector and addressed to this Court and the petitioner applied to this Court under that section for the cancellation of the said decree granted by the Order in Council, the Privy Council having ceased to have any jurisdiction in the meantime. 'The question for decision was whether as a result of the constitutional changes this court could be said to have passed the decree and could entertain the petition.
Held, that the petition must be allowed.
The combined effect of sections 5 and 8 of the Abolition of the Privy Council jurisdiction Act, 1949, and articles 374(2) and 135 of the Constitution was that this petition which lay to the Privy Council before it ceased to exercise its jurisdiction, could be presented to the Federal Court before the commencement of the Constitution and thereafter to this Court.
The certificate issued by the Collector and addressed to this Court was, therefore, valid and must be given effect to.
