The first respondent filed an election petition for an order that the election of the appellant be declared void on the ground that the appellant had committed the corrupt practice under section 123(5) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in that he had hired a tractor for conveying women electors from their houses to places of polling and back.
By an amendment application the first respondent gave particulars about the conveying of voters, but he did not give any particulars regarding the contract of hiring nor did the appellant ask for such particulars.
At the trial t~he first respondent led evidence in respect of t~he contract of hiring and the appellant raised no objection to the relevance of that evidence.
The Election Tribunal dismissed the petition but on appeal the High Court held the charge proved and declared the election of the appellant void.
The appellant contended that the election petition ought to have been dismissed because particulars of the contract of hiring which was an essential ingredient of the corrupt practice had not been given.
Held, (per Sinha Lc.
J., jafer Imam, K. N. Wanchoo and J. C. Shah, jj), that the corrupt practice under s~. I23~(5) was the conveying of electors to and from the polling station and not the contract of hiring.
If the election petition gave particulars about the use of a vehicle for conveying of electors to ' and from the polling station, the failure to give particulars of the contract of hiring, as distinguished from the fact of hiring, did not render the petition defective.
An election petition was not liable to be 92 dismissed in limine merely because full particulars of a corrupt practice alleged were not set out.
If an objection was taken and the Tribunal was of the view that full particulars had not been set out the petitioner had to be given an opportunity to amend or amplify the particulars.
It was only in the event of noncompliance with the order to supply the particulars that the charge which remained vague could be struck out.
Besides, in the present case no material prejudice was caused to the appellant by the absence of the particulars of the contract of hiring.
Sarkar J.
Under section 123(5) the hiring of the vehicle for conveyance of electors was an essential element of the corrupt practice and it was necessary to give particulars of the contract of hiring.
But the failure to give such particulars did not render the petition liable to be dismissed.
Section 83 of the Act did not provide for the dismissal of the petition for failure to furnish particulars nor did section 90(3) empower the Tribunal to dismiss a petition for non compliance with the provisions of section 83.
The appellant was entitled to apply for particulars but he did not do so; he could not at a later stage complain about the absence of the particulars.
