Can the Full Bench formula for calculation of bonus apply to a claim of bonus made by workmen engaged in electricity con cerns and undertakings ? That was the question raised for decision in this appeal.
A Special Bench of the Labour Appellate Tribunal held in the affirmative and the correctness of its decision was challenged in this appeal.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant company that the Electricity Supply Act, 1948 (54 Of 1948) was a self contained code intended to regulate the business and affairs of electricity concerns and that Act and not the formula applied to a claim of bonus by the workmen in an electricity concern.
(1) (1933] , 201.
69 Held, that the Special Bench had taken a correct view of the matter and its decision must be upheld.
It is evident from the provisions of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948, and its schedules that the respective fields of operation of the Act and of the principles of industrial adjudication are wholly different, and so there can be no conflict between them and their relevance and validity in their own spheres are beyond question.
While the Full Bench formula seeks to ensure social justice to workmen by apportioning a share of the profits to them and thus minimise the gap between the actual and the living wages, the Act does not provide for wages at all.
But it is improper to suggest on that basis that the workmen in electricty undertakings can be denied social justice.
just as the relevant industrial principles have to be applied for framing a wage structure for such workmen so also must the problem of bonus be solved in a like manner.
The working sheet prepared under the method of accounting required by the Act can be no basis for calculation of the amount of bonus since it is not possible to ascertain the gross profit therefrom and the Full Bench Formula has to be applied on the basis of the profit and loss account which a company has to keep under the Companies Act.
Bayoda Boyough Municipality vs Its Workmen.
[1957] S.C.R. 33, referred to.
Moreover, the intention of the Legislature in enacting cl.
(vi) of paragraph 17(2)(b) of Sixth Schedule to the Act clearly 'was to include a claim of bonus is within the expenses covered by it and it was to set at rest any possible doubt on that score that cl.
(xiii) was added by a subsequent amendment.
