The petitioner, a registered co operative society, carrying on the business of plying motor buses as stage carriages, had permits for four routes which were due to expire.
The State applied for permits for all these routes under Ch.
IV of the , as amended by Act 100 of 956, and the petitioner applied for renewal of its own permits.
The Regional Transport Authority rejected the petitioner 's applications and granted those of the State.
The petitioner 's appeal to the State Transport Authority was rejected.
But the High Court quashed the said orders under article 226 and directed a (1) (2) (3) [1957] 31 I.T.R.250.
23 178 reconsideration of the matter.
The State published a scheme under section 68C, Ch.
IVA, of the Act.
The scheme was not however finalised.
Thereafter the Regional Transport Authority, purporting to reconsider the matter as directed by the High Court, rejected the petitioner 's applications for renewal and granted those of the State for permits.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that in view of Ch.
IVA of the Act, the State had no right to apply for permits except thereunder and the grant of permits on applications made under Ch.
IV was, therefore, illegal and infringed the petitioner 's fundamental rights under articles 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
It was further contended that the order violated article 14 as well.
Held, that both the contentions were without substance and must fail.
The , as amended by Act 100 of 1956, lays down two independent sets of provisions relating to running of buses by the Government, one tinder Ch.
IV and the other Ch.
IVA of the Act.
The latter chapter by section 68F(1) confers a special advantage on the Government when it proceeds under that chapter and entitles it to the necessary permits as a matter of right.
Under Ch.
IV of the Act, however, the Government cannot claim any such advantage.
It has to compete with other applicants.
The powers conferred by the two chapters being thus not one but two different powers, the principle enunciated in Nazir Ahmad 's case has no application.
Since, therefore, the Government had a distinct right to apply for permits under Ch.
IV of the Act, no question of applying for permits without the right to do so and thereby infringing the petitioner 's fundamental right under article 19(1)(g) could arise.
Nazir Ahmad vs King Emperor, (1936) L.R. 63 I.A. 372, held inapplicable.
Taylor vs Taylor, , distinguished.
Nor could the maxim expressio unius est exclusio alter us be of any help to the petitioner.
That maxim has its utility in ascertaining the intention of the legislature.
Since section 42(3)(a) of the leaves no manner of doubt as to that intention by its clear indication that the Government cannot run buses as a commercial enterprise without first obtaining permitsunder section 42(1) Of the Act, that maxim cannot operate so as to imply a prohibition against applying under Ch.
IV of the Act.
There was therefore, no reason for holding that Ch.
IVA of the Act contained the only provision under which the Govern ment could be allowed to ply stage carriages.
Viscountess Rhondda 's claim, and Motilal vs Government of Uttar Pyadesh, , considered.
It was not correct to say that the State was not intended to compete with private citizens in obtaining permits under Ch.
IV of the Act.
Section 47 of the Act lends no support to such a proposition and article 19(6) of the Constitution indicates that the Government can enter into such competition without infringing any of the fundamental rights.
179 The Regional Transport Authority in granting permits acts in a quasi judicial capacity.
If its decision was in any way erroneous having regard to the proviso to section 47(1) of the Act, that could not amount to a violation of article 14 of the Constitution.
The petitioner had other remedies open to him.
Nor could Ch.
IV of the Act be said, in view of article 19(6) of the Constitution, to offend that Article by permitting open competition between the State and a private citizen.
