The question for determination in these appeals was whether and to what extent the municipal activities of the Corporation of 943 Nagpur City fell within the term 'industry ' as defined by section 2 (14.) of the C.P. and Berar Industrial Disputes Settlement Act, 1947.
Disputes having arisen between the said Corporation and its employees in its various departments, the State Government referred them for adjudication to the State Industrial Court under section 39 of the Act and that Court by its award held that the Corporation and all its departments were covered by the said definition.
Against that award the Corporation made an application to the High Court under article 26 of the Constitution.
The High Court rejected its contention that the Corporation was not an industry within the meaning of the said section and remanded the case to the Industrial Court for determination as to which of its departments fell within the definition and making an award accordingly.
Thereafter The Industrial Court found all the departments of the Corporation except those dealing with (1) assessment and levy of house tax (2) assessment and levy of Octroi, (3) removal of encroachment and removal and pulling down of dilapidated houses, (4) prevention and control of food adulteration, and (5) maintenance of cattle pounds, to be industries within the meaning of the definition and passed its award accordingly.
The Corporation appealed to this Court by special leave but there was no appeal on behalf of the employees of the five departments excluded from the definition.
Held, that the decision of the Industrial Court except so far as it related to the five departments in respect of which the re was no appeal, must be affirmed.
The definition of the word 'industry ' in section 2 (14) of the C.P. and Berar Industrial Disputes Settlement Act, 1947, although in a language somewhat different from that of section 2 (1) of the , is very comprehensive.
It is in two parts, cl.
(a) defines it from the standpoint of employers and cl.
(b) from that of the employee.
An activity that falls within any of the two clauses must be ,in industry.
D.N. Banerji vs P. R. Mukherjee ; and Baroda Borough Municipality vs Its Workmen.
; , applied.
It is not necessary that an activity of the Corporation must share the common characteristics of an industry before it can come within the section.
The words Of section 2 (14) of the Act are clear and unambiguous and the maxim noscitur a socii can have no application.
The history of industrial disputes and the legislation, however, recognises the basic concept that the activity must be an organised one and not one that pertains to private or personal employment.
State of Bombay vs The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha.
; and Heydon 's Case b., referred to.
But the definition, however wide, cannot include the regal, primary and inalienable, functions of the State though statutorily delegated to a corporation and the ambit of such functions cannot be extended so as to include the welfare activities of a modern state and must be confined to legislative power, administration of law and judicial power.
120 944 Richard Coomber vs The Justices of the County of Berks, Berks.(1883 84) 9 A.C. 61 and The Federated State School Teachers ' Association of Australia vs The State of Victoria.
; , County Council of Middlesex vs Assessment Committee of St. George 's Union.
(1896) 2 Q.B.D. 143, Verisimo Vasquez Vilas vs City of Manila, 220 U. section 345, and The Federated Municipal and Shire Council Employees ' Union of Australia vs Mclbourne Corporation.
; , referred to.
The real test as to whether a service undertaken by a corporation is an industry must be whether that service, if ' performed by an individual or a private person, would be an industry.
Monetary cosideration cannot be an essential characteristic of industry in a modern State.
It was, therefore, incorrect to say that only such activities as were analogous to trade or business could come within section 2 (14) of the Act.
D. N. Banerji vs P.R. Mukherjee, ; , explained.
The Federated Municipal and Shire Council Employees ' Union of Australia vs Melbourne Corporation.
(19l8 19) ; , Federated Engine Drivey and Fireme 's Association and Ors.
vs The Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited and Ors.
5 and The Federated State School Teachers ' Association Australia vs The State of Victoria; , , referred to.
Where a service rendered by a Corporation is an industry, the employees of the departments connected with that service, whether financial, administrative or executive, would be entitled to the benefits of the Act.
Baroda Borough Municipality vs Its Workmen.
[1957] S.C.R. 33, referred to.
If a department of a municipality discharges many functions, some within and some without the definition of industry given by the Act, the predominant functions of the department shall be the criterion for the purposes of the Act.
