After the Police action in the State of Hyderabad in August, 1948, the Nizam, by a Farman dated September 19, 1948, invested the Military Governor " with all authority for the administration of the State " and by a later Farman declared that " the said authority includes and has always included authority to make Regulations." By virtue of the said powers, the Military Governor promulgated the Hyderabad (Abolition of jagirs) Regulations of 1358 Fasli.
Thereafter on the termination of the appointment of the Military Governor, the Nizam by another Farman appointed Mr. Vellodi as his Chief Minister and directed that " all the powers of administration, vested in the Military Governor before the said date are exercisable by the Chief Minister.
" Thus empowered, the Chief Minister promulgated the Hyderabad jagirs (Commutation) Regulation XXV of 1358 Fasli.
Thereafter with the commencement of the Constitution of India, the territory of the State of Hyderabad became part of the Union of India and the President certified the two Regulations under article 31(6) of the Constitution.
By the Constituion (First Amendment) Act of 1951, articles 31(A) and 31(B) and Sch.
IX were inserted into the Constitution and the two Regulations were included in the said schedule.
The appellant, whose properties had been taken over by the jagir Administrator under the Abolition Regulation, and who had, in the meantime, filed a writ petition in the High Court, by his amended petition after the amendment of the Constitution, claimed that sections 4(1)(c) and 4(2) of the Commutation Regulation and section 6(4) of the Abolition Regulation were confiscatory in nature and amounted to colourable and fraudulent exercise of legislative power.
The High Court found against him and rejected his petition: Held, that the decision of the High Court must be affirmed.
There can be no question that the Nizam, at the time when he executed the Farmans and prior to it, was an absolute ruler vested with all authority executive, legislative and judicial and had unquestionable powers to modify or extinguish any of the rights of his subjects and the language of the Farmans leaves no manner of doubt that he thereby delegated the entirety 312 of his authority and powers to the Military Governor and thereafter to the Prime Minister.
The doctrine of invalidity of legislation enacted in colourable exercise of legislative authority can apply only where the legislature is subject to constitutional restrictions.
But where the powers of the legislature suffers from no limitations, constitutional or otherwise, that doctrine can have no application.
No question of infringement of fundamental rights could arise as (i) the impugned Regulations were pre Constitution legislations and the appellant 's rights had already been determined before the Constitution, (ii) article 32(B) of the Constitution exempts the Regulations from such a challenge.
Keshavan Madhava Menon vs State of Bombay ; , referred to.
