One S lodged a first information report against K.
When K found that no action was taken on the report for several months he filed a criminal complaint against S contending that the report lodged by S was false.
At the instance of S the magistrate ordered K 's complaint to stand adjourned till the police made its final report on the first information report.
Thereupon K moved the High Court under section 561 A of the Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing the proceedings initiated by the first information report.
Pending the hearing the police submitted its report under section 173 of the Code.
Subsequently the High Court dismissed the petition.
K obtained special leave and appealed: Held that no case for quashing the proceedings was made out.
The inherent 'Jurisdiction of the High Court could be exercised to quash proceedings in a proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
The following are some categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction could and should be exercised to quash proceedings: (i) where there was a legal bar against the institution or continuance of the proceedings; (ii) where the allegations in the first information report or complaint did not make out the offence alleged; and (iii)where either there was no legal evidence adduced in support of the charge or the evidence adduced clearly or manifestly failed to prove the charge.
In exercising its jurisdiction under section 561 A of the Code the High Court cannot embark upon an enquiry as to whether the evidence in the case is reliable or not .
In the present case there was no legal bar to the institution of the proceedings or to their continuance; the allegations made in the first information report did constitute the offences alleged and it could not be contended that on the face of the record the charge was unsustainable.
In re: Shripad G. Chandavarkar, A.I.R. 1928 Bom.
184, jagat Chandra Mozumdar vs Queen Empress, Cal.
786, Dr. Shankar Singh vs The State of Punjab, (1954) 56 Punj.
L.W. 54, Nripendra Bhusan Ray vs Govind Bhandhu Majumdar, A.I.R. 1924 Cal.
1018 and Ramanathan Chettiar vs K. Sivarama Subrahmanya Ayyar, Mad. 722, referred to.
S.P. Jaiswal vs The State, , distin guished, 389
