The assessees were carrying on business in Bhavnagar which was formerly an Indian State.
In 1948 Bhavnagar became part of the United State of Saurashtra and on March 16, 1949 the Saurashtra Income tax Ordinance was promulgated.
For the purpose of calculating the depreciation allowance to which the assessees were entitled in computing the profits or gains of the business, the written down value of the building, machinery etc., had to be ascertained in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinance.
Section 13(5) (b) of the Ordinance provided that "the written down value meant, in the case of assets acquired before the previous year, the actual cost to the assessee less all depreciation actually allowed to him under this Ordinance or. . which would have been allowed to him if the Indian Income tax (1) A.I.R , was in force in the past".
For the assessment year 1949 50, as the assets of the assessees had been acquired before the previous year, the Income tax Officer, in ascertaining the written down value, deducted the depreciation which would have been allowable under the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, if it had been in force and a claim had been made supported by the prescribed particulars.
The assessees claimed that on the wording of it section 13(5) (b) of the Ordinance did not enable the Income tax Officer to make the deduction, as, in fact, no claim was made or could be made for such allowance.
For the assessment year 1951 52, as by that time Saurashtra had become a Part B State of the Union of India and the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 had been extended to it, the Income tax Officer, applied the provisions of section 10(5) (b) of the Indian Income tax Act read with para 2 of the Taxation Laws (Part B States) (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 1950, while computing the written down value and deducted not only the depreciation allowed in the assessment year 1950 51 under the Indian Income tax Act and the depreciation allowed in the assessment year 1949 50 under the Saurashtra Income tax Ordinance but also the deprecia tion availed of in the previous years by the assessees under the Bhavnagar War Profits Act.
Paragraph 2 of the Removal of Difficulties Order of 1950 provided: "In making any assessment under the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, all depreciation actually allowed under any laws or rules of a Part B State relating to income tax and super tax or any law relating to tax on profits of business shall be taken into account in computing the written down value under section 10(5) (b) of the Act".
The assessees contended that it was only when a difficulty was actually experienced in giving effect to the Act that the provision of the Order could come into operation in a particular case and as no such difficulty was actually experienced the said provision had no application, and that, in any case, as the Bhavnagar War Profits Act was not a law of the Part B State, para 2 of the Order was not applicable.
Held:(i) On the true construction of section 13(5)(b) of the Saurashtra Income tax Ordinance, the words "which would have been allowed to him" in that sub section meant "which should have been allowed if proper claim had been made", and that in ascertaining the written down value the depreciation that would have been allowed if proper claim had been made if the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, which was not in force in the State before, had been in force, should be deducted.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Kamala Mills Ltd., and Rajaratna Naranbhai Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax , distinguished.
(ii)It was for the Central Government to determine if any difficulty had arisen in giving effect to the provisions of the Indian 218 income tax Act, 1922, and then to make such order as appeared to it necessary to remove the difficulty, that once the order was made it operated under its own terms, and that in giving effect to the order it was not necessary for the Income tax Officer to examine first in any particular case whether any difficulty had arisen.
Accordingly, para 2 of that Taxation Laws (Part B States) (Removal of Difficulties Order, 1950, was applicable.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Dewan Bahadur Ram Gopal Mills Ltd., [19611 2 S.C.R. 318, followed.
(iii)The Bhavnagar War Profits Act was a law within the words " any law relating to tax on profits of business" in para 2 of the Removal of Difficulties Order of 1950.
