The vendors executed an agreement for sale in respect of a certain survey number which according to the agreement was to be diverted to non agricultural purposes and thereafter a sale deed was to be executed.
In pursuance to the said agreement the vendors applied for diversion which was sanctioned subject to the payment of premium and other conditions.
Before the sale deed was executed respondent No. 1 Sridhar brought a suit for pre emption against the appellant on the ground that he had a co occupancy in the survey number in dispute being the owner of the adjoining survey number.
The suit was decreed and on appeal the High Court inter alia held that the transaction was a sale which was subject to pre emption and that the failure to execute and register a sale deed was a subterfuge to defeat the right of pre emption.
The question for decision was (1) whether a right of pre emption had accrued to respondent Sridhar under the provisions of the Berar Land Revenue Code, 1928, and (2) whether the appellant was guilty of fraud in that in order to defeat the right of pre emption the deed of sale was not executed, but for all intents and purposes the appellant had become the owner of the property.
Held, that the right of pre emption in Berar did not arise from Mohamedon Law and did not exist till it was brought from Land laws of the Punjab or North West Provinces.
The right of pre emption under the Berar Land Revenue Code extended to transactions of sale, usufructuary mortgages and leases for 15 years or more and right under Mohamedon Law applies only to sales.
The word sale has no wider connotation under section 176 of the Berar Land Revenue Code than it has in the Transfer of Property Act.
After the application of Transfer of Property Act to Berar a transaction of sale could not be effective except through a registered instrument.
The contract of sale in the instant case created no interest in favour of the appellant and the proprietary title did not validly pass from the vendors to the appellant and until that was completed no right to enforce pre emption arose.
The transfer of 249 property, where the Transfer of Property Act applied, had to be under the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act only and neither the Mohamedon Law nor any other personal law of transfer of property could override the statute law.
There are no equities in favour of a pre emptor, whose sole object is to disturb a valid transaction by virtue of the right created by statute.
Held, further that it is neither illegal nor fraudulent for the parties to a transfer, to avoid and defeat a claim for preemption by all legitimate means and a person is entitled to steer clear of the laws of pre emption by all lawful means.
