By an order of the Ruler of the erstwhile State of Hyderabad an institution was formed for the development of industries on behalf of the Government, called the Industrial Trust Fund, to be managed by a committee called Trustees.
In 1934 the Trustees entered into agreements with two cotton mills situated in the State by virtue of which they were appointed secretaries, treasurers and agents of the said mills.
They were given the general management of the mills including the power to appoint employees and were also appointed selling agents of the mills.
By separate agreements the Trustees were given power to delegate to other persons all or any of the powers under the agreements subject to the approval of the Board of Directors of the respective mills.
On December 6, 1938, the Trustees entered into an agreement with the appellant whereby they delegated their powers in his favour and appointed him as the managing agent of their business as secretaries, treasurers and agents, as also selling agent of the two mills, subject to their general control.
The appellant was to hold the office of managing agent and selling agent for the remaining period of the original managing agency and selling agency agreements.
The remuneration of the appellant for the managing agency was fixed at Rs. 2,000 per month and a commission of 2 1/2 per cent.
out of the commission of 12 1/2 per cent.
per annum on the annual profits payable to the Trustees.
For the selling agency a separate commission was payable on the sale of different kinds of goods.
Clause 9 of the agreement provided 547 that the managing agent shall not assign the benefit of the agreement, the same being personal to himself.
For the accounting years 1941 42 and 1942 43 the appellant was assessed to excess profits tax, but he contended that the Trustees of the Industrial Trust Fund were the managing agents as also the selling agents of the two mills, that the Trustees employed him on certain terms and gave him certain powers, and that he was not carrying on an independent business of his own but was just carrying out the duties of an employee of the Trustees.
He claimed that his remuneration under the agreement dated December 6, 1938, was merely salary and not income derived from business and therefore not liable to excess profits tax : Held, (1) that under the agreements of 1934 the Trustees as agents had express authority to name the appellant to act for the principal in the business of agency and that therefore the appellant was neither a servant nor a mere sub agent, but an agent of the principal for such part of the business of agency as was entrusted to him, within the meaning of section 194 of the Indian Con tract Act, 1872.
(2)that on the true construction of the agreement dated December 6, 1938, the appellant was undertaking a business of his own in accepting the duties and responsibilities of a managing agent of the two mills under the general control of the Trustees, and that, therefore, the income derived by him as remuneration and commission was liable to excess profits tax.
Lakshminarayan Ram Gopal and Son Ltd. vs The Government of Hyderabad, ; and 1.
K. Trust, Bombay vs The Commissioner of Income tax excess Profits Tax, Bombay, [1958] S.C.R. 65, relied on.
