On October 10, 1958, the Himachal Pradesh Abolition of Big Landed Estates and Land Reforms Act, 1953, was declared invalid by the Supreme Court on the ground that the Legislative Assembly of the New Himachal Pradesh State which passed it was not duly constituted and was as such incompetent to pass the Act (Vide: Shree Vinod Kumar vs State of Himachal Pradesh, [1959] SUPP.
1 S.C.R. 160).
The President by Ordinance NO. 7 of 1958 validated the constitution and proceedings of the said Assembly.
That Ordinance was replaced by the Validating Act No. 56 of 1958 passed by the Parliament.
Section 3 of the Act validated the constitution and proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of the Himachal Pradesh State and section 4 prohibited the courts from questioning the validity of any Act or proceeding of the Assembly on the ground of defect in its constitution.
The Himachal Pradesh Abolition of Big Landed Estates and Land Reforms Act was accordingly validated.
The petitioners who were land holders challenged the constitutionality of the Ordinance and the validating Act, by petitions under article 32 of the Constitution: Held, that (i) in view of article 24o as it stood before its amendment by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, the Parliament was competent to enact the validating Act; (ii) the provisions of the Abolition Act did not infringe articles 19 and 31 Of the Constitution, and (iii)the Abolition Act fell within the protection of article 31A of the Constitution and it was not open to challenge on the ground that it infringed articles 19 and 31 Of the Constitution.
Shri Ram Narain vs State of Bombay, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 489, referred to.
The reason which precluded the members of the Old Himachal Pradesh Assembly from functioning as the Legislature of the New Himachal Pradesh State was that a Notification under section 74 of, the Representation of the People Act 1951, Was not 756 issued.
The Parliament, by virtue of its residual powers of legislation under article 248 of the Constitution and item No. 97 of List I to the Seventh Schedule, was competent to remove the defect that arose because of the failure to issue the notification, and to validate the actual proceedings of the body which functioned as the Legislature.
Under article 240 Of the Constitution, as it stood before it was amended by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, the Parliament was not debarred from enacting the validating Act nor did the power of the Parliament to validate the acts and proceedings of the State Legislature come to an end when the State itself ceased to exist.
