The appellant company was a dealer in ghee and groundnut oil etc.
The Deputy Commercial Tax Officer assessed it to sales tax for the year 1948 49 on a turnover of Rs. 28,69,151 and odd.
Similarly for the year 1949 50 the appellant was assessed to sales tax on a turnover of Rs. 28,72,o83 and odd.
The appellant challenged these assessments and its appeal before the Commercial Tax Officer having failed the two matters came up in second appeal before the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal.
In the Tribunal the appellant did not place any materials in support of its contentions and the two appeals were disposed of by the Tribunal holding that the appellant was correctly assessed to sales tax.
In respect of the aforesaid orders of the Tribunal the appellant filed applications for review under section 12A(6)(a) of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939 (Mad.
Act IX Of 1939), taking the plea that in the first case the materials could not be placed before the Tribunal as there was none to instruct the appellant 's advocate in English or Telegu, and in the second case the relevant correspondence was mixed up with other records.
The Tribunal rejected the applications for review on the ground that a failure to produce the necessary materials in support of a plea taken before it, due either to gross negligence or deliberate withholding, did not come within the reason of section 12A(6)(a) of the Act.
The High Court upheld the decision of the Tribunal.
On appeal by special leave in one case and a certificate of the High Court in the other: Held, that the provision in section 12A(6)(a) of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939 (Mad.
Act IX Of 1939), permits a review when through some oversight, mistake or error the necessary facts, basic or evidentiary, were not present before the Court when it passed the order sought to be reviewed, but a party was not 805 entitled to ask for a review when it had deliberately or intentionally withheld evidence in support of a claim made by it.
State of Andhra vs Sri Arisetty Sriyamulu, A.I.R. 1057 Andhra Pradesh 130, not approved.
