Under a quolnama the assessee company was granted exclusive rights in the nature of a monopoly to extract Shahabad Flag Stones without limit to quantity or measurement from quarries situated in six villages for a period of 12 years on annual payment of Rs. 28,000 but not to manufacture cement.
The stones had to be extracted methodically and skilfully before they could be dressed and sold.
The assessee company paid an initial sum of Rs. 96,000 as security and the balance of Rs. 20,000 was payable each year in monthly instalments of Rs. 1,666 10 8 each.
The payments were to be made even if no stones were extracted or could not be extracted.
The question was whether the amounts paid were allowable as business expenditure under section 12(2)(xv) of the Hyderabad Income Tax Act: Held (Per Kapur and Hidayatullah, jj. section K. Das, J., dissenting), that under the quolnama the assessee acquired by his long term lease a right to win stones and the lease conveyed to him a part of land.
The stones in situ were not his stock intrade in a business sense but a capital asset from which after extraction he converted the stones into his stock in trade.
The payment though periodic in fact was neither rent nor royalty but a lump sum payment in instalments for acquiring a capital asset of enduring benefit to his trade.
The right acquired is to a source from which the raw material was to be extracted.
The expenditure was outgoings on capital account and was not allowable as deductions under section 12(2)(XV) Of the Hyderabad Income Tax Act.
Per section K. Das, J. That on its true construction the trans action was the sale of raw materials coupled with a licence to the assessee to come on the land and remove the materials sold, the purchase price being paid partly in a lump sum and partly in monthly instalments, that the object was the procuring of the stones for making flag stones and not the acquisition of an enduring asset or advantage, that the payments made were the price of raw materials and that the assessee was therefore entitled to claim them as business expenditure under section 12(2)(xv) of the Hyderabad Income Tax Act.
Assam Bengal Cement Works Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal, , distinguished.
