The appellant in the first case (C. A. No. 88/56) and the respondents in the other two cases (C. As.
Nos. 91 & 92 of 1958) were shipping companies carrying goods by sea from one port to another.
They carried goods of the opposite parties by ships to their places of destination but failed to deliver the whole of the goods consigned.
In the suits brought by the owners of the goods for compensation the main question related to the interpretation of the 3rd clause of para.
6 of article III in the Schedule to the Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925 (XXVI Of 1925) which runs thus: " In any event the carrier and the ship shall be discharged from all liability in respect of loss or damage unless suit is brought within one year after the delivery of the goods or the date when the goods should have been delivered ".
In the first case the Madras High Court expressed the opinion that the above clause did not provide for the extinction of the consignor 's right to claim compensation but merely prescribed a rule of limitation.
It also held that the term in the bill of lading requiring that the claim for compensation should be made within one month from the date of arrival of the vessel was repugnant to Rule 8 to article III of the Schedule and was void.
The Bombay High Court held that article 111(6) dealt with all cases of loss or damage whether the loss or damage was caused by the deterioration of the goods or by their non delivery and further that the words " the loss or damage " included any loss or damage caused to the consignee in respect of his claim for compensation from the shipping company.
If also held that the goods should have been delivered as soon as they were landed.
On appeal by special leave: Held, that the word " loss " in cl. 3, para.
6 of article III in the schedule to the Indian Carriage of Goods Act, 1925, meant and included any loss caused to a shipper or consignee by reason of the inability of the ship or the carrier to deliver part or whole of the goods, to whatever reason such failure might be due.
Spens and another vs The Union Mayine Insurance Co. Ltd., 3 Common Pleas 427, distinguished, 821 Sandeman & Sons vs Tyzack and Branfoot Steamship Co. Ltd., , referred to.
The words "discharged from liability" were intended to mean and did mean that the liability had totally disappeared and not only that the remedy as regards the liability had disappeared.
The date when the goods should have been delivered for the purpose Of cl. 3, para.
6 of article III of the Act was the date when the ship by which the goods were carried left the port of delivery.
The stipulation in the bill of lading requiring claim for compensation being made within one month from the date of arrival of the ship was null and void.
