In the new State of Mysore (Now Karnatake) which came into existence on 1 11 56 as a result of integration of the areas which formed part of erstwhile States of Mysore, Madras, Coorg, Bombay and Hyderabad, the Government on 6 2 58, 7 2 58 and 2 12 60 respectively promulgated the following Rules (all framed under Article 309 of the Constitution) namely, "The Mysore Government Servants (Probation) Rules 1957, "The Mysore Government Servants (Seniority) Rules 1957 and "The Mysore Public Works Engineering Department Services (Recruitment) Rules, 1960" The recruitment Rules envisaged appointment of Assistant Engineers in the Public Works Department by direct recruitment to the extent of 40% and by promotion for the rest viz. 50% from the cadre of Junior Engineers and 10% from the cadre of supervisors.
The cadre of Assistant Engineers was to consist of 344 permanent and 345 temporary posts.
Prior to 1 11 56 in the merged States, there was a non gazetted class designated as graduate supervisors in Mysore State, as Junior Engineers in the Madras State and as supevisors in the States of Bombay and Hyderabad.
The claim of the graduate supervisors who were given charge of sub divisions prior to 1 11 56 and continued to hold the same even thereafter, for equation of their posts with those of Assistant Engineers, was rejected by the Central Government.
However, on 15 11 58, 167 of them (including 107 graduate supervisors from Mysore) and between the period 2nd Dec. 1958 and 13th October '60, 299 more persons of the same class were promoted as officiating Assistant Engineers.
With reference to three notifications of the Mysore Public Service Commission dt. 1 10 58, 4 5 59 and 1 4 61, eighty eight candidates were appointed on 31st Oct. ' 61, i.e. 8 days after the amendement of the Recruitment Rules giving them retrospective effect from 1st March 1958, as Probationary Assistant Engineers by direct recruitment.
The challenge to their appointment was ultimately rejected by this Court in B. N. Nagarajan vs State of Mysore & Ors., [1966] 3 S.C.R. p. 682 holding that their appointment although made after the Recruitment Rules had come into force, were valid, as the process of direct recruitment had been set in motion by the State Government in exercise of its executive power under Article 162 of the Constitution of India well before the Recruitment Rules were promulgated and that these appointments were therefore, "outside the Recruitment Rules".
In the year 1971 various orders were passed promoting some of the direct recruits to the posts of Executive Engineers and those orders were challenged by 938 the promotees on the ground that they had been given promotions "on regular basis" which amounted to substantive appointments and that therefore they should rank senior to the direct recruits.
Subsequent to the issue on 4 9 73 of a revised seniority list snperseding the list (G) prepared on 28 9 72 further writ petitions were filed by the promotees.
All the petitions were heard together by the High Court and allowed with the following directions: (i) Promotees other than those covered by direction (ii) and direct recruits, would not be governed by the quota system as envisaged in the Recruitment Rules.
(ii) Promotees who were appointed to posts of Assistant Engineers with effect from 1st of March 1958, or later dates, would be governed by the quota system as envisaged in the Recruitment Rules.
(iii) Promotees appointed as Assistant Engineers prior to 31st October 1961 would rank senior to the direct recruits whose appointments were made on that date.
(iv) The claim of each of the promotees to the next higher post shall be con sidered with effect from a day prior to that on which any officer found junior to him was promoted.
Allowing the appeals by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The scope of the writ petition was not limited to thq question of preme tion of Assistant Engineers as Executive Engineers.
The attack on the seaiority list dated 4th Sept. 1973 was inherent in the case set up by the promotees, of which it formed an integral part.
Though no prayer had been made by the promotees to quash or rectify the seniority list dated 4th September 1973, their whole case was based on the contention that they had been promoted to the posts of Assistant Engineers in a substantive capacity prior to the appointment of direct recruits, that they would take precedence over direct recruits in the matter of seniority and regular absorption in the cadre of Assistant Engineers and that it was on that account that the promoion of direct recruits to the posts of Executive Engineers without consideration of the case of the promotees for such promotion was illegal.
[946E G] 2.
No exception is or can be taken on behalf of the promotees to the finding arrived at by the High Court that the appointment of direct recruits to the posts of Assistant Engineers was in order, in view of the judgment of this Court in B. N. Nagarajan vs State of Mysore, [1966] 3 SCR p. 682.
Nor can it be urged with any plausibility on behalf of direct recruits that the appointment of the promotees as Assistant Engineers prior to the enforcement of the Recruitment Rules lay outside the powers of the Government or was otherwise illegal.
[946G H, 947A] V. B. Badami and Ors.
vs State of Mysore and Ors.
, [1976] 1 SCR 815 and B. N. Nagarajan vs State of Mysore and Ors., ; followed.
A combined reading of Rule 2 of the Seniority Rules and the definition of the words "appointed on probation" and "Probationer" in Rule 2 of the Probation Rules, makes it clear that the direct recruits were appointed as Assistant 939 Engineers, "substantively in clear vacancies" as envisaged by clause (a) of rule 2 of the Seniority Rules.
If any of the promotees also satisfied that requirement at any time earlier to the 31st of October 1961, he would be bracketed with the direct recruits under that clause and his seniority vis a vis those recruits would then be govened by clause (b) of the rule i.e., on the basis of his and their respective dates of confirmation.
If, on the other hand, none of the promotees can be said to have been appointed substantively in a clear vacancy, clause (a) aforesaid would have no application to them and all direct recruits would rank senior to them.
[947G H, 948A B] 4.
In the instant case, all through the relevant period the promotees held appointments as Assistant Engineers in non substantive capacity, i.e., either on an officiating or a temporary basis.
This being the position, they would all rank junior to the direct recruits who, from the very start, held appointments made "substantively in clear vacancies".
[950H, 951A] (a) The language employed in the first order dated 15th November 1958 (exhibit
A) appointing promotees as Assistant Engineers makes it clear that the promotion of the 167 officers was not substantively made, the tenure being specifically stated to be either "officiating" or "purely temporary" and "subject to review after the finalisation of the inter se seniority list of supervisors and the Recruitment Rules", which expressions clearly militate against a substantive appointment.
[948E G] (b) Orders made by the State Government later on right upto the 31st October, 1961 when the direct recruits were appointed as Assistant Engineers did not improve the position of any of the promotees in any manner.
These orders were either silent on the point of the nature of the tenure of the promotees as Assistant Engineers, or stoted in no uncertain terms that the promotees would hold the posts of Assistant Engineers on a temporary or officiating basis.
[948G H. 949A] (c) The two Notifications dated 27th February 1962, and order Exhibit (D).
dated 6th October 1962 the combined effect of which was to promote the said 107 officers as Assistant Engineers with effect from 1st of November 1956 "on a regulaur basis" do not give it the colour of permanence to the appointments of the promotees as Assistant Engineers which cannot therefore be deemed to have been made substantively right from the 1st of November 1956 for two reasons; Firstly, the words "regular" or "regularisation" do not connote permanence.
They are terms calculated to condone any procedural irregularities and are meant to cure only such defects as are attributable to the methodology followed in making the appointments.
Secondly, when rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India are in force, no regularisation is permissible in exercise of the executive powers of the Government under Article 162 thereof in contravention of the Rules.
The regularisation order was made long after the Probation Rules.
the Seniority Rules and the Recruitment Rules were promulgated and could not therefore direct something which would do violence to any of the provisions thereof.
Regularisation in the present case, if it meant permanence operative from the 1st of November, 1956 would have the effect of giving seniority to promotees over the direct recruits who, in the absence of such regularisation.
would rank senior to the former because of the Seniority Rules read with the Probation Rules and may in consequence also confer on the promotees a right of priority in the matter of sharing the quota under the Recruitment Rules.
In 940 other words, the regularisation order, in colouring the appointments of promotees as Assistant Engineers with permanence would run counter to the rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
What could not be done under the three sets of Rules as they stood, would thus be achieved by an executive fiat.
And such a course is not permissible because an act done in the exercise of the executive power of the Government, cannot override rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution.
[949B D, 950D G] State of Mysore and Anr.
vs section V. Naraynaswami, [1967] 1 SCR 128 and R. N. Nanjundappa vs T. Thimmiah, ; ; applied.
The Court made it clear (a) "that this order does not cover such officers as were holding the posts of Assistant Engineers on a substantive basis prior to the 1st of November, 1956 when the new State of Mysore now known as Karnataka came into being, and the case of any Assistant Engineer who acquired a substantive status prior to the promulgation of the Recruitment Rules and the appointment of the direct recruits; (b) that persons falling within these two categories will first have to be accommodated in the clear vacancies available and only the remaining vacancies will have to be utilised for fitting in the direct recruits and the Assistant Engineers who have disputed their claim in these proccedings; and (c) that the quota rule will not stand in the way of the Government giving effect to this arrangement which has been taken care of in the anemendment (promulgated on the 23rd of October 1961) to the Recruitment Rules"].
