The assesses firm which was doing business in Bombay was served with a notice on January 21, 1953, by the Income tax Officer under section 11(1) of the Business Profits Tax Act, 1947, in respect of the chargeable accounting period from November 13, 1947, to October 31, 1948, calling upon it to submit its return.
It filed the return under protest stating that the notice was barred under section 14 of the Act as it was served beyond the period of four 989 years.
The question was whether in section 11 of the Act a limitation corresponding to the limitation contained in section 14 must be necessarily read and whether in a case where the profits were not brought to assessment because notice under section 11 was not issued in time, they must be deemed to have escaped assessment and action could only be taken under section 14 within the time specified therein : Held (per section K. Das and Kapur, JJ., Hidayatullah, J., dissenting), (1) that the words " profits escaping assessment " in section 14 of the Business Profits Tax Act, 1947, apply equally to cases where a notice was received by the assessee but `resulted in no assessment, under assessment or excessive relief, and to cases where due to any reason no notice was issued to the assessee and therefore there was no assessment of his income; (2)that sections 11 and 14 Of the Act have to be read together and that a notice under section 11 cannot be issued against an assessee beyond the period of four years indicated in section 14.
Kamal Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 10 and Mahayajadhiraj Sir Kameshwar Singh vs State Of Bihar, ; , relied on.
Gokuldas Ratanji Mandavia vs Commissioner of Income tax, , distinguished.
Per Hidayatullah, J. Section 11 of the Business Profits Tax Act, 1947, is confined to cases where there has been no prior assessment, while section 14 is applicable to cases where after an assessment there is discovery that profits have escaped assessment due to one reason or another.
The use of the words " escaped assessment " in the context of the Act has reference only to those cases where profits of a business were brought to process once but for some reason some profits escaped assessment or were under assessed or received excessive relief.
For the subsequent and re opened assessment there is a limit of four years, but for the assessment for the first time there is no limit.
