The appellant company had been carrying on various classes of insurance business other than life insurance after its incorporation in 1941, but in 1956 the shareholders of the company passed a resolution by which all its insurance business was to be closed.
Accordingly, on application made by the company to the Controller of Insurance, the certificate granted to it for carrying on insurance business was cancelled with effect from July 1, 1957.
in the meantime, complaints against the company were being received by the Government of India, who, thereupon, passed an order on July 17, 1957, under section 33 of the , directing the Controller of Insurance to investigate the affairs of the company and to submit a report.
The company challenged (1)(1923) L.R. 51 I.A. 129.
(2) I.L.R. 858 the legality of the order on the grounds, (1) that as all its insurance business had been closed the Central Government had no jurisdiction to pass an order under section 33 of the Act, which only enables the investigation of the affairs of an insurer who, as defined in section 2(9), is one who is actually carrying on the business of insurance, (2) that such an order could not be sustained under section 2D of the Act as that section was applicable only to those cases where an insurer was carrying on different classes of insurance business and had closed some of them but not all of them, (3) that even if such order could be passed under section 33 read with s.2D it could not be done in the present case as the company 's liabilities did not remain unsatisfied or not otherwise provided for, and (4) that, in any case, the order in question was invalid because it did not show on the face of it that the Central Government was prima facie satisfied that the liabilities had remained unsatisfied or not otherwise provided for: Held, (1) that the word " insurer " in section 33 of the , refers not only to a person who is actually carrying on the business of insurance but also to one who has subsequently closed it.
(2) that in section 2D of the Act an " insurer " means a person who was carrying on the business of insurance but has closed it.
(3)that the word " class " in section 2D though used in the singular includes the plural also and the section is applicable to the case where an insurer who was carrying on different classes of insurance business closes all of them.
(4) that the expression " not otherwise provided for " in section 2D refers to liabilities in the nature of claims against the insurer whether the insurer admits them or not and whether a decree has been finally passed in respect of them or not.
(5) that under section 2D the satisfaction or " provision other wise " for the liabilities of insurance business which is closed, does not refer to the deposit made under section 7 and has to be over and above that deposit.
(6) that though an order under section 33 read with section 2D of the Act should show on the face of it that the Central Government was prima. ' facie satisfied that the liabilities had remained unsatisfied or not otherwise provided for, the fact that the order does not on the face of it show that the Central Government considered this aspect of the matter would not make it bad, if in subsequent ,proceedings taken to challenge it, it is shown that there were materials before the Central Government which would justify its coming to the prima facie conclusion that the liabilities had not been satisfied or otherwise provided for, and therefore an investigation into the affairs was called for.
