The appellant, who was employed in the Punjab Police, was found while working as a Police Censor to have detained certain letters illegally and later to have made use of copies and photographs of the them for blackmail.
He was consequently reverted to his substantive post of head constable on January 14, 1944.
Thereafter an enquiry was started against him by the Superintendent of Police and eventually he was dismissed from service on January 25, 1944.
His representations to higher authorities having failed he instituted a suit challenging the legality of the order of dismissal on the grounds, inter alia, (1) that section 240(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935, had not been complied with, and (2) that as the appellant was alleged to have committed a criminal offence the Superintendent of Police could not hold a departmental enquiry in respect of such allegations in view of SS. 29 and 35 of the .
Held : (1) that section 243 of the Government of India Act, 1935, 65 which was a special provision with regard to the subordinate ranks of police forces in India, excluded the operation of section 24G(3) of the Act to the appellant, who was, therefore, governed by the conditions of service as provided under the Police Regulations, and that the substance of section 240(3) which was brought into the Police Regulations in September 1946 long after the appellant had been dismissed was not applicable to him.
Accordingly, he was not entitled to the second notice, under section 240(3), giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.
North West Frontier Province vs Suraj Narain Anand and High Commissioner for India and High Commis sioner for Pakistan vs I. M. Lal, , referred to.
(2) that the provisions of the , relating to offences committed by a police officer above the rank of a constable do not bar a departmental enquiry in respect of a matter where it is also possible to prosecute such an officer under that Act.
