S was the karta of the Hindu undivided family, consisting of himself and his younger brother.
Their father was the Treasurer of a Bank till his death in 1950.
During his father 's lifetime S was employed as an overseer in the Bank on a salary of Rs. 400 a month, and, subsequently, after his father 's death he was appointed Treasurer of the Bank at Delhi and sixteen other branches of the Bank.
As Treasurer he furnished security to the Bank of certain properties of the Hindu undivided family.
The agreement dated September 19, 1950, between him and the Bank, showed that he was appointed Treasurer on a monthly salary of Rs. 1,75o and he was also paid certain sums of money for guaranteeing the conduct of the cashiers and other members of the Cash Department Staff which he was required to employ with the approval of the Bank.
He was to carry out his duties as directed by the Bank and if in the discharge of his duties he caused any loss to the Bank he was liable to make good the loss.
He was not required to serve personally, but his services could be terminated by notice.
In the year of account 1950 51 he received from the Bank a sum of RS.
23,286 as Treasurer.
The Income tax authorities considered that this sum was not the individual income of S as salary but was part of the income of the Hindu undivided family and taxed if as such on the grounds (1) that the agreement between S and the Bank showed that the relationship between them was not one of master and servant but that of an employer and independent contractor and that the emoluments received by the Treasurer were profits and gains of business, (2) that S was appointed Treasurer not on account of any personal qualification but because his father was a Treasurer of the Bank before him, and (3) that as the security furnished by S came out of the joint family properties, the emoluments could not be said to have been earned without detriment to the family property and therefore were part of the Hindu undivided family: Held, (1) That on the true construction of the agreement dated September 19, 1950 the Treasurer was a servant of the Bank.
Shivanandan Sharma vs The Punjab National Bank Ltd. ; and Dhayangadhara Chemical Works Ltd. vs State Of Saurashtra, , relied on.
(2) That in view of the fact that there was nothing to show that S had received any particular training at the expense of the 87 670 family funds or that his appointment as Treasurer was the result of any outlay or expenditure of or detriment to the family property, but on the other hand his previous experience as an overseer of the Bank was indicative of personal fitness for his appointment as Treasurer, the mere fact he had lodged joint family property by way of security would not make his earnings as Treasurer part of the income of the Hindu undivided family.
The use of the words " risk of " and " detriment to " in Gokul Chand vs Firm Hukum Chand Nath Mal, (1921) L.R. 48 I.A. 162, explained.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Kalu Babu Lal Chand, [1960] 1 S.C.R. 32o, distinguished.
Accordingly, the emoluments received by S were in the nature of salary and therefore assessable under section 7 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, and not under section 10 of the Act as profits and gains of business, and the salary was the income of the individual, S, and not the income of the Hindu undivided family.
