The petitioner, the Editor of the Searchlight, an English daily newspaper published from Patna, was called upon to show cause before the Committee of Privileges of the Bihar Legislative Assembly why he should not be proceeded against for the breach of privilege of the Speaker and the Assembly for publishing an inaccurate account of the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly.
He moved this Court under article 32 of the Constitution for quashing the said proceeding and the question for decision in substance was whether the said privilege conferred by article 194(3) of the Constitution was subject to the fundamental 97 rights of a citizen under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
This Court by a majority found against the petitioner.
Thereafter the Assembly was prorogued several times, the Committee of Privileges reconstituted and a fresh notice was issued to the petitioner.
By the present petition the petitioner in substance sought to reopen the decision, raise the same controversy once again and contend that the majority decision was wrong.
The question was whether he could be allowed to do so.
Held, that the general principles of res judicata applied and the judgment of this Court could not be allowed to be reopened and must bind the petitioner and the Legislative Assembly of Bihar and the reconstitution of the Committee of Privileges in the meantime could make no difference.
Raj Lakshmi Dasi vs Banamali Sen, ; , applied.
Since this Court had held that the Legislature bad the power to control the publication of its proceedings and punish any breach of its privilege, there could be no doubt that it had complete jurisdiction to carry on its proceedings in accordance with its rules of business and a mere non compliance with rules of procedure could be no ground for interference by this Court under article 32 of the Constitution.
Janardan Reddy vs The State of Hyderabad, ; , referred to.
Prorogation of the Assembly does not mean its dissolution and the only effect it has is to interrupt its proceedings which can be revived on a fresh motion to carry on or renew them.
It was, therefore, not correct to contend that since the Assembly was prorogued several times since after the alleged breach of privilege, the proceeding must be deemed to be dead.
