The United Provinces Agricultural Income tax Act, 1949, authorised imposition of a tax on agricultural income within the State, and the agricultural income tax and super tax were charged on the total agricultural income of the previous year of the assessee.
For the purposes of the Act the Collector and the Assistant Collector were declared to be the assessing authorities within their respective revenue jurisdiction and the expression " Collector " was to have the same meaning as in the United Provinces Land Revenue Act, 1901.
Under the rules framed by the government under section 44 of the Act an assessee having agricultural income in the jurisdiction of more than one assessing authority was to be assessed by the Collector of the district in which he permanently resided.
The State Government of Uttar Pradesh appointed Mr. K. C. Chaudhry under subS. 1 of section 14(A) of the United Provinces Land Revenue Act, 1901 to be the Additional Collector in District Bahraich and authorised him to exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of a Collector in all classes of cases ".
Claiming to exercise the 83 powers of a Collector under section 14 of the United Provinces Agricultural Income tax Act of 1949 he assessed the net agricultural income of the assessee who owned landed property in two districts, namely, Bahraich and Kheri in the State of Uttar Pradesh, at 12,81,110 10 0 and ordered him to pay Rs. 1,36,390 2 0 as agricultural income tax and super tax.
The validity of this order was challenged by the assessee in the High Court by an application under article 226 of the Constitution and the High Court quashed the order of the Additional Collector holding that he had no " extra territorial " jurisdiction which was exercised by the Collector as the assessing authority in cases where the property of the assessee was situate in several districts and as such the proceeding taken by him for assessing agricultural income tax was unauthorised.
After the judgment of the High Court was delivered the State Legislature amended the United Provinces Agricultural Income tax Act, 1949, by Act XIV of 1956, giving retrospective operation to the amending provisions.
The Amendment Act enacted that the assessment proceedings held by an Additional Collector who was invested with the powers of a Collector under Act III of 1901 should be deemed always to have been properly taken.
The State Government submitted before the High Court an application under section 11 of the amending Act for review of its judgment but it was dismiss ed.
On appeal by the State Government by special leave, Held, that the Additional Collector was competent to assess the liability of the assessee to pay agricultural income .tax and super tax under the United Provinces Agricultural Income tax Act, 1949.
A Court of appeal must give effect to the law as it stood at the time of hearing of the appeal if at any stage anterior to the hearing the law had been amended with retrospective effect conferring on an authority or tribunal from the order whereof the appeal is filed, jurisdiction which it originally lacked.
The power of the appellate court to deal with the appeal in accordance of the amended law is not affected by a provision for review as contained in section 11 of the Amending Act.
