A Swedish company manufacturing ball bearing equipment entered into an agreement with the respondent, section K. F. Ball Bearing Co. Ltd. registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1913, appointing the latter as its sole selling agent in India.
The material portion of the Agreement ran thus: " Clause 23: The Agent shall pay to section K. F. net sales value of the said products that are sold each month, after deduction of the Commission that has been agreed upon and the import expenses that have been paid.
Payment shall be made in Sweden thirty days at the latest following the last day of the month in which the sales have been effected." During the second world war a corporation known as the Pan rope Corporation was incorporated in the Republic of Panama to take over the assets and business of the Swedish company and the said Panrope Corporation in its turn conveyed the property and business to the Swedish company.
Thereafter the respondent company sold in India as the agent of the foreign Corporations goods manufactured by them, and in a majority of the sales the respondent company remitted the " sale value " to the foreign corporations after the goods were sold but before the sale proceeds were recovered from the buyers.
In some cases remittances were made even before the goods were sold and in others remittances were made after the sale proceeds were realised from the buyers.
The Income tax Officer assessed the foreign corporations under section 4(1)(a) of the Indian Income tax Act for payment of tax on the profit included in the price realised by the respondent company without making any distinction between remittances made before recovery of the sale proceeds and remittances made after recovery of the sale proceeds.
This order was confirmed by the higher income tax authorities.
On a reference made at the instance of the respondent company the High Court came to the conclusion that the foreign corporations had a business connection in the taxable territories in the years of account and the respondent company was liable to pay tax on their behalf only with regard to remittances made after the sale proceeds were recovered.
On appeal by the Commissioner of Income tax by special leave, 142 Held, that the liability to pay income tax finder s, 4(1)(a) arose on the receipt of the income and the question whether the income was received in the taxable territory was determined by the place where the price was received.
Profits were received by the respondent company on behalf of the foreign corporations in the taxable territory in respect of all sales of consigned goods irrespective of whether the remittances were made either before or after the price was received.
