Section 6(1) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 (Bom.
LXVII of 1948), provided that the maximum rent payable by a tenant shall not in the case of irrigated land exceed one fourth and in the case of any other land exceed one third of the crop of such land or its value as determined by the prescribed manner.
Section 6(2) of the Act read as follows, " The Provincial Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix a lower rate of the maximum rent payable by the tenants of lands situate in any particular area or may fix such rate on any other suitable basis as it thinks fit." By a notification under that section the Government of Bombay, in supersession of all other notifications prescribed a rate of maximum rent which was very much lower than the one previously fixed.
The petitioners challenged the vires of the said section and the validity of the notification under article 226 of the Constitution, but the High Court found against them.
The question for determination in these appeals was whether section 6(2) conferred unguided power on the Government and was void by reason of excessive delegation of legislative power.
342 Held (per Sinha, C. J., Kapur, Gajendragadkar and Wanchoo, jj.) that although the power of delegation is a constituent element of the legislative power, it is well settled that a legislature cannot delegate its essential legislative function in any case and before it can delegate any subsidiary or ancillary powers to a delegate of its choice, it must lay down the legislative policy and principle so as to afford the delegate proper guidance in implementing the same.
A statute challenged on the ground of excessive delegation must, therefore, be subjected to two tests, (1) whether it delegates essential legislative function or power and (2) whether the legislature has enunciated its policy and principle for the guidance of the delegate.
It is in that light that the preamble of the statute and its provisions relating to delegation should be considered.
Harishankay Bagla vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, and The Edward Mills Co. Ltd., Beawar vs State of Ajmer ; , referred to.
The preamble and the material provisions of the Act show that it seeks to improve the economic and social condition of the peasants and with that end in view fixes maximum rent payable by the tenants and provides a speedy machinery for fixation of reasonable rent.
This being the legislative policy and regard being had to the specific provisions laid down by section 12(3) of the Act for determining reasonable rent, it is impossible to hold that the power delegated to the Provincial Government by section 6(2) was vitiated by excessive delegation.
The fact that no minimum was prescribed by the section could not alter the position.
Held, further, that since the Act itself is within the protection of article 31 B of the Constitution and there can be no question as to the validity of section 6(2), the notification issued in exercise of the power conferred by that section cannot be challenged as infringing article 31 of the Constitution.
Nor was it correct to say that the power delegated by section 6(2) could be used only once and no more.
Per Subba Rao, J. The essential legislative function is the determination of the legislative policy and its formulation as a rule of conduct.
Obviously the legislature cannot abdicate its functions in favour of another.
But in view of the multifarious activities of a welfare State, it cannot presumably work out all the details to suit the varying aspects of a complex situation.
It must necessarily delegate the working out of details to the executive or any other agency.
But there is a danger inherent in such a process of delegation.
It may not lay down any policy at all; it may declare its policy in vague and general terms; it may not set down any standard for the guidance of the executive, it may confer an arbitrary power on the executive to change or modify the policy laid down by it without reserving for itself any control over subordinate legislation.
This self effacement of legislative power in favour of another agency 343 either in whole or in part is beyond the permissible limits of delegation.
It is for a Court to hold on a fair, generous and liberal construction of an impugned statute whether the legislature exceeded such limits.
But the said liberal construction should not be carried by the courts to the extent of always trying to discover a dormant or latent legislative policy to sustain an arbitrary power conferred on executive authorities.
In re The ; , , Rajnarain, Singh vs The Chairman, Patna Administration Committee, Patna, ; , Harishankay Bagla vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, , The Edward Mills Co., Ltd., Beaway vs The State of Ajmer, ; and Hamdard Dawakhana vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
The whole scheme of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 (LXVII of 1948), excluding section 6(2), is a self contained and integrated one.
The legislature fixes the maximum rent linked with crop having regard to the nature of the land, and the other provisions enable the appropriate authorities to fix reasonable rent subject to that maximum.
But under section 6(2) the legislature in clearest terms abdicated its essential functions in favour of the executive authority without laying down any standard for its guidance.
In effect it permitted the Government to amend section 6(1) of the Act.
While section 6(1) overrides other provisions of the Act, section 6(2) derogates from section 6(1) itself.
Section 6(2) is capable of being exercised in such a way that the object of section 6(1) is itself frustrated.
Section 6(1) in effect is made subject to section 6(2).
This is clearly an abdication by the legislature of its essential legislative function and the delegation must be held void.
It was not correct to say that the factors specified by section 12(3) afforded a standard 'for fixing the maximum rent.
It was not permissible to read them into section 6(2) of the Act.
No legislature can be legally permitted to lay down a broad policy in general terms and confer arbitrary powers on the executive for carrying it out.
Such a law must obviously be contrary to the decisions of this Court and cannot be valid.
