The appellant was using certain premises in Calcutta for storing rice flour, etc.
without taking out any license under section 386(1)(a) of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1923.
The respondent filed a complaint against the appellant for a contravention of section 386(1)(a).
The trial Magistrate acquitted the appellant holding that the provisions of section 386(1)(a), neither in terms nor by necessary implication bound the Government whom the appellant represented.
In revision, the High Court held that the Government was bound by a statute unless the legislature excluded it expressly or by necessary implication.
The High Court declined to follow the decision of the Privy Council in L. R. 73 1.
A. 271 that the general principle applicable in England applied to Indian legislation also.
Held, that the State was not bound by the provisions of section 386(1)(a) of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1923, and that the appellant was not liable to be prosecuted for a contravention of this section.
Per Sinha, C. J., Imam and Shah, jj.
The law applicable to India before the Constitution was as authoritatively laid down by the Privy Council in L. R. 73 I. A. 271.
The Constitution has not made any change in the legal position.
On the other hand it has clearly indicated that the laws in force before January 26, 1950, shall continue to have validity even in the new set up except in so far as they were in conflict with the express provisions of the Constitution.
The rule of interpretation of statutes that the State is not bound by a statute unless it is so provided in express terms or by necessary implication, is still good law.
Province of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay, (1946) L.R. 73 I. A. 271, applied.
Bell vs The Municipal Commissioners for the City of Madras, Mad. 457, disapproved.
The Corporation of Calcutta vs Sub Postmaster, Dharmatala Post Office, , United States of America vs 159 United Mine Workers of America; , , United States of America vs Reginald P. Wittek, (1949) 93 L. Ed.
1406, Less Larson vs Domestic and Foreign Commerce Corporation, ; and Roberts vs Abern, (1904) I C. L. R. 406, referred to.
There is nothing in the Act to indicate that the State was bound by it by necessary implication, nor is there anything in it to show that if section 386 were not held to apply to the State the law would lose it efficacy or that its working would be hampered in any way.
Per Sarkar, J.
The rule that the crown is not bound by the provisions of any statute unless it is directly or by necessary implication referred to is really a rule of construction of statutes and is not dependent on royal prerogatives.
It has been applied by courts in India all along before the Constitution and there is no reason why it should not be applied to the interpretation of statutes after the Constitution.
Attorney General vs Donaldson, ; , Coomber V ' justices of Berks; , , Roberts vs Ahern, (1904) I C.L.R. 406, United States vs United Mine Workers of America; , , United States vs The State of California, ; Bell vs The Municipal Commissioners for the City of Madras, Mad. 457, Mersey Docks vs Cameron, ; and Coomber vs Justice of Berks, , Greig vs University of Edinburgh, (1868) L. R.
I H. L. (SC.) 348 and Cooper vs Hawkin section , referred to.
Section 386(1)(a) does not bind the Government by necessary implication; the fact that certain provisions of the Act expressly exempt the Government does not raise the necessary implication.
Nor would the purposes of the Act be defeated if the Government were not bound by it.
Hornsey Urban Council vs Hennel, and Province of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation, Bombay, (1946) L.R. 73 1.
A. 271, relied on.
Per Wanchoo, J.
The rule of construction which is based on the royal prerogative as known to the common law of England cannot be applied to India now when there is no crown in India and when the Common law of England is not applicable.
The, proper rule of construction which should be applied now is that the state is bound by a statute unless it is exempted expressly or by necessasy implication.
Province of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay, (1946) L. R. 73 1.
A. 271, not applied.
United States of America vs United Mine Workers of America, Etc., , United States of America vs Reginald P. Wittek; , , Jess Larson vs Domestic and Foreign 160 Commerce Corporation; , , H. Snowden Marshall vs People of the State of New York, (192O) 65 L. Ed. 315 and Guaranty Trust Company of New York vs United States of America, ; , referred to.
The Calcutta Municipal Act, 1923, does not specifically exempt the State from its provisions, As the State cannot be sentenced to imprisonment it is exempt by necessary implication from all penal provisions providing for sentences of imprisonment or death.
Further, where a statute provides for a fine and the fine goes to the State, the State is exempted from the provisions by necessary implication as it could never be the intention that such a prosecution should be launched.
The prosecution in the present case is under section 488 which provides for a fine for a breach of section 386, and the fine when imposed and realised goes to the State.
Consequently, the State is exempt from the penal provisions of section 488 of the Act by necessary implication.
