The respondent was the successful candidate at the general election held in March, 1957, for the Punjab Legislative Assembly.
The appellant who was one of the unsuccessful candidates, filed an election petition and challenged the validity of the respondent 's election on the grounds, inter alia, that the latter was not a citizen of India and was, therefore, not qualified to stand for election.
It was found that he was born of Indian parents sometime in 1927 in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, in a village which since August 15, 1947, became part of Pakistan, that in 1944 he had moved from his home district to Jullunder in what is now the territory of India, and that after August 15, 1947, he definitely made up his mind to settle in India with the intention of residing there permanently.
There was some evidence to show that he went to Burma in January, 1950, and made unsuccessful attempts to secure permission from the Government of Burma to stay there permanently.
The question was whether the respondent could be deemed to be a citizen of India within the meaning of article 6 of the Constitution of India.
Held:(1) that the expression " migrated to the territory of India " in article 6 of the Constitution means " migrated at any time before the commencement of the Constitution to a place now in the territory of India ".
(2)that in article 6 the words " migrated to the territory of India " mean " come to the territory of India with the intention of residing there permanently ".
(3)that where a person moves from one country to another and has, at the time of moving, a intention to remain in the country where he moved only temporarily, but later on forms the intention of residing there permanently, he should be held in law to have migrated to that country at the later point of time.
(4)that for applying the test of being " ordinarily resi dent in the territory of India since the date of his migration " in article 6(b)(i), what is necessary to be shown is that during the period beginning with the date on which migration became 577 complete and ending with November 26, 1949, as a whole, the person has been " ordinarily resident in the territory of India ".
Whether he was not in India on January 26, 1950, or whether he formed an intention of taking up his permanent residence in Burma when he left for that place in January, 1950, was not relevant.
(5)That the words " ordinarily resident " in the Consti tution mean " resident during this period without any serious break ".
It is not necessary that for every day of this period the person should have resided in India.
(6)that the respondent satisfied the requirements of article 6 ofthe Constitution and that his claim to be deemed a citizen of India must be upheld.
