As the petitioner 's stage carriage permits were to expire on December 31, 1959, it made applications for a renewal of them 81 632 on August 24, 1959.
on December 29, 1959, temporary permits were granted to the petitioner for one month and thereafter for another, made available up to March 31, 196o.
The matter was adjourned from time to time and ultimately on April 28, 196o, the petitioner 's applications were rejected on the ground that a scheme of nationalisation including the petitioner 's routes had in the meantime been approved by the Government on April 20, 196o.
The petitioner applied under article 32 of the Constitution for a writ quashing the said order and the scheme, on the ground that the Regional Transport Authority was actuated by mala fides and its real purpose in granting the adjournments was to enable the Government to approve of the scheme, and for a direction that the petitioner 's applications for renewal might be disposed of according to law as on the date when they were filed.
Held, that the petition must fail.
The , does not prescribe any time limit for the disposal of an application for renewal of permits and it cannot be said that the Regional Transport Authority in the instant case acted without jurisdiction in rejecting the applications even though months had elapsed after the permits had expired and notwithstanding that section 62 permitted the issue of no more than one temporary permit.
Even so, the relevant provisions of the Act indicate that an application for renewal of a permit has to be disposed of ordinarily before the expiry of the permits or within a reasonable time thereafter.
It was, therefore, open to the petitioner, if it was aggrieved by the delay, to ask for a mandamus directing the Authority to dispose of its applications within a reasonable time.
Although section 68F(1) of the Act applies only where the State Transport Undertaking applies for a permit in pursuance of an approved scheme, section 68F(2) is not conditioned by any such limitation and the word 'entertain used by it does not refer to an application filed for the renewal of a permit after the approval of the scheme.
That word does not connote any time but describes the scope and duty under that clause and only means that the Authority cannot dispose of an application on merits but can reject it as not maintainable either at the time it is filed or thereafter.
Statutory bodies are in duty bound to act promptly and efficiently and discharge their functions fairly and without bias even where the Government is interested.
The conduct of the Regional Transport Authority, in the instant case, in granting adjournments, not for the reasons they purported to be but to enable the Government to approve of the scheme, must be disapproved.
