The State of Travancore Cochin merged with Indian Union on March 7, 1949, but the Travancore Income tax Regulation, VIII of 1096 (Malayalam Era) and the Travancore Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, II24 (Malayalam Era), continued to apply to that area not withstanding the merger.
On August 6, 1949, the Travancore Cochin Government passed an order referring the case of the appellants to the com mission constituted under the 'Travancore Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1124 M. E.
The investigation commission held by its report that the appellants had made a secret profit in the accounting year 1118 M. E., which was not included in the income tax return submitted by the appellants earlier.
The Travancore Cochin Government accepted the report and directed recovery of the tax due by its order dated February 14, 1950.
The Income tax Officer without holding any fresh assessment proceedings, issued a demand notice.
The Union Legislature enacted the Opium and Revenue Laws (Extension of Application) Act (33 of 1950) providing for extension of certain opium and revenue laws to certain parts of India.
In exercise of the authority under section 8(2) of the said Travancore Investigation Act, read with section 3, cl.
(c), of the Opium and Revenue Laws (Extension of Application) Act, the Government of India, on October 25, 1951, directed that appropriate assessment proceedings under the Travancore Income tax Act be taken against the appellants with a view to assess or reassess the concealed income which bad escaped assessment.
The Commissioner of Income tax withdrew the earlier notice of demand and thereafter the Income tax Officer after reassessment proceedings directed the appellants to pay income tax and super tax on the concealed income.
The said orders of the Government of India and of the 467 Income tax Officer were questioned by the appellants and the matter was referred by the Commissioner of Income tax to the High Court.
The High Court held that the orders in question were valid orders.
The appellant appealed with special leave.
Held, that the Government of India had the powers under section 3(c) of the , to direct proceedings for assessment or reassessment under the Travancore Income tax Regulation after consideration of the report made by the Travancore Investigation Commission.
The order passed by the Government of India on February 14, 1950, was not inconsistent with the order passed by the Travancore Cochin Government.
Liability to pay income tax would arise only on an effective order of assessment.
No such order having been passed by the Income tax Officer in the instant case, there could be no doubt as to the competency of the Government of India to direct proceedings for assessment.
There is nothing in section 8(2) of the Travancore Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act which states that action may be taken thereunder only once, and if an unauthorised direction is given thereunder there is nothing which prevents rectification of that order.
By sub section
(4) 'of section 8 of the Travancore Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act the findings by the Investigation Commission are final in all assessment or reassessment proceedings.
Section 8(2) of the Act removed the bar of limitation which arose by section 25 of the Income tax Act.
Consequently, it was competent to the Income tax Officer to reopen the assessment proceedings notwithstanding any lapse of time and the previous order of assessment did not operate as a bar to such re. assessment.
