The petitioner Company carrying on the business of manu facturing bidis and having its head office at Jabalpur in the State of Madhya Pradesh made certain purchases of tobacco in the State of Bombay.
The Sales Tax Officer assessed the petitioner to a purchase tax under the provisions of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1953.
The petitioner contested the assessment of 710 purchase tax on the grounds that those transactions and pur chases were " Outside the State of Bombay " within the meaning of article 286(1)(a) of the Constitution read with the Explanation, that the provisions of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1953, did not authorise the imposition, levy or collection of any purchase tax on the transactions in question and that the transactions took place in the course of inter State trade and commerce.
The petitioner 's appeal to the Assistant Collector of Sales Tax was dismissed and then the present petition for writs of mandamus and certiorari was filed in the Supreme Court.
The petitioner contended that the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1953, did not authorise the imposition of a tax on the purchase of bidi tobacco which was not one of the goods specified in column 4 of Schedule B of the said Act.
The petitioner further contended that the purchased tobacco was delivered to it within the State of Bombay as a direct result of the purchase but it was intended to be sent to the State of Madhya Pradesh to be manufactured into bidis at that place.
The only thing which was done in the Bombay State was to remove the stem and dust from the tobacco which process did neither amount to " consumption " of tobacco as contemplated under the Explanation to article 286 of the Constitution nor did it convert the tobacco which was sent to the Head Office into an article " commercially different " from the tobacco purchased from the cultivators.
In their counter affidavit the respondents averred that the raw tobacco was converted into bidi pattis before it was sent outside Bombay State both of which were commercially different articles and the market value of which was also different.
These averments were not controverted by the petitioner.
Held, that the words " all goods other than those specified from time to time in Schedule A and in the preceding entries " in entry 8o of Schedule B of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1953, amounted to a specification of goods for the purposes of section lo of the Act and as bidi tobacco purchased by the petitioner was not within Schedule A or any of the earlier entries in Schedule B purchase tax at the rate mentioned against entry 8o was leviable under section 1o of the Act.
Whenever a commodity was so dealt with as to change it into another commercial commodity there was consumption of the first commodity within the meaning of the Explanation to article 286 of the Constitution.
State of Travancore Cochin vs Shanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory, ; , followed.
The delivery of tobacco in Bombay State for changing it into bidi patti which is a commercially different article amount ed to delivery for the purpose of consumption and the purchase fell within the meaning of article 286(i)(a) of the Constitution and took place inside tile Bombay State.
