The respondent was Siem of Mylliem siemship in United Khasi and jaintia Hills District in the Tribal Areas of Assam, having been elected as such by the Myntri electors according to custom in 1951.
In June, 1952, a District Council was constituted for the District under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution and the siemship was brought under it.
The rules in the Sixth Schedule empowered the District Council to make laws with respect to various matters regarding the administration of the District including the appointment or succession of Chiefs and Headmen.
No law was made regulating the appointment and succession of Chiefs and Headmen.
The Chief Executive Member of the Executive Committee of the District Council served on the respondent a notice to show cause why he should not be removed from his office and suspended him.
The respondent challenged the action on the grounds: (i) that he could not be removed by administrative orders but only by making a law, (ii) that the Executive Committee could not take any action in this case, and (iii) that the order of suspension was ultra vires.
Held, that the District Council had the power to appoint or remove administrative personnel under the general power of administration vested in it by the Sixth Schedule.
The District Council was both an administration well as a legislative body.
After a law was made with respect to the appointment or removal of administrative personnel the authority would be bound to follow it; but until then it could exercise its administrative powers.
Since the United Khasi jaintia Hills Autonomous District (Appointment and Succession of Chiefs and Headmen) Act, 1959, had now come into force further action should be taken in accordance with that Act.
The Executive Committee could, under r. 3o(a) of the Assam Autonomous Districts (Constitution of District Councils) Rules, 1951, act on behalf of the District Council in cases of emergency and it was not for the courts to go into the question whether there was an emergency or not.
In these circumstances the action taken by the Executive Committee could not be challenged.
An order of interim suspension could be passed against the 751 respondent while inquiry was pending into his conduct even though there was no specific provision to that effect in his terms of appointment.
But he was entitled to his remuneration for the period of his interim suspension as there was no statute or rule existing under which it could be withheld.
The Management of Hotel Imperial vs Hotel Workers ' Union, ; , applied.
Per Subba Rao, J. It is very doubtful whether, when the Constitution confers on an authority power to make laws in respect of a specific subject matter, that authority can deal with the same subject matter without making such a law in its administrative capacity.
