Under an agreement dated December 8, 1933, the appellant firm was appointed managing agent of a limited company for a period of thirty years from November 9, 1933.
Clause 2 of the agreement provided for the remuneration of the managing agent.
Some of the shareholders and directors of the company having felt that the scale of remuneration paid to the managing agent was extraordinarily excessive and unusual, negotiations were started for a reduction of the remuneration, and as a result the appellant and the company entered into a Supplementary Agreement on March 24, 1948, whereby in consideration of the company paying a sum of Rs. 7,50,000 " as compensation for releasing the company from the onerous term as to remuneration ", contained in the original agreement, the managing agent agreed to accept as remuneration as from September i, 1946, for the remaining term of the managing agency ten per cent.
of the net annual profits of the company as defined in section 87C, sub section
(3) of the Indian Companies Act, 1938 The sum of Rs. 7,50,000 was paid by the company to the appellant in 1947.
For the assessment year I948 49 the Income tax Officer treated the aforesaid sum as a revenue receipt in the hands of the appellant and taxed it as such.
The appellant claimed that the sum was a payment made by the company whole in discharge of its contingent liability to pay the higher remuneration and it was, therefore, a capital expenditure incurred by the company and received by the appellant as a capital receipt and was, as such, not liable to tax.
The income tax authorities maintained (i) that though the payment of Rs. 7,50,000 had been described as compensation, the real object and consideration for the payment was the reduction of remuneration, (2) that it was a lump sum payment in consideration of the variation of the terms of employment and was, therefore, not a capital receipt but was a revenue receipt, and (3) that there was, in fact, no break in service and the payment was made in the course of the continuation of the service and, therefore, represented a revenue receipt of the managing agency business of the appellant.
Held, that the sum of Rs. 7,50,000 was paid by the company for securing immunity from the liability to pay higher remuneration to the appellant for the rest of the term of the managing 528 agency and was, therefore, a capital expenditure ; and, so far as the appellant was concerned, it was received as compensation for the deterioration or injury to the managing agency by reason of the release of its rights to get higher remuneration and was, therefore, a capital receipt.
The Commissioner of Income tax vs Vazir Sultan and Sons ; Hunter vs Dewhuyst, (1932) 16 Tax Cas.
605 and Glenboig Union Fiyeclay Co. Ltd. vs The Commissioners of Inland Revenue, , relied on.
Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1955] i S.C.R. 972 ; The Commissioner of Income tax and Excess Profits Tax vs The South India Pictures Ltd., ; ; The Commissioner of Income tax vs Jairam Valji, and The Commissioner of Income tax vs Shaw Wallace and CO.
(1932) L.R. 59 I.A. 206, considered.
