On December 15, 1947, the Ruler of the erstwhile State of Sonepur, the appellant, executed a merger agreement whereby the Government of India acquired full sovereign rights over the territory of the State, but ownership and full enjoyment of private properties belonging to the appellant and the personal rights, privileges, dignities etc., enjoyed by him immediately before August 15, 1947, were guaranteed to him under articles 4 and 5.
On July 27, 1949, the Governor General of India issued an order providing that the merged Orissa States including the State of Sonepur shall be administered in all respects as if they formed part of the Province of Orissa.
The Orissa Agricultural Income tax Act, 1947, had in the meantime been enacted by the Legislature of the Province of Orissa and by virtue of an Ordinance promulgated by the Governor of Orissa on December 30, 1949, the Act became applicable to the merged Orissa States.
Section 2(1) of the Act defined a " person " as inclusive of a Ruler of an Indian State, but by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 195o, reference to Rulers of Indian States was deleted as from January 26, 195o.
The appellant contended that he was not liable to be assessed to tax on agricultural income under the provisions of the Act because (1) as a Ruler of the State of Sonepur, he was, before merger of his State, immune from liability to taxation in respect of his private property and that his immunity from taxation was Guaranteed by articles 4 and 5 of the agreement of merger; and (2) that by virtue of the amendment of section 2, cl.
(1), of the Act, he was not a "person" within the meaning of the Act and therefore he was not liable to pay agricultural income tax.
Held: (i) that the amendment in the definition of "person" in section 2, Cl.
(i), of the Act was made not with the object of excluding the Rulers of former Indian States from liability to pay tax, but only to delete a clause which in view of political changes which had taken place since the Act was enacted had no practical significance.
The appellant could not claim exemption from taxation on the ground that he was not a " person ", in the absence of an express exemption clause in the Act.
780 (2)that the privileges guaranteed by articles 4 and 5 of the agreement of merger were only personal privileges of the appellant as an ex Ruler and that these privileges did not extend to his private property.
Vishweshwar Rao vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, , followed.
(3)that the claim made by the appellant of immunity from taxation relying upon the agreement of merger was not justiciable.
