The appellants were holders of ghatwali tenure called Rohini and Pathrole ghatwalis and were governed by Bengal Regulation XXIX of 1814.
The Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, was enacted by the Bihar State Legislature and came into force on September 25, 1950.
In suits instituted by the appellants the question was raised as to whether under the provisions of the Act the State could acquire their ghatwalis.
They claimed (1) that the Act was not applicable to the Government ghatwali tenures like Rohini and Pathrole ghatwalis which could not be acquired by the State under section 3 of the Act, in view of the definition clause in section 2 and SS.
23 (1) (f) and 32(4), (2) that the Act did not purport to repeal Bengal Regulation XXIX of 1814 and inasmuch as the said Regulation dealt with special tenures, the special law enacted with regard to such tenures would not be affected by the general law with regard to land reforms as embodied in the Act, and (3) that, in any case, ghatwali tenures, being of a quasi military nature, must be held to fall under Entries 1 and 2 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India and, therefore, the Act was outside the competence of the State Legislature.
Held: (i) that all ghatwali tenures including government ghatwalis came within the definition clause in section 2 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, and that SS.
23(1) (f) and 32(4), though they might be inapplicable to the ghatwali tenures in question, did not have the effect of excluding such tenures from the operation of the other provisions of the Act; (2) that the Act in pith and substance related to acquisition of property and was covered by Entry 36, List II, Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and had no relation to Entries 1 and 2 of List I. Consequently, the State Legislature was competent to enact the Act 89 696 The State of Bihar vs Maharajadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga and Others, , followed.
(3) that the principle that a special law relating to special tenure is not affected by a subsequent general law of land reforms had no application to the Act which in pith and substance related to acquisition of property and no question of the repeal of Regulation XXIX of 1814 arose.
Raja Suriya Pal Singh vs The State of U. P. and Another, , applied.
