The appellant encashed high denomination currency notes of the value of Rs. 87,5oo and was called upon by the Incometax Officer to submit a return for the relevant year.
The appellant made three statements, discrepant in material particulars, at different stages as to how he received the amount.
The Income tax Officer held that the true nature of the receipt had not been disclosed, treated it as income from an undisclosed source and assessed him accordingly.
The Assistant Commissioner of Income tax upheld that order on appeal.
On a further appeal, the Appellate Tribunal reviewed the facts, considered the discrepancies in the appellant 's case and affirmed the order of assessment.
An application for a reference to the High Court having been made under section 66 of the Indian Income tax Act, the Tribunal held that no question of law arose from its order and dismissed the same.
The High Court thereafter summarily dismissed the application made by the appellant under section 66(2) of the Act.
Against that order of summary dismissal special leave to appeal was obtained from this court and the sole question for determination in the appeal was whether the order of the Tribunal on the face of it disclosed any question of law and if the High Court was right in summarily dismissing the application under section 66(2) of the Act.
Held, that no question of law arose from the order of the Tribunal and the appeal must fail.
In order to decide whether the principles laid down by this court in Dhirajlal Girdharilal vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, and Omar Salay Mohamed Sait vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, (1959) 37 I.T.R. 151, applied to a particular case, it was necessary to read the order of the Tribunal as a whole for determining whether or not it had properly considered the material facts and the evidence, for and against, in coming to its final conclusion and whether any irrelevant consideration or matter of prejudice had vitiated such conclusion.
Those decisions do not require that the order of the Tribunal must be examined sentence by sentence so as to discover a minor lapse here or an incautious opinion there and rest a question of law thereon.
771 Dhirajlal Girdharilal vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, and Omar Saley Mohamed Sait vs Commis sioner of Income tax, Madras, , explained.
Although a mere rejection of an explanation given by the assessee does not invariably establish the nature of a receipt.
, where the circumstances of the rejection are such as to properly raise the inference that the receipt is an income, the assessing authorities are entitled to draw that inference.
Such an inference is one of fact and not of law.
