The appellant was the recipient of a hereditary military pension called Bachat granted by the Rulers of Gwalior to his ancestors in recognition of military service.
The right to receive the said pension was recognised by the Kalambandis of 1912 and 1935 issued by the said Rulers.
When Gwalior integrated with Indore and Malwa in 1948 to form a union, section 4 Of 122 958 Act No. 1 of 1948 provided for the continuance of all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations having the force of law in the covenanting states.
After the formation of the State of Madhya Bharat under the Constitution, the Government of that State, which remained liable to pay the said pension, by an executive order, terminated the right.
The appellant moved the High Court against the said order under article 226 of the Constitution.
and his case was that the right to receive the said pension, having been statutorily recognised by the State of Gwalior, could not be extinguished by an executive order.
The Full Bench of the High Court held against him.
The question was whether the Kalambandis of 1912 and 1935, on which the appellant rested his case, were existing law within the meaning of article 372 Of the Constitution.
Held, that the question must be answered in the affirmative, No distinction could be made between an executive order and a legislative command made by an absolute monarch, such as the Rulers of the Indian State of Gwalior were, since they have the same force of law, passed in whichever capacity they may be, and govern the rights of the subjects.
Ameer un Nissa Begum vs Mahboob Begum, A.I.R. 955 S.C. 352 and Director of Endowments, Government of Hyderabad vs Akram Ali, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 6o, referred to.
Consequently, even supposing that the Kalambandis did not amount to a quanun or law technically so called, they would nevertheless be orders or regulations having the force of law in the State at the material time and would be existing law within the meaning of article 372 Of the Constitution.
Edward Mills Co., Ltd., Beawar vs State of Ajmer, ; , referred to.
The contents of the two Kalambandis and the character of their provisions clearly show that they could not be mere administrative orders, and if not statutes, must, in any event, be rules and regulations having the force of law.
