A settlement was arrived at between the management of Mankatha Distillery and the workmen 's union before the con ciliation officer.
The Union was not registered under the Indian Trade Unions Act on the date of the said settlement.
The terms of the settlement not having been carried out by the management the respondent, who was the proprietor, and the manager of the said distillery were prosecuted and were convicted by the Magistrate.
The Sessions Court, on appeal by the respondent, confirmed the Magistrate 's order.
On an appeal to the Patna High Court by the respondent the High Court set aside the order of conviction and acquitted the respondent holding that there was no recognised union and that because the conciliation officer had visited the Distillery without giving a reasonable notice, on 18 3 1954 there could be no agreement between the proprietor on one side and the workmen as a whole on the other on the date and it was wrong to suppose that because somu workmen had signed the settlement that it bound all the workmen: Held, that for a dispute to constitute an industrial dispute it is not a requisite condition that it should be sponsored by a recognised union or that all the workmen of an industrial establishment should be parties to it.
A settlement arrived at in course of conciliation proceedings falls within section 18(3)(a) and (d) of the Industrial Disputes Act and as such binds all the workmen though an unregistered union or only some of workmen may have raised the dispute.
The absence of notice under section 11(2) by the Conciliation Officer does not affect the jurisdiction of the conciliation officer and its only purpose is to apprise the establishment that the person who is coming is the conciliation officer and not a stranger.
Any contravention of section 12(6) in not submitting the report within 14 days may be a breach of duty on the part of the conciliation officer ; it does not affect the legality of the proceedings which terminated as provided in section 20(2) of the Act.
1 2 Where a fresh settlement is arrived at between the parties and all disputes are settled, then " public interest does not require that the stale matter should be resuscitated ".
Newspapers Limited, Allahabad vs State Industrial Tribunal, Uttar Pradesh, , referred to.
Andheri Marol Kurla Bus Service vs The State of Bombay, A.I.R. and State of Bihar vs Hiralal Kejrilal, [1960] 1 S.C.R. 726, approved.
