The respondent a firm carrying on business in Singapore filed a plaint in the firm name against the appellants for the breach of contract.
The plaint had been signed and verified on behalf of the firm by one 'D ' on a power of attorney executed by one of the partners only.
After about, 6 years the respondents made an application for the amendment of the plaint.
The amendment sought was to the effect that the name of the firm as plaintiff be struck off, as it was a misdescription and in its place and stead the names of five partners of the firm should be brought on record in order to bring the controversy between the proper parties into clear relief.
The amendment petition was rejected, inter alia, on the grounds that the original plaint was no plaint in law and it was not a case of misnomer or misdescription, nor a case of a nonexistent firm or a non existent person, but a legal bar, as the plaint was a nullity.
The proper course when there is such a mistake is not to amend disregarding the condition of 0.
i r. 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure but to seek the Court 's permission to withdraw the suit with liberty to file a fresh suit under 0.
23 r. i of the Civil Procedure Code on the ground of formal defect and which should be done before limitation.
In appeal the High Court came to the conclusion that the description of a plaintiff by a firm name in a case where the Code of Civil Procedure does not permit a suit to be brought in the firm name should properly be considered a case of description of the individual partners of the business and as such a misdescription, which in law can be corrected and should not be considered to amount to a description of non existent person.
It also rejected the contention that the power of attorney in favour of D was insufficient.
983 Held, that the word, ' firm" or the "firm name " in section 4 Of the Indian Partnership Act is merely a compendious description of all the partners collectively.
Where a suit is filed in the name of a firm it is still a suit by all the partners of the firm unless it is proved that all the partners had not authorised the suit.
The provision of 0.
XXX r. 1 & 2 of the Code of Civil Pro cedure are enabling provisions to permit several firms who are doing business as partners to sue or be sued in the name of the firm and do not prevent the partners of a firm from suing or being sued in their individual names, nor do they prohibit the partners of a firm suing in India in their names individually although they may be doing business outside India; since a firm is not a legal entity the privilege of suing in the name of a firm is permissible only to those persons, who as partners are doing business in India.
Such privilege is not extended to persons who are doing business as partners outside India.
In their case they still have to sue in their individual names.
If however, under some misapprehension, persons doing business as partners outside India do file a plaint in the name of their firm they are misdescribing themselves, as the suit instituted is by them, they being known collectively as a firm.
A plaint filed in a court in India in the name of a firm doing business outside India is not by itself a nullity.
It is a plaint by all the partners of the firm with a defective description of themselves for the purpose of the Code of Civil Procedure.
A civil court could permit under provisions of section 153 of the Code an amendment of the plaint to enable a proper description of the plaintiffs to appear in it in order to assist the court in determining the real question or issue between the parties.
Neither r. 10(i) nor r. 10(2) of Order I have any application to a case of this kind, as the suit had been from its very inception a suit by the partners of the firm and no question of adding or substituting any person arises, the partners collectively being described as a firm with a particular name.
Held, further, that it is not necessary that the power of attorney should be signed by all the partners of the firm.
A partner is an agent of the firm and there is no prohibition to a partner executing a power of attorney in favour of an individual authorising him to institute a suit on behalf of the firm.
Vyankatesh Oil Mill Co. vs Velamahomed, A.I.R. 1928 Bom.
191, disapproved.
Amulakchand Mewaram vs Babulal Kanalal, A.I.R. 1933 Bom.
304, Sadler vs Whiteman, , Mura Mohideen vs V.O.A. Mohomed, A.I.R. 1955 Mad.
294 and Kasturchand Bahiravdas vs Sagarmal Shriyam, Bom.
413, discussed.
Hajee Sattar Hajee Peer Mohomad vs Khusiram Benarsilal, I.L.R. , referred to. 984
