The Marwar Tenancy Act, 1949, now repealed but which was in force in the State of jodhpur at the relevant period, by section 85 authorised the Government in case of any general refusal by tenants to pay rent to declare by notification that such rents might be recovered as arrears of land revenue.
A notification having been issued by the Government of Rajasthan under that section the appellant, a jagirdar, applied to the Collector thereunder for the recovery of rents due to him from his tenants.
The tenants also applied to the Collector stating that notice of the said application should be served on them and they should be given a hearing as required by the rule framed under the Rajasthan Revenue Courts (Procedure and jurisdiction) Act, 1951.
The Collector rejected the tenants ' application and passed an order directing the recovery of the sum found to be due to the appellant as arrears of land revenue.
The Additional Commissioner on appeal and the Board of Revenue in revision upheld the Collector 's order.
But before the Board passed its order the 48 Government rescinded the notification.
The High Court on an application under article 226 of the Constitution held that although section 85 of the Tenancy Act had not been repealed by the Revenue Courts Act, 1951, the rules framed under that section had been, and the non compliance with the rules framed under the latter Act which should have been followed, was an error on the face of the record and quashed the orders directing that since the notification under section 85 of the Tenancy Act had been rescinded no further action thereunder should be taken by the Collector.
Held, that there could be no doubt that section 2 of the Rajasthan Revenue Courts (Procedure and jurisdiction) Act, 1951, had not repealed section 85 of the Marwar Tenancy Act, 1949, and that the former Act contemplated its continuance, unfettered by the bar of limitation, and subject to this modification that an application under the section was no longer to be made to the Deputy Commissioner but to the Collector.
Section 85 of the Tenancy Act clearly contemplated that an application thereunder shall be heard and determined in the absence of the tenant.
The right given by the section was a summary one and the application must be heard ex parte.
It was not, therefore, necessary to serve any notice on the tenants.
It would not be correct to hold that the procedure of a con tested proceeding as prescribed by Ch.
II of the Rules framed under the Revenue Courts (Procedure and jurisdiction) Act, 1951, could apply to the application for to apply them would be to wholly defeat its object.
Once a notification under the section had been issued and an application duly made, subsequent rescission of 'the notification could not divest the appropriate authority of the power already vested in him to dispose of the application.
