Section 116 of the Pepsu Ordinance X of 2005 (1948 1949) is a transitory regulation providing for a change over of proceedings 'from one set of courts in the covenanting State to others of like status in the Union, and for their continuance etc.
in the latter courts.
It does not mean that the proceedings must be treated as having freshly commenced.
What is contemplated in the latter part of the section is a notional commencement, and the section means that all rights which arose or are likely to arise in future shall remain intact not with standing the new set Lip and that they would be dealt with by the Union courts in place of the courts of the covenanting State.
There is nothing in the section to justify the view that any taking away of a vested right of appeal retrospectively was intended.
Under the Patiala States Judicature Farman of 1999 a certificate was necessary for an appeal to a Division Bench from an order of a single Judge of the Patiala High Court only in respect of judgments and orders made in the exercise of civil appellate jurisdiction.
Under the Pepsu Ordinance X of 2005 (1948 49) a certificate was necessary in all cases.
In Appeal No. 152 an application made on 2nd February, 1950, for amendment of an order made by a Liquidation Judge in 1946 was dismissed and an appeal from the order of dismissal to a Division Bench was dismissed on 1st May, 1950, for want of a certificate.
In appeals Nos. 167 and 167A, the payment orders were made on the 18th January, 1949, and appeals from those orders were dismissed on 3rd March, 1949, for want of a certificate: Held, (i) that as a petition for amendment was not a continuation of the earlier proceedings but was in the nature of an 753 independent proceeding though connected with the order sought to be amended, it was governed by the law prevailing on its date, viz., the Pepsu Ordinance of 2005 under which a certificate was, necessary, and in Appeal No. 152 the dismissal of the appeal to the Division Bench for want of a certificate was right; (ii)that with regard to Appeals Nos. 167 and 167 A, as the law in force on the relevant dates was the Patiala States Judicature Farman of 1999 the appellants had a right to appeal from the payment order without a certificate; this vested right could not be taken away by a subsequent change in the law unless the later enactment expressly or by necessary implication was retrospective in operation and deprived them of such a right, that there was nothing in section 116 of the Ordinance to show that it was intended to have retrospective effect and the order of the High Court dismissing the appeals as incompetent was, therefore, erroneous.
Colonial Sugar Refining Company vs Irving referred to.
