One S sent a complaint against the first petitioner to the Chief Minister who sent it to the Additional Inspector General of Police who in his turn sent it to the Deputy Superintendent of Police C.I.D., with the endorsement " Register a case and investigate personally ".
The Deputy Superintendent of Police drew up a first information report.
There were also three other cases instituted against the petitioners or some of them, which were being investigated into by the C.I.D. Police officers.
The petitioners contended that the respondents had violated the provisions of sections 154, 156 and 157 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and had adopted a procedure unknown to law and had thus singled out the petitioners for unequal treatment in viola tion of article 14 of the Constitution.
Held, that the procedure adopted was authorised by section 551 of the Code and in the first case the Inspector General had power to deal with the complaint and to direct investigation of the same by the Deputy Superintendent of Police.
Even if the reason given for the Inspector General making over the investigation to the Deputy Superintendent of Police that the case was of a technical nature was not correct, it was open to him to make over the investigation to the Deputy Superintendent of Police in view of the status of the petitioners.
The procedure adopted in the other three cases was also not illegal, and there was no unequal treatment of the petitioners in the matter of the institution or investigation of the cases so as to entitle them to invoke in aid article 14 of the Constitution.
H. N. Rishbud and Inder Singh vs The State of Delhi, ; , King Emperor vs Nilkantha, I.L.R. , Pulin Bihari Ghosh vs The King, I.L.R. and Textile Traders Syndicate Ltd. vs The State of U. P., A.I.R. 1959 All. 337, referred to.
Since allegations were made against the Chief Minister by the petitioners, he owed a duty to the Court to file an affidavit stating what the correct position was so far as he remembered it. 144
