The National Syndicate, a Bombay firm, acquired on January 11, 1945, a tailoring business as a going concern for Rs. 89,321 which included the consideration paid for sewing machines and a motor lorry.
Soon after the purchase the respondent found it difficult to continue the business, therefore closed its business in August, 1945.
Between August 16, 1945, and February 14, 1946, sewing machines and the motor lorry were sold at a loss.
The respondent closed its account books on February 28, 1946, showing the two losses and writing them off.
For the assessment year 1946 47, the.
respondent claimed a deduction under section 10(2)(Vii) of the Indian Income Tax Act.
The Appellate Tribunal held that the sales of machines and the motor lorry were made in the course of the winding up of the assessee 's business after the business had been stopped and that, therefore, the deduction could not be claimed under section 10(2)(Vii).
Respondent moved the High Court and obtained an order under section 66(2) of the Income Tax Act, and the following two questions were referred : " (1) Whether the Tribunal was justified in law in holding that the petitioner had carried on its business only till twenty eight day of August, One Thousand Nine Hundred and Forty Five ? (2) Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was justified in law in not allowing the sum of Rs. 41,998 (Rupees forty one thousand nine hundred and ninety eight) on sale of machines and Rs. 3,700 (Rupees three thousand and seven hundred) on the sale of lorry as a deduction from the total income of the applicant ?" The High Court answered the first question in the affirma tive, and the second question in the negative.
The Commissioner of Income tax questioned the finding of the High Court and came up in appeal by special leave and con tended that an allowance could only be claimed if sale of machines, etc.
took place when the business was being continued and not if the business had come to a close.
The respondent on the other hand submitted that section 10(2)(Vii) would be applicable 230 in a case where the business continued for a part of the account year, even though the sale of machinery, plant, etc.
took place after the closure of the business during the course of the account year.
Held, that if the profits or gains of a business for a particular year are to be taxed, they must be computed for the whole year taking into account losses incurred during the same year, provided that the business had been " carried on by the assessee " ; the building, machinery or plant had been " used for the purpose of the business "; the sale etc.
had taken place during the year of account, and the loss had been brought into the books of the assessee and written off.
There is no other condition to be found expressly in the section or in the Act.
It is nowhere stated that the business of the assessee should have been carried on for the whole year, or that the machinery or plant should have been used for the whole of the accounting period.
There are no words which would show that, if the assessee worked only for a part of the year and then sold out, the loss that he incurred was not a business loss, or that he must pay tax on the small profit that he might have made, and bear the loss in addition.
The Liquidators of Pursa Limited vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar, ; , Commissioner of Income tax vs Express Newspapers Ltd. , distinguished.
Indian Iron & Steel Co., Ltd. vs Commissioner of Incometax, Bengal, , Commissioner of Income tax vs Shaw Wallace & Co., Ltd., (1932) L.R. 59 I.A. 206, referred to.
