The appellant, a private limited company, was assessed to income tax for the assessment years 1942 43, 1943 44 and 1944 45 by three separate orders dated January 26, 1944, February 12, 1944, and February 15, 1945, under section 23(3) of the Indian Income Tax Act on returns filed by it with statements of account.
On March 28, 1951, three notices under section 34 of the Act were issued calling upon it to submit fresh returns for the said assessment years.
The appellant filed the returns but thereafter applied to the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for writs restraining the Income tax Officer from initiating assessment proceedings on the basis of the said notices on the ground, inter alia, that he had no jurisdiction to issue the said notices.
In his report to the Commissioner of Income tax for obtaining sanction to initiate the said proceedings the Income tax Officer had stated as follows : " Profit of Rs. 5,46,002 on sale of shares and securities escaped assessment altogether.
At the time of the original assessment the then I. T. O. merely accepted the company 's version that the sale of shares were casual transactions and were in the nature of mere change of investments.
Now the results of the company 's trading from year to year show that the company has really been systematically carrying out a trade in the sale of investments.
As such the company had failed to disclose the true intention behind the sale of the shares as such section 34(1)(a) may be attracted".
The question for determination was whether in the circum stance the Income tax Officer was right in issuing notices on the assessee under section 34(1)(a) of the Act.
Held, (per section K. Das, K. C. Das Gupta and N. R. Ayyangar, jj.), that before the Income tax Officer could issue a notice under $ '.
34(1)(a) of the Indian Income tax Act, two conditions precedent must co exist, namely, that he must have reason to believe (i) that income, profits or gains had been under assessed and (2) that such under assessment was due to non disclosure of material facts by the assessee.
242 Although what facts would be necessary and material for the assessment in a particular case must depend on the facts of that case, there could be no doubt that the burden of disclosing all the primary facts must invariably be on the assessee.
The Explanation to section 34(1) made it clear that that burden could not be fully discharged by simply producing the account books and other documents, but the assessee must also disclose such specific items or portions thereof as are relevant to the assessment.
But once he has done so, it is for the Income tax Officer to draw the proper inferences of fact and law therefrom and the assessee cannot further be called upon to do so for him.
The Explanation does not enlarge the scope of the section so as to include " the disclosure " of such inferences.
The question whether by the sale of shares the assessee in the instant case intended to change the form of investment or to make a business profit was one of an inferential fact and the failure to disclose such intention could not by itself amount to a failure or omission to disclose a material fact within the meaning of section 34(1)(a) of the Act.
Where, however, the Income tax Officer has prima facie reasonable grounds for believing that there has been a non disclosure of a primary material fact, that by itself gives him the jurisdiction to issue a notice under section 34 of the Act, and the adequacy or otherwise of the grounds of such belief is not open to investigation by the Court.
It is for the assessee who wants to challenge such jurisdiction to establish that the Income tax Officer had no material for such belief.
Since, in the instant case, there was no non disclosure of a primary material fact which the assessee was bound to disclose under section 34(1)(a) of the Act, the Income tax Officer had no jurisdiction to issue the notices in question.
It is incorrect to say that the question of under assessment by reason of non disclosure of a material fact was relevant only for the purpose of applying either the longer or the shorter period of limitation prescribed by the section and not for jurisdiction and, therefore, not a proper matter for investigation under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Courts have ample powers under article 226 of the Constitution, and are in duty bound thereunder, to issue such appropriate orders or directions as are necessary in order to prevent persons from being subjected to lengthy proceedings and unnecessary harassments by an executive authority acting without jurisdiction.
Alternative remedies such as are provided by the Income tax Act cannot always be a sufficient reason for refusing quick relief in a fit and proper case.
Per Hidayatullah, J. The Explanation to section 34(1) of the Indian Income tax Act clearly indicates that the duty of the assessee thereunder does not end by merely producing evidence or disclosing the primary facts, but also extends to the disclosure 243 of such other facts relating to status, agency, benami nature of the transaction, the nature of the trading and the like, which he knows but do not appear from the evidence, and which may be necessary for interpreting the evidence.
If the evidence produced hides nothing and discloses everything, the assessee cannot be subjected to section 34 merely because the Income tax Officer misinterprets such evidence.
But it is otherwise if the assessee raises a contention that is contrary to fact and requires the Income tax Officer to discover the truth for himself for that would be to suppress a material fact that would attract the section.
Since, in the present case, an investment company dealing in stocks and shares, not only knowingly suppressed that fact but contended otherwise, there was non disclosure of a material fact necessary for its assessment, and sufficient to attract section 34(1) (a) of the Act.
Per Shah, J.
The expression " has reason to believe " in section 34(1)(a) of the Indian Income tax Act does not mean a purely subjective satisfaction of the Income tax Officer but predicates the existence of reasons on which such belief has to be founded.
That belief, therefore, cannot be founded on mere suspicion and must be based on evidence and any question as to the adequacy of such evidence is wholly immaterial at that stage.
Whether all the material facts necessary for the assessment had or had not been fully and truly disclosed in a particular case has to be examined, in the fight of the Explanation to section 34(1)(a).
If there is disclosure of some facts but not all, a tax payer cannot resist reassessment on the plea that such non disclosure was due to the negligence or inadvertence on the part of the Income tax Officer to scrutinise the materials before him.
Where the existence of reasonable belief that there bad been under assessment due to non disclosure by the assessee, which is a condition precedent to exercise of the power under section 34(1)(a) is asserted by the assessing authority and the record prima facie supports its existence, any enquiry as to whether the authority could reasonably hold the belief that the under assessment was due to non disclosure by the assessee of material facts necessary for the assessment must, be barred.
