The appellant effected sales during the period 26 1 1950 to 31 3 1950, whereunder the property in the goods passed in the State of Bihar but delivery was effected outside Bihar for consumption outside Bihar.
In some of these sales the goods were delivered in the State of first destination for consumption therein whilst in other cases the goods were not for consumption in the State of first delivery of destination.
The appellant contended that both these categories of sale were exempt from tax under article 286(1)(a) as they were outside sales.
Held (per Hidayatullah, Das Gupta and Rajagopala Ayyangar, JJ.) that the sales where delivery in the State of first destination was for consumption therein, were outside the State of Bihar within the Explanation to article 286(1)(a) and Bihar could not tax them, but the sales where delivery in the State of first destination was not for consumption therein were not " Explanation Sales " and were not " outside " sales and Bihar could tax them.
Where the property in the goods passed within the State as a direct result of the sale the sale was not an " outside " sale for the purpose of article 286(1)(a) unless it fell within the Explanation.
In the first category of sales the appellant was entitled to the.
exemption and it was not necessary for it to prove that the goods delivered for consumption in the State of first destination were actually consumed therein.
The State of Bombay vs United Motors (India) Ltd., and Bengal Immunity Company Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, , referred to.
Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co. of India Ltd. vs The Commercial Tax Officer, C. A. No. 751 of 57 and C. A. No. 10 of 1958 (Unreported), relied on.
Per section K. Das and Shah, Jj.
Section 33 introduced in the Bihar Sales Tax Act by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1951, engrafted the same restrictions on the taxing power of the State on the pre Constitution statutes as were imposed by article 286 upon post Constitution statutes.
Section 33(1)(a)(1) of the Act took away only the power to tax " Explanation Sales " but not the power to tax " non Explanation Sales ".
A sale in which goods had been delivered outside Bihar, but not as a direct result of 277 the sale or not for the purpose of consumption in the State of first delivery was not covered by the Explanation, and the right to tax the sale, if it arose otherwise under the Act, was not impaired by section 33(1)(a)(i).
