Prior to January 26, 1950, when the erstwhile State of Hyderabad merged in the Union of India and became a Part B State the respondent company was assessed to income tax under the Hyderabad Income tax Act, by which depreciation allowance was given to it on the basis of the written down value of its assets, such as buildings, machinery, plants, etc., in accordance with cl.
(C) of section 12(5) of that Act, which provided that in the case of assets acquired before the previous year and before the commencement of the Act, the written down value would be the actual cost to the assessee less (1) depreciation at the rates applicable to the assets calculated on the actual costs for the first year since acquisition and for the next year on the actual cost diminished by the depreciation allowance for one year and so on, for each year upto the commencement of that Act, and, (ii) depreciation actually allowed to the assessee on such assets for each financial year after the commencement of the Act.
After the merger of Hyderabad with the Union of India, by sections 3 and 13 of the Finance Act, 950, the taxation laws in force in the State were repealed and the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, was extended to that area; and in exercise of the powers conferred by section 12 of the Finance Act, 1950, the Central Government issued a notification dated December 2, 1950, called the Taxation Laws (Part B States) (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 1950.
Paragraph 2 of the Order provided that " in making any assessment under the Indian Income tax A ct, 1922, all depreciation actually allowed under any laws or rules of a Part B State. shall be taken into account in computing the aggregate depreciation allowance referred to in proviso (c) to section 10(2)(vi) and the written down value under section 10(5)(b) of the said Act ".
For the assessment year 1951 52 the respondent was assessed for the first time under the Indian Income tax Act, and basing its claim on para.
2 of the aforesaid Order it asked for 319 the value thereof at their inception and deducting therefrom such depreciation as was allowed for the three assessment years in which it was assessed under the Hyderabad Income tax Act.
7 By order dated November 30, 1951, the Income tax Officer disallowed the respondent 's claim on the ground that it was against the principle inherent in granting depreciation allowance which must decrease from year to year.
The matter was taken up to the Supreme Court and while it was pending there, on May 8, 1956, the Central Government issued a notification in exercise of its powers conferred on it by section 12 of the Finance Act, 1950, whereby an explanation was added to the aforesaid para.
2 as follows: "For the purpose of this paragraph, the expression "all depreciation actually allowed under any laws or rules of a Part B State " means and shall be deemed to have always meant the aggregate allowance for depreciation taken into account in computing the written down value under any laws or rules of a Part B State or carried forward under the said laws or rules.
" The respondent challenged the validity of the notification of 1956 and also its applicability to the present case on the grounds (1) that it was ultra vires the powers conferred on the Central Government by section 12 of the Finance Act, 1950, (2) that it contravened article 14 of the Constitution, and (3) that, in any case, it could have no retrospective effect.
Held : (1) that the true scope and effect of section 12 was that it was for the Central Government to determine if any difficulty of the nature indicated in the section had arisen and then to make such order, or give such direction, as appeared to it to be necessary to remove the difficulty, the legislature having left the matter to the executive.
Pandit Banarsi Das Bhanot v The State of Madhya Pradesh and Others, ; , relied on.
In the present case, a difficulty had arisen, because if depreciation actually allowed under the Hyderabad Income tax Act was taken into account in computing the aggregate depre ciation allowance and the written down value, an anomalous result would follow, namely, depreciation allowance to be allowed to the assessee in the accounting year under the Indian Income tax Act would be more than what was allowed in previous years under the Hyderabad Income tax Act.
Consequently, the Central Government was within its power under section 12 in making the notification dated May 8, 1956.
(2) that the notification of 1956 applied to all those to whom para.
2 of the Taxation Laws (Part B States) (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 1950, was applicable and created no unequal treatment of persons in the like situation.
Accordingly, the notification did not contravene article 14 of the Constitution.
(3) that the Central Government had the power under section 12 of the Finance Act, 1950, to make an order or give a direction so as to remove difficulties which arose in the very beginning 320 and, therefore, the notification, though added in 1956, was valid and was applicable to the assessment of 1951 52.
