The respondent company purchased certain machinery for Rs. 89,000 and sold it for the same value, but in the books of account the written down value of the machinery was shown in the year of account as Rs. 73,392.
The Income Tax Officer in computing the assessable income of the company added the difference, i.e. Rs. 15,608, between the actual value and the written down value to the profit of the company.
The Income Tax Officer also passed an order under section 23A of the Income Tax Act, and directed that the undistributed portion of the assessable income, shall be deemed to have been distributed amongst the shareholders as dividend.
Appeals against the order of the Income tax Officer proved unsuccessful and the Appellate Tribunal referred the following question to the High Court under section 66(1): "Whether the sum of Rs. 15,608 should have been included in the assessee company 's "profit" for the purpose of deter mining whether the payment of a larger dividend than that declared by it would be unreasonable.
" The High Court answered the question in the negative.
On appeal by special leave, Held, that the view taken by the High Court was correct.
494 By the fiction in section 10(2)(Vii) second proviso, read with s.2(6C), what is really not income is, for the purpose of computation of assessable income, made taxable income: but on that account, it does not become commercial profit, and if it is not commercial profit, it is not liable to be taken into account in assessing whether in view of the smallness of profits a larger dividend would be unreasonable.
"Smallness of profit" should not be equated with "smallness of assessable income" but should be determined in accordance with commercial principles.
Sir Kasturchand Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, (1949) XVII I.T.R. 493, Ezra Proprietary Estates Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, (1950) XVIII I.T.R. 762 and Commissioner of Income tax Bombay City vs F. L. Smith & Co. (Bombay) Ltd., (1959) XXXV I.T.R. 183, referred to.
