S, employed by the appellant as a cross cutter in the saw mill was asked to show cause why his services should not be terminated on account of grave indiscipline and misconduct and he denied the allegations of fact.
He was thereafter informed about a department enquiry to be held against him and was suspended pending enquiry.
Purporting to act under r. 18(a) of the Standing Orders, the appellant terminated the services of S, without holding any departmental enquiry.
The industrial tribunal to which the dispute was referred held, that action taken, after dropping the proposed departmental proceedings was not bonafide and was a colourable exercise of the powerconferred under r. 18(a) of the Standing order and since no attempt was made before it to defend such action by proving the alleged misconduct, it passed an order for reinstatement of S, The appellant contended that as the termination was strictly in accordance with the terms of contract under r. 18(a) of the Standing Orders, it was entitled to dispense 823 with the service of an employee at any time by first giving 14 days notice or, paying 12 days wages.
^ Held, that the employer 's decision to discharge the employee under r. 18(a) of the Standing Orders after dropping the enquiry intended to be held for misconduct was clearly a colourable exercise of the power, and an employer could not press his right purely on contract and say that under the contract he has unfettered right "to hire and fire" his employees, right was subject to industrial adjudication and even a power like that granted by r. 18(a) of the Standing orders in this case was subject to the scrutiny of industrial courts.
Even in a case of this kind the requirement of bona fides was essential and if the termination of service was a colourable exercise of power, or was a result of victimisation or unfair labour practice, the tribunal had jurisdiction to intervene and set aside such termination.
Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd. vs Workers of the Company, , referred to.
The Chartered Bank Bombay vs The Chartered Bank Employees Union. ; and Assam Oil Company vs Its Workmen, [1960] 3 S.C.R. 457, followed.
Held, further, that the principle relating to termination of Government service stands on an entirely different footing as compared to industrial employees and the same principle could not be applied to industrial adjudication.
Parshotaa Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, ; , distinguished.
