The respondent was the head of a Hindu undivided family and was the descendant of a Jagirdar.
Certain disputes between the Jagirdar and the Zamindars in the district had been settled in 1837 by a compromise between the British Government and the then Jagirdar, whereby, the Government granted the Jagirdar and his heirs a pension in perpetuity to be calculated on the basis of one fourth of the revenue of the Jagir.
By this arrangement the collections from the Jagir became payable by the Zamindars direct to the Government and the Jagirdar and his successors no longer remained the proprietors of the Jagir and became entitled only to a pension.
The Income tax Officer assessed the receipt of the pension by the respondent as part of his regular income and rejected the latter 's contention that the amount received was agricultural income within the meaning of section 4(3)(viii) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
In appeal, the Assistant Commissioner accepted the respondent 's contention, but the Tribunal reversed this finding.
The High Court, on a reference, decided the issue in favour of the respondent, on the grounds, inter alia, that the right conferred under the compromise of 1837 was a right to a share of one fourth in the net land revenue collections and furthermore, the amount received by the successors of the Jagirdar varied from year to year.
In the appeal before the Supreme Court, it was also contended on behalf of the respondent that the amount received was in the nature of a capital receipt, being a payment to the Jagirdar and his successors of compensation for relinquishing the title to the Jagir lands.
HELD: (i) Under the compromise and arrangement of 1837, the respondent had no interest in the land or in the land revenue payable in respect thereof.
[704 A] State of U.P.v.
Kunwar Sri Trivikram Narain Singh; , , followed.
As the source of the income in this case was the arrangement of 1837, the income could not be held to be derived from land within the meaning of the definition of agricultural income in section 2(1)(a) of the Act.
Even if the income varied from year to year, the source of the income was still the arrangement and not land.
[705 G] Maharajkumar Gopal Saran Narain Singh, vs
C.I.T. Bihar and Orissa, , C.I.T. Bihar and Orissa vs Raja Bahadur Kamkhya Narayan Singh and Ors, , Mrs. Bacha F. Guzdar vs
C.I.T. Bombay , MaharaJadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh, vs C.I.T. Bihar and Orissa, , followed.
(ii) The amount received by the respondent was not a capital receipt but revenue income and therefore taxable.
701 Where an owner of an estate exchanges a capital asset for a perpetual annuity, it is ordinarily taxable in his hands.
The position would be different if he exchanged his estate for a capital sum payable in installments.
Such installments when received would not be taxable as income.
But in the present case there was no material to show that the amount received was an instalment of this nature.
[706 H~707C] Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs Wesleyan and General Assurance Society, , and Perrin vs Dickson , referred to.
