The first respondent while he was holding the post of a Senior Jailor in March, 1954, was suspended on the allegations that he had committed certain acts of misappropriation and maltreatment of prisoners.
After January, 1955.
A show cause notice was then issued to him to which he replied by a written statement.
The respondent was dismissed by an order of Inspector General of Prisons in February, 1955.
The respondent filed a suit for a declaration that enquiry report was never supplied to him and consequently he had not been given reasonable opportunity within the meaning of article 311 of the Constitution.
He also prayed for a decree for arrears of pay from April, 1954 to May, 1960.
His suit was dismissed by the trial court but he succeeded in the first appeal where the order of dismissal was declared illegal and void.
An appeal by the respondent to the High Court claiming arrears of salary was allowed.
As the State of Bombay had, in the meantime, been reorganised, the High Court also directed that the liability for arrears of salary upto the date of suit would be that of the State of Maharashtra and the liability arising out of the declaration that the appellant was in Government service would be the liability of the State of Gujarat.
A Letters Patent appeal filed by the State of Maharashtra was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended, inter alia, on behalf of the appellant that the liability to pay arrears of pay was not a liability arising out of a contract within the meaning of section 60 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act of 1960 but it was a liability in respect of an actionable wrong other than a breach of contract within the meaning of section 61 of the Act.
HELD: (1) The High Court had rightly found that the failure on the part of the competent authority to provide the respondent with a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer amounted to denial of reasonable opportunity contemplated by article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The Inspector General of Prisons had the report before him and the tentative conclusions arrived at by the Enquiry Officer were bound to influence him and in depriving the plaintiff of a copy of the report he was handicapped in not knowing what material was influencing the Inspector General of Prisons.
[920 F] Union of India vs H. C. Goel, ; , 728, referred to.
It is true that the question whether reasonable opportunity has or has not been ' afforded to the Government servant must depend on the facts 918 of each case, but it would be in very rare cases indeed in which it could be said that the Government servant is not prejudiced by the non supply of the report of the Enquiry officer.
[921 B] (2) The decree of the High Court decreeing payment of arrears of salary is truly a liability in proceedings relating to a contract within section 60(2) (a) of the Act.
Although the words 'actionable wrong ' other than breach of contract in this context are wide words and include something more than torts, but even so where a suit is brought by a Government servant for arrears of salary the decree more properly falls under section 60 of the Act rather than under a. 61.
[925 B] State of Tripura vs The Province of East Bengal, ; , 44, State of Bihar vs Abdul Majid, [1954] S.C.R. 786, Owner of section section Raphael vs Brandy, , Inland Revenue Commissioner vs Hambrook, [1956] 1 AR E.R. 807, 811 12, Reilly vs R., , 179; Terrell vs Secretary of State for the Colonies, , 499; R. vs Doultre, and Bushe vs R., (May 29, 1869, The Times), considered.
