The appellants we 're a registered partnership firm engaged in money lending business as well as business in certain chemical goods, and silk yarn.
Another firm had a current account with the appellants between the samvat years 2003 and 2008.
At the end of the latter year the said account had a debit balance of Rs. 268385 1 3.
In the return of income for the assessment year 1953 54 the appellants claimed allowance for the said sum of Rs. 268385 as a bad debt written off as irrecoverable.
The claim was disallowed by the authorities under the Income tax Act, 1922.
The Tribunal referred to the High Court under section 66(2) of the Income tax Act, 192Z the question whether on the facts and circumstances of the case the Tribunal 's finding that the sum in question did not relate to the appellants money lending business was correct.
The High Court answered the question in the affirmative against the appellants.
This Court in appeal by special leave re framed the question to be answered by the Tribunal so as to cover not only the money lending business of the appellants but also the business in chemicals etc.
The Court directed the Tribunal to submit a supplementary statement of case.
The supplementary statement of case submitted by the Tribunal was however found unsatisfactory in as much as it contained a summary of arguments on both sides but no findings on the,facts of the case.
Hence supplementary statement on 'facts was called for.
The findings given by the Tribunal were against the appellants.
On the contention that the conclusion reached by the Tribunal was not supported by proper discussion of the materials before it, HELD : The findings reached by the Tribunal were findings of fact and those findings were supported by the evidence on record.
The Tribunal had found that the loans were not made in the course of money lending business of the assessee nor in respect of any other business of the assessee.
This finding covered the entire amount sought to be deducted.
In view of this finding which was binding on this Court, the answer to the question re framed had to be in favour of the department.
[423 B] Also held : (i) The Tribunal in submitting its statement,of case must give not only the facts of the case or the arguments of parties but also its own findings on the, facts and evidence.
[410 D] (ii) When the assessee had money lending as well as other business, its claim for a bad debt under section 10 (2) (xi) of the Act must be considered in relation to both the businesses and the question submitted by the Tribunal must cover the claim in both its aspects.
[418 F 419 A] 416
