The appellant, a partnership firm, filed its return of income for the assessment year i960 61 and subsequently produced before the Incometax Officer its relevant books of accounts and papers.
It also produced before him the statement showing various creditors from whom it had borrowed on Hundis during the accounting year in question, giving full names and addresses of the alleged creditors.
After enquiry the Incometax Officer made an assessment.
On June 3, 1966 the Income tax Officer issued to the appellant a notice under section 148 of the Income tax Act, 1961.
The notice was issued after four years but before 8 years of the end of the original assessment year.
The appellant challenged the validity of the notice as well as the proceedings taken on the strength of that notice in a writ petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
By special leave appeal was filed in this Court.
On direction given by the Court the report submitted by the Income tax Officer to the Commissioner and the Commissioner 's order thereon were produced.
In the report it was said that it appeared that the alleged creditors of the appellant were name lenders and transactions were bogus; hence proper investigation regarding those loans was necessary.
Question No. 8 on the report was whether the Commissioner was satisfied that the case was fit for the issue of notice under section 148.
Against this the commissioner had noted 'yes '.
On these facts this Court, HELD : Under section 148 and section 151(2) the Income tax Officer Must record his reasons for issuing the notice under section 148.
There must be prima facie grounds for taking action under section 148 Further before issuing such a notice the provisions of cis.
(a) and (b) of section 147 must be satisfied.
[447 B, E] In this case the Income tax Officer appears to have had a vague feeling that the transactions were bogus and that the alleged creditors were only name lenders.
According to him proper investigation regarding the loans was necessary.
That is not the same thing as saying that there ,are reasons to issue notice under section 148.
[447 A C] In these circumstances it could not be held that the Income tax Officer had any material before him which could satisfy the requirements of either cl.
(a) or cl.
(b) of section 147.
Therefore he could not have issued a notice under section 148.
Further the report submitted by him under section 151(2) did not mention any reason for coming to the conclusion that it was a fit case for the issue of the notice under section 148.
The Commissioner also mechanically accorded permission.
Thus the important safeguards provided in sections 147 and 151 were lightly treated by the income tax Officer as well as by the Commissioner.
[447 F 448 B] The appeal must accordingly be allowed.
