(1 ) When a provisional inter State seniority list is prepared for integrating services after States re organisa tion, there is a possibility of some mistakes occurring about the facts of a case or in the .application of the relevant statute or rules or executive directions governing seniority.
It would, therefore, be quite fair to give the person affected an opportunity to be heard against the proposed list before it is made final under 8. 115.
State Reorganisation Act, 1956, so that.
any possible mistakes, either in the facts relating to his case or in the law or rule applied with regard to the proposed assignment of a place to him in the seniority list may be rectified.
But, once he had that opportunity.
it cannot be said that he should have a further opportunity against even a final seniority list, for then such a list would not really be final but will only he provisional or preliminary.
[830 C D] (2) But, even a final list, if it is prepared contrary to the rules applicable or is vitiated on some ground show ing that a condition precedent to the finalisation of the list is absent, or a particular decision is malafide or arrived at on totally irrelevant or extraneous considera tions.
such a final list could be declared invalid by the Court.
G] In the present case.
the officer was not satisfied with the position given to him the final seniority list.
But, since he had an opportunity Under the integration rules of the State for filing objections against the preliminary provisional list, he cannot urge that he should he heard again alter the final list was prepared.[829 A] He cannot claim to have a say against the final list on the analogy of a second opportunity to show cause against a proposed punishment in a departmental enquiry, because.
no element of punishment is involved in preparing either a provisional or a final seniority list.
[830 B] He is not entitled to any relief because he had not made out in his petition to the Court any of the grounds on which a final list can be assailed.
[831 G] Union of India vs
G.M. Shankariah & Ors. etc.
(S.L.R. 1969 p. 1 ) (C As.
1439 & 1446 of 1967 decided on 16 10 1968) explained.
Union of India & Anr.
v P.K. Roy & Ors.
[1968] 2 S.C.R. 186 @ 202 and Union of India vs
G.R. Prabhavalkar & Ors. ; at 2106, followed.
