The appellant was charged with the offence of committing the murder of his wife.
The trial court acquitted him on the ground that the prosecution had failed to establish any motive for the offence, that the evidence of the prosecution witnesses was discrepant, conflicting and improbable and that when two views were possible on the basis of two divergent versions given by the prosecution and the defence, the benefit of doubt should be given to the accused.
The High Court reversed the order of acquittal and convicted and sentenced the appellant to imprisonment for life on the view that the trial court had magnified the importance to be attached to the discrepancies which were of a minor nature In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that in all cases where two views of the evidence were possible the accused was entitled to the benefit of doubt arising from the two views and that on this principle the High Court should not have interfered with the order of acquittal merely because another view was also possible.
Dismissing the appeal: ^ HELD : (1) Where the trial court allows itself to be beset with fanciful doubts, rejects creditworthy evidence for slender reasons and takes a view of the evidence which is but barely possible, it is the obvious duty of the High Court to interfere in the interest of justice, lest the administration of justice be brought to ridicule.
[370D] (2) After the decision of this Court in Sanwat Singh vs State of Rajasthan ; this Court has consistently recognised the right of the appellate court to review the entire evidence and to come to its own conclusion bearing in mind the considerations mentioned by the Privy Council in Sheo Swarup vs Emperor (61 T.A. 389).
Occasionally phrases like "manifestly illegal", "grossly unjust have been used to describe the orders of acquittal which warrant interference.
But such expressions have been used more as flourishes of language to emphasise the reluctance of the appellate court to interfere with an order of acquittal than to curtail the power of the appellate court to review the entire evidence and to come to its own conclusion.
In two other cases it has been held that to the principles laid down in Sanwat Singh 's case may added the further principle that if two 364 reasonable conclusions could be reached on the basis of the evidence on record the appellate court should not disturb the finding of the trial court.
This principle stems out of the fundamental principle of our criminal jurisprudence that the accused is entitled to the benefit of any reasonable doubt.
If two reasonably probable and evenly balanced views of the evidence are possible one must necessarily concede the existence of a reasonable doubt.
But fanciful and remote possibilities must be left out of account.
To entitle an accused person to the benefit of a doubt arising from the possibility of duality of views, the possible view in favour of the accused must be as nearly reasonably probable as that against him.
If the preponderance of probability is all one way, a bare possibility of another view will not entitle the accused to claim the benefit of any doubt.
It is, therefore essential that, any view of the evidence in favour of the accused must be reasonable even as any doubt, the benefit of which an accused person may claim, must be reasonable.
A reasonable doubt does not mean some light, airy, insubstantial doubt that may flit through the mind of a Judge about almost anything at any time or other, it does not mean a doubt begotten by sympathy out of reluctance to convict, it means a real doubt, a doubt founded upon reason.
"Proof beyond a reasonable doubt" does not mean proof beyond a shadow of doubt The law would fail to protect the community if it admitted fanciful possibilities to deflect the course of justice.
If the evidence is so strong against a man be to leave only a remote possibility in his favour which can be dismissed with the sentence, "of course it is possible but not in the least probable," the case is proved beyond reasonable doubt but nothing short of that will suffice.
[369A G] Sanwat Singh vs State of Rajasthan, ; applied.
Ramabhupala Reddy & Ors.
vs The State of A.P., AIR 1971 SC 460, Bhim Singh Rup Singh vs State of Maharashtra, AIR 1974 SC 286, Miller vs Minister of Pensions, [1947] 2 All.
E.R. 372; Khem Karam & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Anr., referred to.
