Dismissing the appeals by special leave, the Court. ^ HELD: Per Pathak, J. (Krishna Iyer and Chinnappa Reddy, JJ.
concurring) (1) Having regard to the financial capacity of M/s. Tata Consulting Engineers, the appellant, and the material on the record and the various other considerations which prevailed with the Tribunal, the granting of revised wage scales is in order.
Although the wage scales were introduced as long ago as 1973 they were maintained at that level except for a slight revision some time thereafter.
No dearness allowance was paid until the beginning of 1977 and the house rent allowance also was introduced about that time.
The cost of living had gone on increasing from 1972 onwards and the dearness allowance and house rent allowances made no appreciable impact in neutralising the increasing cost.
During all these years, the appellant had continued to enjoy increasing profits; nonetheless the emoluments received by the workmen did not receive the impress of the appellant 's growing prosperity.
The Charter of Demands was presented by the Union in July, 1974 and when conciliation proceedings failed the State Government made a reference to the Industrial Tribunal in 1975.
The several considerations which prevailed with the Tribunal giving retrospectivity to the revised pay scales and referred to by it cannot be ignored.
[174C G] (2) It is not a universal rule that the dearness allowance should in all cases be correlated with the cost of living index.
The Tribunal, in the present case, considered the matter and found it sufficient and in accord with justice that the wage scales should be restructured with suitable increments provided therein.
It noted that dearness allowance was being granted by the appellant at 10% of the salary subject to a minimum of Rs. 50/ and house rent allowance at 30% of the basic salary.
Having regard to the not inconsiderable improvement in the level of the basic wage, it observed that there would be a consequent increase in the dearness allowance and house rent allowance.
In view of the increase so secured, the Tribunal rejected the suggestion that a slab system should be introduced in the dearness allowance or that there should be any other modification of the principle on which dearness allowance was being presently granted.
It declared that the cumulative effect of an im 167 proved wage structure together with dearness allowance operating on a slab system would throw an impossible burden of about Rs. 1 crore on the financial capacity of the appellant.
It was open to the Tribunal to adopt the position which it did.
If the dearness allowance is linked with the cost of living index the whole award will have to be reopened and the entire basis on which it has been made will have to be reconsidered.
The award is a composite document in which the several elements of increased wage scales, larger increments longer span of 20 years for earning increments, dearness allowance at 10% of the basic wage, besides several other benefits, have been integrated into a balanced arrangement in keeping with what the Tribunal has found to be the financial capacity of the appellant.
It is not possible to maintain one part of the award and supersede another.
[179 E F] The Hindustan Times Ltd, New Delhi vs Their Workmen, [1964] 1 SCR 234, 247 and Bengal Chemical & Pharmaceutical Works Limited vs its Workmen; , , distinguished.
(3) The jurisdiction given to the Tribunal by rule 31 of the Industrial Disputes (Bombay) Rules, 1957, is closely circumscribed.
It is only a clerical mistake or error which can be corrected and the clerical mistake or error must arise from an accidental slip or omission in the award.
An accidental slip or omission implies that something was intended and contrary to that intention what should not have been included has been included or what should have been included has been omitted.
It must be a mistake or error amenable to clerical correction only.
It must not be a mistake or error which calls for rectification by modification of the conscious adjudication on the issues involved.
[175 A C] Per contra The order of 22nd December, 1978 is invalid so far as it amends paragraph 23 of the original award.
The amendment has resulted in the Tribunal making, as it were, a supplementary award, whereby a further relief is being granted beyond that granted in the original award.
The original award was completed and signed by the Tribunal, and it cannot be reopened now except for the limited purpose of Rule 31.
In travelling outside and beyond the terms of the original award, the Tribunal has committed a jurisdictional error.
The evidence contained in the award throughout provides incontrovertible proof that this flat increase (ad hoc) was never originally intended in the award.
There was only one increase contemplated in the award, in paragraph 23 of the award and it is more than plain that the increase was the one incorporated in the revised pay scales pertaining to different categories.
No second flat increase was envisaged at all.
The amendment made by the Tribunal has the effect of providing a second increase, this time to each individual workmen.
If, as the Tribunal has stated in the amendment order.
the increase in paragraph 23 was intended to apply to each individual workmen, there is nothing in the body of the award to form the foundation on which the actual figures in the restructured pay scales can be made to rest.
There will be no explanation why the initial start of the revised pay scales has been increased by Rs. 150/ in the case of the category of Draughtsmen and Rs. 100/ in the case of other categories.
Considering the fitment of the workmen in the revised scales, it was stated in the award that workman found drawing a salary less than the beginning of the grade would be stepped up to the beginning of the grade and if his pay fell between two steps in the reclassified pay scales the 168 basic pay was to be fixed at the step higher in the revised scale.
Further the award was made on the basis that the overall financial load according to paragraph 33 of the award would be to the tune of about Rs. 5 lakhs.
It was that figure which the Tribunal had in mind against the backdrop of the gross annual figures when it made the revised pay scales retrospective from 1st January, 1976.
[176 D G, 177A, 178 D F] The statement, Exhibit C 51 afforded an indication merely of what the additional financial load would be if a flat increase was given to the individual workmen on the alternative basis set forth therein.
None of the alternatives actually adopted by the Tribunal, because when the award was made the Tribunal proceeded instead to restructure the wage scales by the addition of Rs. 150/ in the case of the category of Draughtsmen and of Rs. 100/ in the case of other categories to the initial pay in the wage scales pertaining to these categories.
The addition was integrated as a feature of the wage scales, it was not regarded as an addition to the pay of each individual workmen.
[178A C] It is an accepted principle that consent by a party cannot confer jurisdiction on a court.
What is without jurisdiction will remain so.
[178 E F] Per O. C. Reddy, J. (Majority view, Iyer and Reddy, JJ.) The order dated December 22, 1978 of the Industrial Tribunal which purports to correct the award dated December 20, 1978 cannot be considered in effect to be a fresh award and it is in order.
The omission of the words "to each employee" after the figure Rs. 150/ and again after the figure Rs. 100/ was clearly an accidental slip or omission which the Tribunal was entitled to correct.
The application for the correction was made immediately, that is to say, two days after the Award, while iron was still hot or when everything must have been fresh to the minds of the Tribunal.
Even the endorsement made on the application by the Advocate for the Company to the effect "submitted to whatever this honourable Tribunal desires to do, does not indicate that the Company had any objection to the award being corrected as sought by the employees union.
On the other hand the endorsement reads as if there was tacit agreement on the part of the Company to the correction sought by the union; it cannot possibly be doubted that an Industrial Tribunal deciding upon the wage scales of the employees of an establishment would have full liberty to propose ad hoc increase of salaries as part of the revision of pay scales, not can it be doubted that fitment into the revised pay scales is certainly a part of the revision of pay scales.
This is elementary and fundamental to the jurisdiction of the Industrial Tribunal in revising wage scales.
If without any flat or ad hoc increase of salary the workmen were to be fitted into revised scales of pay, it would, obviously, result in serious anomalous situations.
In the case of several senior employees, the revised scale would yield but a very small and almost a token increase in the size of the pay packet whereas the junior employees would get a large benefit.
While workmen raising industrial disputes for revision of wage scales are certainly minded about their future prospects in the matter of wages, they, surely would be more concerned with the immediate benefit accruing to them.
That was why the Industrial Tribunal thought that all round flat increase of Rs. 150/ in the case of Draughtsmen and Rs. 100/ in the case of other workmen to each employee was called for.
[180C, 181D E, G H, 182A, 183D E, G H, 184A B] 169 (4) While it is true that Dearness Allowance linked to cost of living index is ordinarily the best and the most scientific method of computing dearness allowance, it cannot always be said that an illegality warranting interference under Article 136 is committed if some other method is adopted.
In the instant case, the Tribunal has given satisfactory reasons for adopting a different mode.
[184 F G]
