The appellant, purporting to Act on behalf of a partnership consisting of himself, Todar Mal and Krishan Kumar, applied for and obtained permission in his individual capacity to construct a cinema theatre on a plot of land which was taken on lease jointly by all the three of them after the application for the permission was made but before the same was granted.
They entered into a partnership along with 11 others for carrying on the business of constructing and running a cinema theatre and the deed of partnership contained a clause that the plot of land as well as the permission obtained for constructing the theatre shall be the property of the firm.
On completion of the construction the appellant applied for, in his own name, and obtained in his personal capacity, a licence to exhibit cinematograph films at the Theatre.
The partnership was re constituted on retirement of two partners and the new deed executed by the remaining partners also contained a clause that the firm shall have the right to operate the licence.
An application for inclusion of the names of Todar Mal and Krishan Kumar in the licence was rejected by an order of the Licensing Authority who held that the appellant was the sole licensee and the said order became final.
Another application for renewal of the licence in the name of the Theatre on the ground that the appellant had been expelled from the partnership was also rejected by an order of the Licensing Authority which was not challenged.
Thereafter when, in a suit instituted for a declaration that the licence was the property of the firm, the trial court issued an injunction restraining the appellant from interfering with the possession and running of the Theatre by some of the partners of the firm, the appellant wrote to the Licensing Authority disclaiming responsibility for any acts of commission or omission committed by others in the premises of the Theatre.
The Licensing Authority, acting on a report from the police that films were being exhibited in the Theatre by persons other than the licensee, ordered suspension of exhibition of films at the Theatre.
A writ petition challenging the validity of this order filed in the name of the Theatre was dismissed by a Single Judge of the High Court.
In tho Letters Patent Appeal heard by a Division Bench consisting of the Acting Chief Justice another Judge of the High Court the Acting Chief Justice held that the impugned order was void but the other Judge agreed with the view of the Single Judge who had dismissed the petition earlier.
In view of 576 the divergence of opinion, the matter was referred to the only other Judge available in the High Court, but he having declined to hear the same for good reason, the Division Bench decided under sub r.
(3) of r. 23 of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court Rules, 1975 that the view of the Senior Judge should pre vail and accordingly the Letters Patent Appeal was allowed in conformity with the view taken by the Acting Chief Justice.
This resulted in the anomalous situation that as against the view concurrently taken by two Judges of the High Court, the opinion of the Acting Chief Justice which was really the minority view was allowed to prevail.
The reasons given by the Acting Chief Justice for the view he took were: (i) that a licence under the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir (Cinematograph) Act is granted for premises permanently equipped for cinematograph exhibition in the name of the owner/manager of the cinematographs used in the premises and hence, where the licensed premises including the cinematograph used therein belongs to a partnership and one of the partners obtains a licence in his separate name, the other partners automatically acquire an interest in the licence and that the privilege granted by the licensing authority "must necessarily follow the title in such building and the cinematograph" and that the provision contained in section 6F lends support to this conclusion; (ii) that the partnership firm had a legal right in the licence which entitled it to notice and hearing under the Act before the licence was suspended; (iii) that inasmuch as the said procedure was not followed by the Licensing Authority the impugned order was void and in violation of principles of natural justice and (iv) that except for the power of revocation of licence embodied in section 6F and an implied power to suspend a licence pending proceedings for revocation, the Licensing Authority had no power to suspend the licence of the Theatre under any other circumstances.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The provisions of the Act and the Rules contemplate the grant of a licence to a person in respect of a `place ' where cinematographic apparatus have been installed.
Under the Rules and the terms and conditions of the licence, the grantee thereof is the person answerable to the Licensing Authority for breach of the obligations and conditions.
A licence granted under the Act is not analogous to a licence in the realm of real property law.
It is, therefore, not possible to accept the view that the licence is a grant for the premises and constitutes an interest attached to the premises.
The provision contained in section 6F, far from supporting such a view, goes to show that the holder of a licence may be a person different from the owner or partner of a cinematograph.
The object of that section is to empower the Licensing Authority to revoke the licence in the event of commission of an offence under s: 6 or 6E not merely by the licensee but also by any person who may be in actual charge of the cinematograph.
[588 H, 589 A B, G H, 590 A] 2.
(a) In proceedings to which the Licensing Authority was a party, the High Court as well this Court had upheld the order of the Licensing Authority holding the appellant to be the sole licensee and rejecting the case Put forward 577 on behalf of the firm.
The firm and its partners are bound by the said decision.
It is, therefore, unnecessary to deal with the reasons stated by the Acting Chief Justice of the High Court in support or his concussion that the licence was granted to the appellant in his individual capacity as representing the partnership.
[588 D F] (b) The appellant was the sole licence in respect of the Theatre.
By virtue of r. 88 (v) as well as cl. 11 of the licence issued, there was a clear prohibition against the licensee from transferring, assigning, sub letting or otherwise transferring the licence without the permission of the Licensing Authority and also against his allowing any other person to exhibit films at the licensed place without obtaining such permission.
The firm of partners had no right whatever to exhibit cinematograph films at the theatre without a licence.
It was the plain duty of the Licensing Authority to ensure that exhibition of films was not conducted in the Theatre by unautuorised persons and the impugned order is obviously one passed by him in the discharge of the said function.
The principles of natural justice are not attracted to such a situation.
The position would have been different if it was a case of even temporary suspension of the licence without notice to the licensee.
A, 592 A, C F] (c) The Licensing Authority had the power to make tho impugned order suspending the exhibition of films in the Theatre by persons other than the licensee.
The power to control the exhibition of cinematography by grant of licence and the power to administer and enforce the provisions of the Act and the rules included the implied power to take all steps necessary to ensure the due observance of the terms of the statute.
the rules and the conditions of licence.
The view expressed in the impugned judgment of the High Court that the Licensing Authority had no power to make the impugned order was based on the fallacious assumption that what was done under the impugned order was to suspend the licence while, in fact, what was done was only to suspend the exhibition of films in the Theatre by persons other than the licensee.
[593 D F, B] 3.
Although there are very serious doubts about the correctness of the view taken by the Division Bench of the High Court regarding the applicability of r. 23 (3) of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court Rules, 1975 to the instant case, it is not necessary to consider that question in view of the conclusion arrived at on the merits on the case.
[586 F G]
