One Late Raja Vasireddi Chandra Dhara Prasad died intestate on 12th January, 1961.
He had filled a proposal for insurance for Rs. 50,000 on 27th December 1960.
There was medical examination by the doctor on the life of the deceased on 27th, December, 1960.
The deceased issued two cheques being the consideration towards the first premium for Rs 300 and Rs. 220 respectively which were encashed by the appellant on 29th December 1960 and 11th January 1961.
On 16th January 1961, the widow of the deceased wrote to the appellant intimating the death of the deceased and demanded payment of Rs. 50,000 The Divisional Manager, Masulipatam Branch denied liability on behalf of the appellant on 28th January, 1961.
Thereafter there was correspondence between the parties between Ist February 1961 and 23rd December 1963.
On 10th January 1964, the respondents filed a suit in the Court of Subordinate Judge, Masulipatam.
The trial court dismissed the suit holding, inter alia, that there was no concluded contract, that the proposal was not accepted by the Divisional Manager for some reason or the other by the time the deceased had died, that neither the encashment of the two cheques created a contract of insurance.
In appeal, the High Court after ordering certain other additional documents set aside the Trial Court Judgment.
Hence the appeal by the Corporation after obtaining the special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD; 1.
Having regard to the clear position in law about acceptance of insurance proposal and the evidence of record in this case, it is clear that the, High Court was in error.
in coming to the conclusion that there was a concluded contract of insurance between the deceased and the Life Insurance Corporation.
[360D E] 2.
Though in certain human relationship silence to a proposal might 351 convey acceptance but in the case of insurance proposal, silence does not denote consent and no binding contract arises until the person to whom an offer is made says or does something to signify his acceptance.
Mere delay in giving an answer cannot be construed as an acceptance, as, prima facie, acceptance must be communicated to the offer or The general rule is that the contract of insurance will be concluded only when the party to whom an offer has been made accepts it unconditionally and communicates his acceptance to the person making the offer.
Whether the final acceptance is that of the assured or insurers, however, depend simply on the way in which negotiations for an insurance have progressed.
[359H, 360A B] 3: 1.
When an insurance policy becomes effective is well settled by the authorities but it is clear that the expression "underwrite" signifies accept liability under that.
The dictionary meaning also indicates that.
It is true that normally the expression "underwrite" is used in Marine insurance but the expression used in Chapter III of the Financial Powers of the Standing order in this case specifically used the expression 'funderwriting and revivals" of policies in case of Life Insurance Corporation and stated that it was the Divisional Manager who was competent to underwrite policy for Rs, 50,000 and above.
[359 B D] 3: 2.
The mere receipt and retention of premium until after the death of the applicant or the mere preparation of the policy document is not acceptance.
Acceptance must be signified by some acts or acts agreed on by the parties or from which the law raised a presumption of acceptance.
[359D E] 3: 3 In the instant case, the High Court was in error in coming to the following conclusions; (i) that there was not sufficient pleading that there was no concluded contract, and non acceptance of the proposal was not sufficient averment that the Divisional Manager was the only competent authority to accept the proposal; (ii) in its view about the powers of the different authorities under Chapter III of the Standing order 1960, dealing with the financial powers; (iii) about the view that the Assistant Divisional Manager having accepted the proposal and (iv) about the assurance given by the Field officers that the acceptance of the first premium would automatically create a concluded contract of insurance ' [358E H] The Court however directed half the amount of the insurance amount of Rs. 85,000 paid to the Respondents to be refunded to the Corporation.
[360F G]
