Section 28 of the Gold Control Act, 1968 bars money lending business to be carried on in licensed premises, either by the licensed dealer or by any other person unless authorised by the Administrator to do so.
Drawing analogy from the reasoning adopted by the Supreme Court in its decision reported in Harakchand Ratanchand Banthia vs Assistant Collector or Central Excise, Poona, II Division, [1970] I SCR 479=AIR , the High Court of Andhra Pradesh struck down the said provision on the ground that it suffers from the vice of excessive delegation of legislative power in as much, as no criteria or guidelines have been provided by reference to which the power conferred on the Administrator to refuse permission or grant permission should be exercised and that the section confers an arbitrary, uncanalised and unfettered power upon the Administrator with the result that the licensed dealer is at his mercy while seeking permission to carry on money lending or banking business on the security of any article, ornament or both in the same premises in which he carried on business as such dealer.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.1 Section 28 of the Gold Control Act, 1968 cannot be struck down on the ground of excessive delegation of legislative power and its validity must be upheld.
[957C] 1.3 It is true that no express rule prescribing the conditions or circumstances under which the permission can be granted or refused has been framed nor any particular guide line has been expressly indicated in section 28 by reference to which the power conferred upon him thereunder could be exercised by the Administrator, but that is not decisive of the matter.
[954H; 955A] 952 1.3 Section 28 of the Gold Control Act, 1968 is part and parcel of the entire scheme of the Gold Control Act the objective, the policy and the scheme of the Act together with the necessity to ensure prevention of circumvention of the other provisions of the Act afford more than sufficient guidance to the Administrator in the matter of exercising the power or discretion conferred on him under section 28.
The several restrictions that have been put on the activities of the traders doing business in gold will have to be viewed, in the light of the purpose or which the Gold Control Act was passed viz., that even though import of gold into India had been banned considerable quantities of contraband gold were finding their way into the country through illegal channels affecting the national economy and hampering the country 's economic stability and progress, that the Customs Department was not in a position to effectively combat the smuggling over the long borders and coast line that therefore anti smuggling measures had to be supplemented by a detailed system of control over internal transactions.
In fact section 5 (1) of the Act requires that the Administrator should have regard to the policy and purposes of the Act in making his orders.
Moreover against his order under that section a revision lies to Central Government which implies that be will have to make judicious use of his power or discretion and any improper exercise is liable to be corrected by a higher authority.
Therefore, it cannot be! said that unfettered or uncanalised or arbitrary power has been conferred upon the Administrator under section 28.
1955B; E G] 1.4 further section 28 does not impose any blanket or absolute prohibition upon a dealer from carrying on money lending, banking or any other business in the same promises in which he carries on business as a dealer but he is prevented only from carrying in business as money lender or banker on the security of any article, ornament or both unless authorised by the Administrator.
Even the restriction in the case of a third person in carrying on business as a money lender, banker or any other business in the same premises is not absolute in as much as the Administrator can authorise the third person to carry of the business in the licensed premises of the dealer and while implementing such limited restrictions or granting relief against the same he will be guided by the policy and purposes of the Act and by the prime consideration that circumvention of the other provisions of the Act shall not be permitted.
[956A C] Bihar State Bullion Merchants Association.
Union of India, AIR 1971 Patna 240; Ramanlal Purshottamdas Chokshi vs Union of India & Others , approved.
, Annam Ramalingam, etc.
vs Union of India, Writ Petitions Nos.
3956 3873/68 etc.
dated 26.12.69.
Andhra Pradesh, reversed.
1.5 In Harakchand Banthia 's case the Supreme Court found, the phrases like 'in the region ', the anticipated demand '. 'suitability ' and 'public interest ' as vague, uncertain and therefore declared the unamended section 21(6) of the Gold Control Act as invalid and the Parliament has carried out suitable amendments thereafter.
No such vague or indefinite expressions or concepts are to be found in section 28 by reference to which 953 the Administrator is required to exercise his power.
In the absence of A parity of situation or circumstances the doctrine of parity of reasoning cannot be invoked.
[957A C] Harakchand Ratanchand Banthia vs Assistant Collector of Central Excise Poona 11 Division, [1970] I SCR 479 AIR , explained and held in applicable.
