Sub section ( l ) of section 630 of the provides for launching of prosecution against an officer or employee of a company, who (a) wrongfully obtains possession of any property of a company, or (b) having any such property in his possession wrongfully withholds or knowingly misapplies the same.
The petitioner who was given a flat by the company for his residence during the period of his employment did not vacate it on his retirement.
He was granted six months time on humanitarian grounds upon his undertaking to comply with.
Upon his failure to vacate the premises the company lodged a complaint against him under section 630 of the Act for wrongful withholding of its property.
The Magistrate took congnizance of the complaint and directed issue of process.
Dismissing the writ petition filed by him under article 227 of the Constitution read with section 482 Cr.
P.C. seeking to quash the proceedings, the High Court following its consistent view in a series of cases that the term 'officer or employee ' in sub section
(1) of section 630 must be interpreted to mean not only the present officer or employee of company but also to include past officers and employees of the company and that the words 'any such property ' in cl.
(b) qualify the words 'any property of a company ' appearing in cl.
(a), held that the case does not call for interference.
169 In the special leave petition it was contended for the petitioner that the provision contained in section 630 of the Act is a penal provision and, therefore, must be subject to a strict construction and there is no room for intendment, that the term 'officer or employee ' occurring in sub section
(1) of section 630 refers only to the existing officers and employees of a company, and not the past officers, and that cl.
(b) of sub section
(I) does not stand by itself but is interconnected with cl.
(a) thereof and therefore cl.
(a) and cl.
(b) must be read together and when so read the words 'any such property ' in cl.
(b) do not qualify the words 'any property of a company ' in cl.
(a) and only relate to the property of company wrongfully taken possession of by a present officer.
Dismissing the special leave petition, ^ HELD: 1.
Section 630 of the plainly makes it an offence if an officer or employee of the company who was permitted to use any property of the company during his employment, wrongfully retains or occupies the same after the termination of his employment.
[176F G] 2.1 The term 'officer or employee ' of a company in section 630(1) applies not only to existing officers or employees but also to past officers or employees if such officer or employee either (a) wrongfully obtains possession of any property, or (b) having obtained such property during the course of his employment, withholds the same after the termination of his employment.
[179B C] 2.2 The beneficent provision contained in section 630 of the though penal, has been purposely enacted by the legislature with the object of providing a summary procedure for retrieving the property of the company.
It is the duty of the Court to place a broad and liberal construction on the provision in furtherance of the object and purpose of the legislation which would suppress the mischief and advance the remedy.
[175C E] 2.3 Sub section
(1) of section 630 of the Act by clauses (a) and (b) creates two distinct and separate offences: (1) Where an officer or employee of a company wrongfully obtains possession of any property of the company during the course of his employment, to which he is not entitled.
Normally, it is only the present officers and employees who can secure possession of any property of a company.
It is also possible for such an officer or employee after termination of his employment to wrongfully take away possession of any such property.
This is the function of cl.
(a) 170 and although it primarily refers to the existing officers and employees, it may also take in past officers and employees.
(2) Where an officer or employee of a company having any property of a company in his possession wrongfully withholds it or knowingly applies it to purposes other than those expressed or directed in the articles and authorized by the Act.
It may well be that an officer or employee may have lawfully obtained possession of any such property during the course of his employment but wrongfully withholds it after the termination of his employment.
That appears to be one of the functions of cl.
Clause (b) also makes it an offence if any officer or employee of a company having any property of the company in his possession knowingly applies it to purposes other than those expressed or directed in the articles and authorized by the Act.
That would primarily apply to the present officers and employees and may also include past officers and employees.
There is therefore no warrant to give a restrictive meaning to the term 'officer or employee ' appearing in sub section
(1) of section 630 of the Act.
[175F H; 176A C] 3.
It is quite evident that clauses (a) and (b) are separated by the word 'or ' and therefore are clearly disjunctive.
The whole object of enacting the provision is the preservation of the property of a company by the creation of two distinct offences by clauses (a) and.(b) which arise under different sets of circumstances, and it would be rendered nugatory by projecting cl.
(a) into cl.
1176C, D E] 4.
According to the plain construction, the words 'any such property ' in cl.
(b) relate to 'any property of a company ' as mentioned in cl.
It is wrongful with holding of such property meaning the property of the company after termination of the employment, which is an offence under section 630(l)(b) of the Act.
[176F; 177E F] 5.
The petitioner given one month 's time to vacate the premises failing which the respondents to take such proceedings as the law provides.
The Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate to proceed with the trial and dispose it of expeditiously.
[179D E] Harkishan Lakhimal Gidwani vs Achyat Kashinath Wagh & Anr., , and Govind T. Jagtiani vs Sirajuddin section Kazi & Anr., , approved.
Amritlal Chum vs Devi Ranjan Jha & Anr., , overruled. 171
