% The appellant, who was stated to be a monthly tenant of the suit premises, entered into an agreement, which was described as an agreement of 'leave and licence ', with the respondent on 9th February, 1965 and the respondent and the appellant were described therein as licensor and licensee respectively.
It was stated in the agreement that the licensor was seized of the premises in dispute as a monthly tenant and gave and granted 'leave and license ' to the licensee to use and occupy the said premises for a period of five years, merely for the purpose of workshop business, at a monthly compensation of Rs.225 that the licensor shall be entitled to terminate the agreement and cancel and revoke and withdraw the leave and licence granted earlier and to take possession forthwith of the said premises if the licensee committed any default of any terms and conditions or failed to pay the compensation for two months or if the licensee at any time put up false or adverse claim of tenancy or sub tenancy, that the licensee shall pay the electric charges in respect of consumption of electricity and the rent of the said premises should be paid by the licensor only, and that the licensor shall have the full right to enter upon the premises and inspect the same at any time.
1058 In November 1970, the respondent filed an ejectment proceedings against the appellant under section 41 of the .
It was contended by the appellant that there was sub tenancy by the respondent in his favour as monthly tenant.
The trial court passed a decree and ordered the appellant to vacate the premises holding that the agreement was for leave and licence and that the appellant was a licensee and not a subtenant.
On the case being remanded by the Supreme Court in a Special Leave Petition filed by the respondent against the earlier decision of the High Court, allowing the appellant 's special civil application, the High Court upheld the order of the Court of Small Causes, and ordered eviction of the appellant.
In the Special Leave Petition against the aforesaid decision, it was contended that the document in question read as a whole was a lease and not a license.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD: 1.1 If an interest in immovable property entitling the transferee to enjoyment was created, it was lease; if permission to use land without exclusive possession was alone granted, a licence was the legal result.
[1067D E] 1.2 In determining whether an agreement creates between the parties the relationship of landlord and tenant or merely that of licensor and licensee, decisive consideration is the intention of the parties.
[1068B C] In view of the intention of the parties in the document and the facts and circumstances of the instant case, it was a licence and not a lease.
This is clear from the language used and the restrictions put upon the use of the premises in question by the appellant.
In the document in question the expression "licence" was introduced and clause (2) said that it was only for the business purposes.
The licence fee was fixed.
It permitted user only for 20 hours.
Restriction in the hours of work negates the case for lease.
Clause (12) gives to the licensor right to enter upon the premises and inspect the same at any time.
[1067E F] 1059 1.3 Where two views are possible and the trial court has taken one view which is a possible and plausible view merely because another view is attractive, the High Court should not interfere and would be in error in interfering with the finding of the trial court or interfering under Article 227 of the Constitution over such decision.
[1068E F] H. Maniar and others vs Woman Laxman Kudav, ; ; Miss Mani J. Desai vs M/s. Gayson & Co. Pvt.
Ltd. 73 Bombay Law Reporter 394; Associated Hotels of India Ltd. vs R.N. Kapoor, ; ; Mrs. M.N. Clubwala and another vs Fida Hussain Saheb and others; , at page 653; Sohanlal Naraindas vs Laxmidas Raghunath Gadit, 68 Bombay Law Reporter 400; Sohan Lal Naraindas vs Laximdas Raghunath Gadit, ; Qudrat Ullah vs Municipal Board, Bareilly, [1974] 2 S.C.R. 530; Booker vs Palmer, at 676, 677; Venkatlal G. Pittie & Anr.
vs M/s. Bright Bros. (Pvt) Ltd., [1987] 2 scale 115; M/s. Beopar Sahayak (P) Ltd. & others vs Shri Vishwa Nath & 5 others, [1987]2 scale 27; Satyanaryan Laxminarayan Hegde and others vs Mallikarjun Bhavanappa Tirumale, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 137 and Halsbury 's Laws of England.
, Fourth Edition, Volume 27 page 13, referred to.
