The petitioners employed as daily rated carpenters at the Wood Working Centre of the Himachal Pradesh State Handi crafts Corporation sought enforcement of their fundamental right to have "equal pay for equal work" in terms paid to their counterparts in regular services, or in the alterna tive, the minimum wages prescribed by the Deputy Commission er for like categories of workmen.
The petitioners ' claim was resisted by the respondents.
Their case was that the unit where the petitioners were working was a factory registered under the Factories Act, that they were treated as industrial workmen and given all benefits due to them under the various labour legislations, that the Government had not fixed the minimum wages payable to the workmen engaged in the Corporation or other like industries but the Corporation had adopted for its workmen the minimum wages payable for similar work in the construc tion industry, and that there were no regular employees of the petitioners ' categories in its establishment and, as such, the question of payment to them the pay admissible to regular employees does not arise.
Dismissing the writ petition, HELD: 1.
Unless it is shown that there is a discrimina tion amongst the same set of employees by the same master in the same establishment, the principle of "equal pay for equal work" cannot be enforced.
A comparison cannot be made with counterparts in other establishments with different management, or even in establishments in different geograph ical location though owned by the same master.
[668B] In the instant case, the petitioners were employed by a company incorporated under the Companies Act.
They cannot claim wages pay 663 able to their counterparts in government service.
[668C] Meva Ram Kanojia vs All India Institute of Medical Sciences & Anr., ; , referred to.
Randhir Singh vs Union of India, ; , ex plained.
The principle of 'equal pay for equal work ' has no mechanical application in every case of similar work.
No two jobs by the mere nomenclature or by the volume of work performed can be rated as equal.
It is not just a comparison of physical activity.
It requires the consideration of various dimensions of the job.
The accuracy required by the job and the dexterity it entails may differ from job to job.
It cannot be evaluated by the mere averments in the self serving affidavits or counter affidavits of the parties.
It must be left to be evaluated and determined by expert body.
[666D, 668D E] In the instant case, however, the Corporation had no regularly employed carpenters.
Even assuming that the peti tioners ' jobs were comparable with the counterparts in Government service they could not enforce the right to equal pay for equal work.
[667G, 668A] State of U.P. vs J.P. Chaurasia, ; ; Meva Ram Kanojia vs All India Institute of Medical Sciences & Anr., ; and Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognised) vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
The order issued by the Deputy Commissioner on March 20, 1986 in exercise of his powers under the H.P. Financial Rules prescribing minimum wages was applicable only to skilled and unskilled workers in Class IV employees in Government service.
The benefit of the rates prescribed under that order cannot be extended to the petitioners unless the Government makes it applicable to the employees of the Corporation.
[668F G]
