Each of the appellants/petitioners is a registered dealer in the State of Haryana.
He purchased certain raw materials in the State without paying purchase tax thereon, in view of the provision contained in section 24 of the Haryana Sales Tax Act, 1973.
He manufactured certain goods in the State with the aid of the said raw materials.
He then sold the manufactured goods to dealers who, in turn, export ed those goods out of India.
On these facts the assessee claimed that he was not liable to pay the purchase tax on the raw materials, imposed under section 9(1) of the Sales Tax Act.
The Department denied the relief on the short ground that the sales effected by the appellants were not sales in the course of export outside India within the meaning of section 5(1) of the .
Ac cording to the Department, they were only "penultimate" sales, which may be deemed to be 'export sales ' because of the fiction created under section 5(3) of the C.S. Act 1956, but that was not enough to escape from the clutches of the charge in section 9(1).
Accordingly, the claim of the asses see was rejected by the taxing authorities.
The High Court also rejected the assessee 's petition.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the assessees that the effect of section 5(3) of the C.S.T. Act was to expand the scope of section 5(1) and include within the concept of sales in the course of export outside India also the 'penultimate ' sales; that a reference to, and the meaning of, section 5(1) could not be understood without a reference to section 5(3); and that as a result of section 5(3), such penultimate sales became export sales falling beyond the purview and competence of State legislature.
It was further submitted that purchases of 344 raw material used in the manufacture of goods inside the State attracted the tax under section 9(1) unless those manufactured goods were dealt with in one of three ways; (1) disposed of by way of sale inside the State; (2) despatched to a place outside the State but by way of a sale in the course of inter State trade or commerce; or (3) despatched to a place outside the State but by way of sale in the course of export outside the territory of India.
In the alternative, it was contended that as the asses see had sold goods to other parties in India, those sales must be either local sales or inter state sales; and that in any view of the matter, it would be a sale covered by the exceptions in section 9(1), and the assessee 's purchases of raw material would not attract tax under section 9(1).
On the other hand, on behalf of the State it was, inter alia contended that there were no facts on record to sub stantiate the claim on behalf of the assessee that the sales in question fulfilled the conditions set out in section 5(3) of the C.S.T. Act.
It was submitted that the assessees would be entitled to an exemption from the impugned purchase tax only if their sales were export Sales within the meaning of section 5(1) of the C.S.T. Act, which they admittedly were not.
Alternatively, it was submitted that section 9(1)(b) had been declared unconstitutional by this Court in the Goodyear case ; and the assessee could seek no implied exemption from its language.
Therefore, if section 9 was left out, the language of section 6 ( as amended) which brought to charge all purchases and sales in the State would be attracted and so the impugned taxation of purchases would be in order.
Allowing the appeals and the petitions, this Court, HELD: (1) The language of section 9(1)(a)(ii) later section 9(1) (b) using the words "within the meaning of sub section (1) of section 5 of the " have to be given full meaning; in other words, the exemption under section 9(1) has to be restricted only to export sales failing within the scope of section 5(1).
[360F G] Mohammed Sirajuddin vs State, [1975] Supp. 1 SCR 169, re ferred to.
(2) The language of the two provisions simultaneously introduced in section 24(1)(a) and (b) makes interesting reading.
The proviso to 345 clause (a) refers only to "sale by him in the course of export outside the territory of India within the meaning of section 5 of the " whereas the proviso to clause (b) refers to "sale by him in the course of export outside the territory of India within the meaning of sub section (3) of section 5 of the ".
Thus, the statute, within the same provision, has made a distinction between a sale in the course of export within the meaning of section 5 and such a sale within the meaning of section 5(3).
[361C D] (3) The High Court was right in concluding that the assessee was not entitled to the exemption under section 9 because the sales made by him were not sales in the course of export outside the territory of India within the meaning of section 5(1) of the .
[362A] (4) What was declared unconstitutional by this Court when it declared section 9(1)(b) of the Act unconstitutional in Goodyear case was only the levy of a tax where raw mate rials were purchased and used inside the State for the manufacture of finished goods which were then simply and without any sale despatched rather, consigned outside the State.
There is, however, nothing unconstitutional about the two other consequences that flow on the language of the clause: one express and the other implied; one in favour of the Revenue and the other in favour of the assessee, viz. (1) that there will be a tax on the purchase of the raw materials if the manufactured goods are disposed of in the State itself otherwise than by way of sale; and (2) that there will be no tax on the purchase of the raw materials if the manufactured goods are despatched from the State conse quent on a (i) local sale; (ii) inter State sale; or (iii) a sale in the course of export.
These two aspects of section 9(1)(b) survive even after the judgment of this Court in the Goodyear case.
[363G H; 364A C] Goodyear, case ; , explained.
(5) Section 9(1) is both a charging and exempting sec tion.
Even after the decision in Goodyear case the charge under a part of clause (b) still survives and so also the exemption provided in the latter part of clause (b).
[364E; C] (6) Since the sales effected by the assessee fail within one of the three exempted categories set out in section 9(1)(b), there can be no levy of purchase tax under section 9(1) of the Sales Tax Act.
[363C] (7) The purchase of raw materials by the assessees are not 346 chargeable to tax either under section 9(1)or section 6 or section 24(3).
[366G]
