Respondent No. 1 adopted petitioner appellant, who married two wives and through the first wife he had a son, the respondent No. 2 and through the second, another son, the respondent No. 3.
During the pendency of the special leave petition the adoptive mother of appellant died.
Respondent 2 and 3 laid claim to the entire property of respondent No. 1 exclusively under two different wills said to be by the respondent No. 1 and each contended that the other will was a forged one.
On the death of the adoptive mother, the appellant laid claim to her entire property as heir.
While each of the parties had taken such stand, in the litigation a compromise was brought about on 21.8.1987 between the appellant and his two sons, the respondents 2 and 3 and the same was filed in this Court and in terms of the compromise the appellant, to make payment of Rs. 1 lakh to each of his two sons in lieu of relinquishment of their interest.
When the matter was listed for recording the compromise, the respondent No. 2 contended that as he had not been paid Rs. 1 lakh as stipulated in the compromise, in the meanwhile he had alienated about 81 acres of the suit properties to the third parties.
The alienees had been also impleaded as parties under the orders of this Court.
Disposing of the petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
Once the Court was satisfied that there was a compromise it was for the Court to record the same and no option lay before the Court to act otherwise.
[542A B] 539 2.
As the compromise petition in the instant case is genuine nd lawful the same has to be acted upon.
[542B] 3.
It is directed that the compromise petition shall be accepted and in terms thereof the suit shall be disposed of and the terms of the compromise shall form part of the order to be drawn up in this Court for disposing of the special leave petition.
[542B C] 4.
With a view to settling all equities between the parties, directed that the appellant to pay a sum of Rs.1 lakh more to respondent No. 2 within eight weeks.
Rs. 77,124 being the amount paid by the alienees before the Sub Registrar in respect of the sale deeds shall be deposited.
[542C E] 5.
The alienees have no right created under the alleged sale deeds.
Their possession is without authority of law and clarified that none of the sale deeds is valid.
[542F H] 6.
The alienees shall deliver vacant possession of the property by 30th of April, 1991, and in the event of failure to do so the Trial Court directed to deliver vacant possession.
[543A B] Bhoja Govinda Maikap & Anr.
vs Janaki Dei & Ors., , approved.
