Section 32(1) of the Travancore Income tax Act, which corresponds to section 24(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, provided : " Where any assessee sustains a loss of profits or gains in any year under any of the heads mentioned in Section 9 [section 6 of the Indian Act he shall be entitled to have the amount of loss set off against this income, profits or gains under any other head in that year : Provided that where the loss sustained is a loss of profits or gains which would but for the loss have accrued or arisen within British India or in an Indian State and would under the provisions of clause (c) of sub section (2) of Section 18 corresponding to section 14 Of the Indian Act] have been exempted from tax, such loss shall not be set off except against profits or gains accruing or arising within British India or in an Indian State and exempt from tax under the said provisions ".
The assessees were companies having their head offices in the erstwhile State of Cochin with branches in the erstwhile State of Travancore and in other places outside the latter State.
They made profits in Travancore State but incurred losses in Cochin State and other places, and for the purposes of assessment to income tax they sought to deduct this loss from the profits made in Travancore State.
The Income tax Officer acting under the provisions of the Travancore Income tax Act, determined the assessable income representing only the profits made in Travancore State and under section 32(1), first proviso of the Travancore Income tax Act which corresponds to the first proviso to section 24(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 refused to allow a deduction of the losses incurred.
The assessees claimed that the business 257 which they were carrying on was one and indivisible for the purpose of determining the amount assessable to income tax and that they were entitled to a deduction of the losses incurred outside Travancore State.
The contention on behalf of the income tax authorities was (i) that under the first proviso to section 32(1) of the Travancore Income tax Act losses incurred in places out I side the State of Travancore cannot be set off against profits made in that State, (2) that though profits and losses in the State arising under the same head could be set off, the proviso, aforesaid, affected not only the generality of the main enactment but also introduced an addendum that where the profits of the business arose in the State and the losses under the head business were sustained outside that State, those losses could not by virtue of the proviso be deducted from profits made in the State,(3) that the proviso applied only to the bead " business in the two respective territories, as the words used therein are where the loss sustained is a loss of profits or gains " andthe word " income " is not mentioned therein, and (4) that the word " business " in section 13 of the Travancore Act corresponding to section 10 of the Indian Act, must mean business in Travancore State under section 13 Of that Act and " business in British India " under the Indian Act, because before 1939 income was not chargeable under the two Acts, unless it was received or accrued in Travancore State or British India, as the case may be, and profits and gains of business in territories outside Travancore or in an Indian State were exempted from payment of income tax in Travancore State or in British India, as the case may be.
Held:(i) Under section 24(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 Is.
32(1) of the Travancore Income tax Act] a set off can be claimed only when the loss arises under one head and the income, profits and gains against which it is sought to be set off arises under a different head.
In cases where profits and losses arise under the same head they have to be adjusted against each other under the provisions Of sections 7 to 12B of the Indian Act.
Arunachalam Chettiar vs Commissioner of Income tax, (1936) L.R. 63 I. A. 233 and Anglo French Textiles Co., Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, , relied on.
(2)The territory of a proviso is to carve out an exception to the main enactment and exclude something which otherwise would have been within the section; it has to operate in the same field and if the language of the main enactment is clear it cannot be used for the purpose of interpreting the main enactment or to exclude by implication what the enactment clearly says unless the words of the proviso are such that that is its necessary effect.
Abdul jabar Butt vs State of Jammu and Kashmir, ; , Ram Narain Sons Ltd. vs Assistant Commissioner of Sales ' ; , Madras & (1944) L.R. 71 I.A. 113 33 258 and Corporation of the City of Toronto vs Attorney General for Of Canada, , relied on.
Consequently, section 24(1), first proviso, of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 Is.
32(1), first proviso, of the Travancore Act] bars the right of set off only where a loss in the Indian States under one head is sought to be set off against profits in British India under any other head, and does not apply to profits and losses and computation thereof which fall under section 10 of the Indian Act, corresponding to section 13 of the Travancore Act.
(3)The mere fact that the word " income " is not used in the proviso does not justify the construction that the intention of the Legislature was to restrict the right to a set off of profits and losses arising in Indian States only to business or to modify the mode of computation under section 10 of the Indian Income tax Act.
(4)The word " business,, in section 10 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, is not confined to business in British India, in view of the definition of " total income " and " total world income " and chargeability of total income under section 3, Or the provisions Of section 4 where in the case of a resident " total income " includes income, profits and gains accruing within or without British India.
